Introduction
Part One
1. Birth of the Kuru Elders
2. Päëòu Cursed and Blessed
3. The Päëòavas Come to Hastinäpura
4. Duryodhana Begins His Evil Schemes
5. The Martial Exhibition
6. The Kauravas’ Hatred Grows
7. The Päëòavas Sent Away
8. Ghaöotkaca Born and Baka Slain
9. The Gandharva Aìgaraparna
10. Draupadé’s Svayaàvara
11. The Päëòavas Wed Draupadé
12. Dhåtaräñöra Gives Half the Kingdom
13. Arjuna’s Pilgrimage
14. Burning the Khäëòava Forest
15. The Celestial Hall
16. Mighty Jaräsandha
17. The Räjasüya Sacrifice
18. Duryodhana’s Envy
19. The Dice Game
20. Draupadé Dragged to the Assembly
21. The Päëòavas Exiled
22. Into the Forest
23. Dhåtaräñöra’s Anxiety
24. Yudhiñöhira’s Moral Instructions
25. Arjuna Goes to Heaven
26. To Badarékä Äçrama
27. Bhéma Meets Hanumän
28. Kuvera Offended
29. Arjuna Returns
30. Kåñëa Visits the Päëòavas
31. The Fight with the Gandharvas
32. Sage Durväsä
1

33. Jayadratha Kidnaps Draupadé
34. The Lake of Death
35. Into Virata
36. Draupadé Again Insulted
37. The Kurus Attack Virata
38. Arjuna Encounters the Kurus
39. The Battle at Virata
40. Out of Exile
41. The Kings Choose Sides
42. Dhåtaräñöra’s Message
43. Anxiety for the Blind King
44. Panic Among the Kauravas
45. The Päëòavas Consult Kåñëa
46. Kåñëa’s Peace Mission
47. Duryodhana’s Obstinacy
48. To Kurukñetra
Part Two
1. The Armies Prepare
2. Çikhaëòé’s Destiny
3. Into Position
4. The Bhagavad-gétä
5. The War Begins
6. Yudhiñöhira’s Fear
7. Bhéñma Wreaks Havoc
8. The Räkñasas Show Their Power
9. Bhéñma’s Vow
10. Kåñëa Protects His Devotee
11. Yudhiñöhira Approaches Bhéñma
12. The Fall of Bhéñma
13. Droëa in Command
14. “Yudhiñöhira Will Be Captured”
15. Abhimanyu’s Incomparable Power
16. Arjuna’s Great Vow
17. Arjuna Slaughters the Kauravas
18. Kåñëa’s Mystic Power
2

19. The Kauravas Rally
20. The Night Battle
21. Dåñöadyumna Encounters Droëa
22. The Näräyaëa Weapon
23. Karëa in Command
24. Karëa’s Prowess
25. Arjuna Encounters Karëa
26. Çalya Leads the Kauravas
27. Bhéma Fights Duryodhana
28. Massacre by Night
29. Açvatthämä Punished
30. Yudhiñöhira’s Sorrow
31. Bhéñma’s Instructions
32. Kåñëa Returns to Dwärakä
33. Yudhiñöhira’s Ashvamedha Sacrifice
34. Vidura Instructs Dhåtaräñöra
35. The Päëòavas Retire
Appendix 1: Karëa’s Birth
Appendix 2: Karëa Cursed
Appendix 3: Bhéñma’s Heavenly Origin
Appendix 4: Questions Posed by Dharma to Yudhiñöhira
Appendix 5: Brief Biographies of Main Characters
by Kåñëa Dharma däsa

Introduction
I expect that most people taking the time to read this introduction are
newcomers to the text. For those already familiar with the story, no
introduction is needed. They will want to immediately enter the deep waters of
, waters which are at once soothing and stimulating to both heart and mind. If
this is your first reading, however, although it is a cliche, I have to say,
3

"Welcome to the wonderful world of the ."
Welcome to a world where gods and heroes walk the earth, where virtuous
kings lead the people, where our lifetimes are seen as simply one step along an
eternal path leading to worlds of unending bliss. Here is a story which will
enthrall you and at the same time deliver profound lessons about every aspect
of life. It was first composed in Sanskrit about five thousand years ago by
Vyäsadeva, a mystic residing in the Himalayas. Its central theme is the true
story of the lives of five powerful rulers, the Päëòavas. Woven throughout the
story are other tales. We meet sages, warrior kings, and a host of other colorful
personalities. Among them is Kåñëa, a divine incarnation and, as you will
discover, the pivotal character in the book. It is due to Kåñëa's presence that
the work is revered as a sacred text. It does, in fact, contain the Bhagavad-gétä,
which Kåñëa spoke and which has become a spiritual treatise still read daily by
millions of people (as indeed is the itself).
My rendition is not an academic one, nor is it unabridged. Rather, I have
written it as a novel in an attempt to bring my readers into the action and to
help them experience the majestic mood of ancient times. In my experience,
even readers who strongly desire to read Mahäbhärata find themselves unable
to go through the very lengthy texts of unabridged scholarly translations that
are available. I have therefore attempted to make the text as accessible as
possible to all kinds of readers, but without sacrificing any of the essential
details of the story. I have remained faithful to the translations to which I had
access, and I believe that my book is as authentic a rendition as you are likely
to find.
I will not delay your reading further. I have written a note at the end giving
more background information, and you will also find glossaries and appendices
delineating the s many characters. Now I will leave you to immerse yourself in
the great ocean of the . All I can add is that the book has captivated me with
its sublime message, making my life richer and fuller. I pray that it may give
you as much pleasure as it has given me in my many readings.
dharme charthe cha kame cha mokshe cha Maratarshabha yad ihasti tad
anyatrayan nehasti na tat kvachit
"In the realm of dharma, artha, käma, and moksha, (ethics, economic
development, pleasure, and liberation), whatever is found in this epic may be
found elsewhere, but what is not found here will be impossible to find
anywhere else." , Adi Parva 56.33)
4

Kåñëa Dharma September, 1998

Part One

Chapter 1
Birth of the Kuru Elders
Ambikä peered curiously into the mirror as her maidservants finished adorning
her in preparation for the nuptial bed. She had lost none of her beauty despite
her months of mourning. Her skin was flawless and as white as milk. Curling
jet-black hair framed her oval face. Bow-like eyebrows arched over her black
eyes, which curved like two lotus petals. No wonder Vicitravérya had been so
enamored of her, rarely leaving her side. While he was alive her maidservants
had adorned her each evening, just in case her lord had desired to approach
her. As Ambikä again put on her ornaments and fine dress her mind drifted
sadly back to the days she had spent with her husband. After having lain in
that great hero’s powerful arms, how strange to now be preparing to meet
another man!
Ambikä balked at the prospect, and she felt herself growing increasingly
restless. She dismissed the maidservants as they fussed around her. She needed
to be alone to think. When Vicitravérya had died in such an untimely way, she
had wanted to ascend his funeral pyre and follow him to the heavens. She
could not imagine living without him. But Satyavaté, the queen mother, had
restrained her––she still had a duty to perform. Despite the fact that they had
enjoyed so much pleasure together, after seven years of marriage they had not
produced a child. Without leaving an heir the king was guilty of neglecting a
prime duty. How, then, would he be able to reach the higher regions?
Satyavaté had convinced Ambikä and her co-wife Ambälikä to stay and fulfill
their husband’s duty and thereby secure the welfare of his soul. The scriptures
allowed that in times of emergency a man’s elder brother could conceive
children in his wife if he was unable. This was such an emergency. Ambikä
suddenly felt more peaceful. Her union with Bhéñma would not be a betrayal of
the love she felt for her husband, but a service to him and to the kingdom. She
5

stopped her restless pacing and lay down on the ivory bed in bashful
anticipation. Bhéñma was a powerful and righteous man. Who better to sire the
future king? She should ensure that he felt completely honored by her.
There was a knock at the door. Ambikä looked up shyly. The door opened and
a tall man entered. Ambikä’s blood turned cold. This was not Bhéñma. There in
her bedchamber stood a wizened, ugly and filthy ascetic. His matted locks hung
about his gaunt face and he stared at her with fierce eyes. His teeth were only
slightly less black than his complexion. Around his waist was a soiled loin
cloth, his only garment. His hairy body was encrusted with dirt. Without any
delay he came toward her and sat by her side. She instantly recoiled from the
foul stench emanating from his body. Who was this person? She knew of no
brother-in-law other than Bhéñma. She prayed to the gods that she might lose
consciousness, for how could she endure this fearful man’s touch? As he put his
hands on her dress she closed her eyes, barely able to repress her urge to
scream.
***
Satyavaté blamed herself. If it had not been for her father’s greed, Hastinäpura
would not be in such a precarious situation now. Here sat the powerful Bhéñma,
son of the goddess Gaìgä. There was no greater hero on earth. As the eldest
son of the righteous King Çantanu, he was the natural heir to Hastinäpura’s
throne, but the kingdom’s good fortune had been thwarted by her foolish
father on her behalf.
She could still vividly picture the events. It had seemed to be like any other
day. She was sitting by the river’s edge, waiting to row travelers across. Her
father, leader of the fishermen, had given her that duty so she would gain the
religious merits born of service to travelers. On this particular day, however,
the emperor of the world, the mighty Çantanu, had been hunting in the nearby
forests and was seduced by the alluring fragrance that emanated from her body.
Having sought out the source of that celestial scent, he had become bewitched
by her beauty. From his gaze it was obvious he desired to marry her. Upon
hearing that she was still unmarried, he had hurried to her father’s house to
ask for her hand.
When she herself had arrived home, she saw Çantanu leaving their humble hut
in dismay. Her father had stipulated that he could only marry her if he
promised the throne to her son. But the emperor already had a qualified son in
6

Devavrataù, and he had already been consecrated as the prince regent. The
king was not prepared, simply for his own pleasure, to wrong his worthy and
beloved son. Thus he left, his heart torn by desire.
Satyavaté too had pined for many days, praying to the gods to arrange her
union with the king. Then one day, unknown to Çantanu, Devavrataù
appeared at their hut to solicit her hand on the emperor’s behalf. Her father
repeated his condition and Devavrataù agreed. He would never ascend
Hastinäpura’s throne; the crown could go to Satyavaté’s children. Still her
father hesitated. He had heard enough about court intrigues to know that if
Devavrataù relinquished the throne, then Devavrataù’s children might feel
cheated and oppose Satyavaté’s son. The fisher-king voiced his doubts. Hearing
them, Devavrataù uttered a terrible vow. He would never accept a wife but
would maintain life-long celibacy. In order to secure his father’s happiness, he
said, he was ready to renounce all personal enjoyment. Satyavaté now recalled
that when Devavrataù made that vow, flowers had rained from the sky and a
thunderous voice had echoed from the heavens: “From this day his name shall
be Bhéñma, one of a terrible vow.”
Satyavaté looked at Bhéñma now as he sat respectfully before her. She spoke his
name and he looked up, ready to execute her command. Maybe she could yet
convince him. He had always been obedient to her, even more so since
Çantanu’s death.
“My dear Bhéñma, please think again,” the queen said as she pulled her fine silk
sari over her plaited hair. “You made your vow simply to secure the interests of
your father and me. I now absolve you of that vow. You have always been fixed
in virtue. Please consider our present situation. Just as you made your vow to
serve your elders, you should now serve them by acting for the welfare of our
line. Surely this is your duty. Ascend Hastinäpura’s throne and beget powerful
sons to secure this ancient kingdom’s future.”
Bhéñma shook his head in exasperation. “Mother, please do not ask me to stray
from the path of truth. It can never be as you suggest. The sun may renounce
its splendor, water its wetness and the sky its sound, but Bhéñma will never
renounce truth.”
Bhéñma asked Satyavaté to consider the deeper cause of the unexpected
emergency facing the kingdom. It was due to all-powerful destiny. How else
could it have come to pass that although Satyavaté had borne two powerful
sons, both had died without producing an heir to the throne? All the kings on
7

earth had paid tribute to Satyavaté’s eldest son, Citräìgadä. His reputation for
prowess in battle and unwavering virtue had reached the heavens. It was thus
that the mighty king of the Gandharvas, who bore the same name, became
envious upon hearing his glories. The jealous Gandharva could not allow
another famous and powerful Citräìgadä to live. He came to earth and
challenged his rival to battle. After years of fighting, the valorous son of
Satyavaté was slain and the proud Gandharva returned triumphant to the
heavens.
Then the powerful Vicitravérya ascended the throne, but suddenly died from
an illness after only seven years of ruling. Neither he nor his brother left a
child.
Bhéñma stood up and looked out of the latticed window. A full moon illumined
the palace gardens, casting a silver light across the broad sandstone paths
where Vicitravérya had loved to walk with his queens. He turned back to
Satyavaté and continued, “Mother, we cannot thwart Providence by acting
immorally. In all circumstances a virtuous man acts in obedience to the will of
God. Auspiciousness and victory always attend virtue, while grief is the sure
result of unrighteousness. Therefore, please do not ask me to abandon my
vow.”
Satyavaté sat silently. Bhéñma’s adherence to truth and virtue was unshakeable.
He had spoken well. She bowed her head as he went on, “In any event, Mother,
it seems destiny has provided us with a solution quite in keeping with religion.
If the illustrious Vyäsadeva produces offspring upon the queens, we shall be
saved. Let us pray that everything goes well.”
Satyavaté nodded. It was she who had summoned the powerful Åñi Vyäsadeva,
her first-born son. It had taken some courage for her to reveal how she had
given birth to that sage even in her maidenhood. Out of fear of public censure
she had hidden this fact for years, but she still remembered how the celestial
Åñi Paräçara had one day come onto her boat and begotten the great
Vyäsadeva in her womb. Paräçara had told her that Providence had destined
her for greatness. He was giving an illustrious son who would play an important
part in that great destiny. Paräçara had then granted her the boon of keeping
her maidenhood even after union with him––and it was he who had blessed
her with the celestial fragrance which had captivated Çantanu.
Satyavaté slowly paced the mosaic floor. Hundreds of golden oil lamps lit up the
great hall. Along the high walls hung fine paintings of her ancestors, going all
8

the way back to the mighty King Kuru. All of them had been powerful
emperors of the globe. Surely the Kuru dynasty would not end now. The queen
said, “I have been praying for the kingdom ever since my sons’ demise. I have
faith that Vyäsadeva will prove a shelter to us all. But seeing the adverse fate
afflicting us, I still cannot help but be fearful.”
Satyavaté felt deeply for the kingdom and for Çantanu’s line. She still acted out
of her love for the departed monarch. It was certainly providential that
Paräçara had given her Vyäsadeva as her son. Vyäsadeva had grown to maturity
immediately upon his birth and had left her, saying, “Dear Mother, should you
ever be in difficulty, then simply think of me. I shall come to you at once from
wherever I may be.”
As Bhéñma and Satyavaté spoke, Ambikä’s door opened and Vyäsadeva came
out. Bhéñma bowed at his feet and Satyavaté anxiously asked, “Will the princess
bear an accomplished son?”
Raising his hand in blessing as Bhéñma stood up, the sage replied to Satyavaté,
“The queen will bear a son who will be as strong as ten thousand elephants. He
will be vastly intelligent, wise and prosperous. He will have a hundred sons.
But, O pious lady, for the fault of his mother he will be born blind.”
Satyavaté was shocked. “How can one who is blind become a king of the Kuru
race?” she asked.
Vyäsadeva explained that he had gone to Ambikä prepared to beget a son
worthy in every way, but the queen had closed her eyes in fear when she saw
him. When agreeing to produce an heir to the throne, the sage had stipulated
that the queen must accept him in his unpleasant condition. Satyavaté had
summoned him from the Himälayas and he had come to her directly from his
practice of harsh asceticism. He kept himself unwashed and unkempt as a part
of his ascetic vows. He said, “I would have come to the queen in a handsome
form decked with jewels if she had first accepted a religious vow for one full
year. But you asked that she conceive immediately. Therefore I stated my
conditions in place of the religious vow.”
Satyavaté cursed herself for her impatience. She had not wanted to wait.
Without an heir to the throne the kingdom was in constant danger. In a land
without a monarch even the rains would not fall regularly and the gods would
not be propitious. Therefore she had begged Vyäsadeva to approach the queen
at once. Now this! A blind son. How could he ever become the king?
“You must give another king to the Kuru race,” she implored. “Please approach
9

the other queen, Ambälikä.”
Vyäsadeva looked upon his anxious mother with compassion. He soothed her
fears. Soon he would return again to beget another child. She need only
summon him when Ambälikä was prepared to receive him. Vyäsadeva then
disappeared from the spot. Satyavaté turned and spoke to Bhéñma. “This is what
I feared. I must now ask Ambälikä to receive the sage. I pray that she will be
more successful than her sister.”
***
Within a month, Vyäsadeva was called. Once again he came from his
austerities and appeared in a repulsive condition. Satyavaté led him to
Ambälikä’s bedchamber and the sage at once entered. Even though she had
been warned by her sister what to expect, the princess was still struck with
horror when the grim ascetic approached her. She turned pale with fright,
although she kept her eyes open as she conceived. Vyäsadeva then said to the
horrified princess, “As you have turned pale upon seeing me, so your son shall
also be pale. He will therefore be named Päëòu, the ‘pale one’.” The åñi then
left the room. He met his mother outside and she asked about the child.
Vyäsadeva replied to her that a greatly powerful boy would be born but he
would be pale.
Satyavaté again felt anxious. The child would be pale? What did Vyäsadeva
mean? Something was still not right. And in any event, even if everything was
fine with this child, with only one qualified prince the kingdom would still be
in a precarious position. Vyäsadeva should try once more. She asked him to
again approach Ambikä. This time the princess, knowing what to expect,
would keep her eyes open. Vyäsadeva smiled and replied, “Be it so. I shall
return again shortly after she has delivered her first child.”
In due course of time Ambikä gave birth to a blind child who was named
Dhåtaräñöra. Ambälikä delivered a pale child who was nevertheless effulgent
and endowed with many auspicious marks on his body, and who was named
Päëòu in accord with Vyäsadeva’s words. Soon after, the sage again came to
the palace in order to approach Ambikä for a second time.
The queen was alarmed at the prospect of meeting again with the terriblelooking åñi. She went to a maidservant who was an intimate friend and asked
that she take her place. Giving the servant her own ornaments and adorning
her with the finest robes, she had her wait in the bedchamber for the sage.
10

Although he knew everything the åñi entered the chamber as before. As soon
as she saw the exalted sage the maidservant rose up respectfully. She bowed at
his feet and had him sit down comfortably. After gently washing his feet, the
girl offered him many kinds of delicious foodstuffs. Vyäsadeva was pleased.
After laying with the girl, he said, “O good-natured girl, you shall be a
maidservant no longer. Your son from our union will be wise, fortunate and
the foremost of all intelligent men upon this earth.”
Again Satyavaté was waiting outside the bedchamber. Vyäsadeva told her, “The
queen deceived me and sent instead her servant. That simple girl received me
with all respect. She will therefore bear an auspicious child. O Mother, I shall
now go and continue my asceticism. I will return when you need me again, but
I will not beget any more children.” Vyäsadeva vanished, leaving Bhéñma and
Satyavaté reflecting on his words.
The maidservant gave birth to a child named Vidura, who later became the
chief minister and advisor of the Kuru house. He was raised alongside his two
brothers, and the three boys grew up like resplendent gods. Everyone was
satisfied that the kingdom was secure. Happiness and prosperity were
everywhere as the gods showered their blessings on the kingdom. Bhéñma ruled
as regent while the boys grew up.
Although Dhåtaräñöra was the eldest, his blindness disqualified him from
becoming the king. Nor could Vidura assume the throne, as he was born of a
servant girl. But Päëòu was a worthy monarch in every way; and when he came
of age, he was installed on the Kuru throne. Päëòu excelled all men in archery,
and he soon became skilled in the Vedic science of leadership and diplomacy.
All three brothers were given the best education and were raised with
affection by Bhéñma. As predicted by Vyäsadeva, Dhåtaräñöra displayed
immense bodily strength and Vidura was naturally wise even from childhood.
His devotion to religion and morality could not be matched by anyone. When
he reached maturity, even the learned Bhéñma would seek his counsel. It was
thus that one day Bhéñma approached Vidura and said, “O wise one, we should
take steps to ensure that our noble line does not again face extinction. The two
princes are ready for marriage. I have heard that there are three princesses
worthy of being allied to our house. Tell me your thoughts on this, O Vidura.”
Bhéñma said that there was a princess in the Yadu house named Kunté, another
named Gändhäré, who was a daughter of the mountain king Suvala, and a third
princess named Mädré, in Madra. He suggested that two of these girls could be
11

sought for Päëòu and the other for Dhåtaräñöra.
Vidura folded his hands and replied, “My lord, you are our father, our protector
and our preceptor. You should do whatever you feel is proper for the welfare of
our dynasty.”
Bhéñma paced up and down his palace chamber. He had heard that Gändhäré
had received a boon from Çiva, who had said she would have one hundred sons.
Surely she would make a good wife for Dhåtaräñöra, who had also been blessed
in a similar way by Vyäsadeva. A hundred sons from that powerful prince
would be a great asset to the kingdom and would ensure the perpetuation of
the Kuru dynasty. Bhéñma at once arranged for messengers to go to Suvala and
ask for the hand of Gändhäré.
When King Suvala heard Bhéñma’s request, he was hesitant. How could his
daughter marry a blind prince? But Suvala reflected on the possibility.
Dhåtaräñöra belonged to the glorious Kuru house. They had ruled the world for
thousands of years. Considering the fame, nobility and virtue of the Kurus,
Suvala assented to the marriage. He had his son Çakuni bring Gändhäré to
Hastinäpura. When the princess heard that she was to marry the blind
Dhåtaräñöra, she took a cloth and bound her own eyes, not wanting to be in
any way superior to her lord.
Çakuni gave away his beautiful sister to Dhåtaräñöra along with many gifts sent
by Suvala. After being duly respected by Bhéñma, he then mounted his golden
chariot and returned to his kingdom. Gändhäré became immediately devoted to
her husband. She pleased him in every way by her attentions, she never even
referred to other men in her speech, and her eyes were always covered by the
cloth.
With Dhåtaräñöra married, Bhéñma turned his mind to Päëòu’s marriage. He
had heard that the princess Kunté would soon select a husband at a special
ceremony known as a svayaàvara. That princess was famous for her beauty and
womanly qualifications, and she belonged to the noble Yadu race. Bhéñma told
Päëòu to leave at once for the svayaàvara and try to win Kunté’s hand.
The king mounted a great dark stallion and rode swiftly to the southern
kingdom of Kuntébhoja, the father of Kunté. Like a proud lion, he strode into
the svayaàvara arena. When the many other kings assembled there saw Päëòu,
broad-chested and with eyes like a furious bull, they considered him to be a
second Indra. He outshone all the other monarchs like the sun rising in the
morning and obscuring the stars. When Kunté saw the powerful Hastinäpura
12

monarch gazing at her, her mind became agitated. Trembling with emotion,
she walked slowly toward him and shyly placed the nuptial garland around his
neck.
Although there were many kings and princes desirous of Kunté’s hand, and
although a svayaàvara would almost always end up in a fight, the kings
abandoned any thought of competing with the mighty Päëòu for the princess.
Mounting upon their steeds and chariots, they simply returned the way they
had come. King Kuntébhoja came down from the royal platform into the arena,
his face bright with delight. There could be no better match for his daughter.
The king immediately arranged for the wedding ceremony, and he presented
Päëòu with gifts of great wealth.
After a few days the couple left for Hastinäpura, accompanied by a large
retinue bearing many colorful pennants which waved in the breeze. The
soldiers beat drums and blew loudly upon their conchshells as they proceeded
toward Päëòu’s capital. Seated with Kunté upon a shining golden chariot and
surrounded by Brahmins offering benedictions, Päëòu entered Hastinäpura in
state.
Bhéñma was overjoyed to see Päëòu married to the gentle and beautiful
princess, but he also felt that the king needed another queen. Although
Gändhäré had received the benediction that she would bear a hundred sons,
Kunté had no such boon. Bhéñma wanted to ensure that the virtuous monarch
was blessed with powerful sons. He went personally to the kingdom of Madra to
seek the hand of Mädré for Päëòu. She was under her brother’s, King Çalya’s,
protection.
King Çalya received with all honor Bhéñma and his retinue of ministers,
Brahmins and åñis. He brought Gaìgä’s son into his palace and offered him a
seat of white ivory studded with precious gems. Then the king bathed his feet
and offered him arghya. His reception completed, Bhéñma said to King Çalya,
“O King, you should know that I am here to seek a maiden. I have heard that
you have an illustrious and chaste sister and I have chosen her for King Päëòu.
Please tell me if you approve of this arrangement.”
King Çalya replied that the Kuru house was more than worthy of being allied
with his house. There was, however, an ancient custom in his family that no
girl could be given in marriage unless the suitor offered a tribute.
Bhéñma had already heard of this custom because it dated back to the great
Brahmä himself. He had come prepared and thus replied to Çalya, “There is no
13

fault in this custom as it has the approval of the self-born creator, Brahmä.
Therefore, please accept the gifts I have brought in exchange for the princess.”
Bhéñma’s men then carried in heaps of gold coins, pearls, corals and gems of
various colors, and set them before Çalya. Bhéñma also presented the king with
hundreds of elephants, horses and chariots.
Çalya received all the wealth with a delighted heart. He then gave Mädré to
Bhéñma, who then soon returned to Hastinäpura and performed the wedding
ceremony.
Päëòu established each of his wives in their own splendid palaces and gave
himself up to enjoyment with them both. He sported in the palace groves and
gardens, appearing like a celestial with two beautiful consorts.

Chapter 2
Päëòu Cursed and Blessed
Although possessed of all material opulences, Päëòu was by nature
disinterested in sensual enjoyment. Having enjoyed with his two wives for only
a short while, he found his mind turning to other things. Although the Kuru
dynasty had for many thousands of years been emperors of the globe and had
upheld religious codes, their hold over other kings had begun to slip with the
death of Çantanu and his two sons. Some of the kings were now becoming
arrogant, exceeding their own boundaries and antagonizing weaker kings.
Päëòu felt impelled to take action. Going before Bhéñma, he said, “My lord, our
dynasty’s greatness has suffered diminution. The world is straying from the
path of righteousness established by our ancestors. Irreligion is rising. It is my
duty to our noble house, and indeed to the Supreme Lord himself, to go out
and check the offenders.”
Bhéñma smiled. Here indeed was a worthy descendent of the great Bharata,
after whom the very earth had been named. He replied, “Your desire befits our
line and is praiseworthy in every way. Take blessings from the Brahmins and
then leave with an army. May victory attend you!”
Päëòu quickly assembled a vast force consisting of infantry, horsemen,
elephants and chariots. As he left Hastinäpura he looked like the king of the
14

gods surrounded by his celestial army. Päëòu marched to the east and defeated
the king of the Däçärhas, who was becoming averse to Hastinäpura’s rule.
Moving south toward Maghada, where the powerful King Dirgha was assailing
many surrounding countries, Päëòu attacked the proud king at his capital,
Rajgriha, and killed him.
After that Päëòu subjugated several other warlike kings. He ranged across the
globe like a fire, his far-reaching arrows and the splendor of his weapons
resembling brilliant flames. As his fame spread, monarchs submitted without
resistance. Soon all the world’s kings recognized him as the most powerful ruler
on earth. They bowed to him with joined palms and offered tribute of various
kinds.
After this one-year campaign, Päëòu returned to his capital with the wealth he
had obtained. All the Kurus, with Bhéñma at their head, came out to greet him.
They viewed with delight the train of elephants, oxen, camels, horses and
chariots, all laden with riches and stretching farther than the eye could see.
Päëòu then presented to the Kuru elders the precious stones, pearls, coral, gold
and silver piled in heaps, along with millions of cows, horses and other animals.
He showed them innumerable costly blankets, rugs and skins from the rare
black renku deer.
Päëòu bowed at Bhéñma’s feet as he presented all this wealth, and Bhéñma
tearfully embraced the young king. Surrounded by Brahmins uttering prayers
and benedictions, the two men then mounted a golden chariot and proceeded
to the royal palace, heralded by a fanfare of trumpets, conches and
kettledrums.
Päëòu ensured that his two brothers were each given much wealth. He had
little personal interest in wealth, being more attracted to forests and plains
than to the luxurious palace life. He loved to mount his stallion and ride out on
long hunting expeditions. Thus, a few months after returning to Hastinäpura,
he decided to make his permanent residence upon a hilly slope of the
Himälayan range. Taking his two wives with him, he left his magnificent
palace and moved to a simple dwelling on the mountainside. The local people
would see the monarch roaming the woods with his wives. Encased in beautiful
blazing armor and armed with bows and swords, he resembled a god wandering
on earth.
Dhåtaräñöra officiated as the king in Hastinäpura on behalf of his younger
brother. At his command, the forest people would supply Päëòu with every
15

object of enjoyment. Päëòu had mastered his senses, so although he gracefully
accepted their gifts, he continued to live simply.
One day Päëòu went out hunting. He saw a couple of large deer mating. They
bolted when they saw the king, but he quickly fired five swift arrows after
them. As the golden-feathered shafts pierced the male deer, it fell down crying.
To the king’s surprise the dying deer began to speak in a pained voice.
“Oh, how shameful! Even degraded men who are slaves to their senses never
act so cruelly. No man’s judgment can ever prevail against the ordinance of
scripture. How then have you, the king and a descendent of the noble Bharata
race, acted so, in conflict with Vedic ordinance?”
Päëòu stood before the deer, which was weeping bitterly, and replied, “As a
king it is my duty to hunt. I thus control the forest, making it safe for the åñis.
At the same time, I am able to practice the kingly art of weaponry.
Furthermore, even great sages in the past have killed deer in the forest by
offering them in sacrifice. O deer, why do you reprove me?”
The deer replied that it did not condemn Päëòu for injuring it, but for not
taking into consideration that it was mating. The deer then told Päëòu that it
was a åñi named Kindama. He had assumed the form of a deer to mate with his
wife in the woods. The åñi had no dwelling and could not unite with his wife in
a human form as people would criticize. He had therefore transformed himself
and his wife into deer. The king had killed him just as he was about to beget a
child in his wife’s womb. Kindama continued, “No creature should be attacked
at the moment of intercourse. Your act was extremely cruel and sinful, and is
liable to lead you to hell. It is especially reproachful as you are a king and are
meant to chastise the wicked and protect the tenets of religion.”
Päëòu gazed at Kindama in shocked silence. He had spoken correctly. It had
certainly been sinful to shoot at the deer as it mated. How had he allowed
himself to be so overcome with passion? And what would come from having
killed a åñi? This was a calamity. The king hung his head in shame.
Seeing Päëòu’s crestfallen condition, Kindama said, “You need not fear the sin
of killing a Brahmin, as you did not know my true identity. But as you killed
me when I was indulging in pleasure, so too shall you meet your death at such a
time.”
The åñi wanted to free Päëòu from his sin. By cursing the king, Kindama knew
that Päëòu would immediately receive the reaction for his misdeed and thus
not have to suffer after death. Struggling to speak as his lifeblood ebbed away,
16

Kindama uttered his fearful imprecation.
“When next you approach your wife out of desire, you will immediately fall
dead. O King, as I was plunged into grief when I was happy, you shall also meet
with grief at such a time.”
The deer then gave up its life. Päëòu stood for some moments unable to move.
As he gazed at the deer’s dead body hot tears ran down his cheeks. Gathering
his wits, he returned to his hut. He immediately told his wives what had
happened. Afflicted by sorrow, the king wept aloud with his two queens. He
condemned himself again and again. Holding his head and lamenting, the king
spoke in an anguished voice: “I have heard that my father, although born of a
virtuous man, was himself a slave of lust and died as a result. Having been
begotten in the wife of a lustful king, I too have become afflicted with lust. I
have become devoted to sin. My life is simply spent in killing innocent
creatures. The gods have forsaken me and I stand cursed.”
Päëòu resolved to live a life of austerity. He declared that from that moment
he would accept a vow of celibacy, as Bhéñma had done. He would seek
salvation by renouncing all sexual pleasure, the great impediment to spiritual
understanding. Päëòu spoke to his horrified wives, “I shall shave my head and
cover my body with dust. Sorrow and joy will be equal to me. I will entirely
renounce anger and I shall be devoted to the good of all creatures. I will accept
no gifts and I will obtain my food by begging. In this way, I shall transcend the
dualities of this world and rise to the highest regions, where the Lord himself
resides.”
The king asked his wives to return to the capital and inform his elders of the
turn of events. They should gratify the Brahmins on his behalf, giving them
much wealth. For his part, he would immediately retire into the wilderness and
leave society forever.
Kunté and Mädré were torn by grief. They could not face the prospect of
separation from their husband. In piteous voices they begged that he allow
them to follow his path. Both queens were prepared to accept whatever
austerities he accepted. On behalf of them both, Kunté said, “Let us together
accept the order of vänaprastha, retirement in the forest. We shall be happy
practising asceticism with you. If you leave us today, we shall not bear our lives
any longer.”
Päëòu relented, but he made it clear that he intended to perform the strictest
austerities. His wives were not deterred. They wished only to be with him
17

wherever he went.
Päëòu resolved to embark on his ascetic life immediately. He would not return
to the city. He removed all his royal ornaments and gave them, along with his
riches, to the Brahmins. Then he said to his attendants, “Go back to
Hastinäpura and inform Bhéñma of everything that has occurred.”
The royal attendants and Brahmins left sorrowfully for Hastinäpura. The
citizens lamented loudly when they learned of Päëòu’s plight. Dhåtaräñöra was
especially afflicted. Thinking of Päëòu living so austerely in the forest, he
could no longer derive pleasure from the comforts of his beds, servants and
royal opulences. He continually wept and brooded over Päëòu.
***
After the Brahmins and attendants had left, Päëòu made his way into the
forest with his wives. They walked steadily north for many days and finally
arrived at Saptasrota, the hundred-peaked mountain. There the king
constructed a wooden hut and began to engage in severe penance. Many åñis,
Siddhas and Cäraëas lived in that region and Päëòu soon endeared himself to
them by his qualities of humility, self-control and devotion to his elders and to
God. They would frequently visit his hut to converse with him.
With his mind fixed only on salvation, Päëòu lived quite simply at Saptasrota.
He ate only fruits and roots and drank clear water from mountain springs. His
two wives accepted the same vows he had taken, and thus all three lived
joyfully on the mountain like celestials descended from the higher regions.
Gradually over time Päëòu thought more about his situation. One day he
spoke to the åñis, revealing his fears. “O greatly learned ones, I have heard that
a sonless man cannot attain heaven. By having sons one pays his debts to his
ancestors. If I die without issue, my forefathers will surely perish, as the çraddhä
offerings will cease. I am thus filled with apprehension because I cannot beget
children.”
Päëòu was anxious. He would often perform the çraddhä ceremony for the
welfare of his departed ancestors. The Vedas state that such food offerings
made to the gods on their behalf ensure their continued happiness in heaven.
Päëòu was concerned. What would happen when he died? If he left no
children, who would continue the offerings to his forefathers and, indeed, to
himself? He folded his palms in supplication. Could the åñis beget children in
his wives, just as Vyäsadeva had begotten him and his brothers?
18

Smiling, one of the åñis replied, “By our ascetic powers we have seen that you
will undoubtedly have children like the gods themselves. Indeed, your progeny
will fulfill the purpose of the celestials. All this can be seen clearly by us.
Therefore you should certainly act in such a way as to somehow produce
children.”
Päëòu reflected on the åñi’s words. It seemed the sages were amenable to his
suggestion. He went to Kunté and spoke with her in private. “O lady of sweet
smiles, I desire offspring, but due to my vicious behavior I have lost my power
of procreation. In such instances the scriptures sanction that another worthy
man may beget children on my behalf. Please, therefore, accept another man
and conceive a child for me.”
Päëòu pointed out that even he and his brothers had been conceived in this
way. Kunté should thus accept a qualified Brahmin, who was superior to
himself, in order to have a child.
The noble Kunté did not like Päëòu’s suggestion. She looked down and spoke
softly in reply, “O virtuous one, please do not request this of me. I am your
lawful wife, ever devoted to you. I shall certainly not accept another’s embrace,
even in my imagination. O King, embrace me to beget offspring. I shall ascend
to heaven with you. Who is there superior to you?”
Kunté recited to her husband an ancient history she had heard. There was once
a powerful king who had died without issue. His lamenting wife had embraced
his dead body and by the arrangement of the gods she conceived children.
Three qualified sons were born of her union with her dead husband. Kunté
asked Päëòu to emulate that king.
Päëòu replied that he did not possess such power. He preferred she conceive a
child by uniting with a åñi. He assured her that no sin was attached to such an
act. It was his responsibility, as he was commanding her as her husband, and
she should not hesitate to comply with his request. The monarch tried in many
ways to convince his wife.
At last, Kunté, seeing her husband’s determination, said to him, “I shall tell you
of a boon I received while in my maidenhood, which may yet prove to be our
deliverance. When I was a girl in my father’s house, he would engage me in
serving guests there. One day the powerful mystic Durväsä arrived. By my
service and constant attention to all his needs I greatly pleased that åñi. As he
was leaving he called me aside and said, ‘O gentle one, I shall confer upon you
a boon. Listen as I recite a mantra. This mantra, uttered by you, will summon
19

any of the celestials you desire. Whether agreeable or not they will then be
obliged to do your bidding.’”
Kunté already had experience of the mantra’s power. As soon as she had
uttered it once and thought of Sürya, that blazing deity had appeared before
her. He had then conceived a son. Kunté therefore knew that she could
summon other gods to produce further children. She had not wanted to reveal
this secret, being reluctant to unite even with the gods in place of her own
husband. But this was an emergency. It seemed that the time to make good use
of Durväsä’s mantra had come.
Päëòu, who had known nothing about the boon, was overjoyed upon hearing
Kunté’s words. This was surely the Lord’s arrangement. Sons from the gods
would be far superior to any born of earthly men.
Kunté asked her husband which of the deities she should call.
Päëòu thought for some moments and then said to his wife, “O beautiful lady,
you should call the great Dharma, the god of justice. He will never be able to
pollute us with sin and his son will undoubtedly be qualified in every way.”
Kunté assented to Päëòu’s request. She sat in meditation and thought of
Dharma, reciting the mantra Durväsä had given her. Within moments the
deity appeared, riding on a resplendent chariot. Shining like the sun, he smiled
and said to Kunté, “What should I do for you at this time?”
Awed by the god’s splendor, Kunté replied in a trembling voice, “I desire a child
by your illustrious self.”
Dharma at once united with her in his spiritual form and then disappeared.
Kunté conceived and in due course gave birth. During the eighth month of the
year, at noon on a full moon day, when the auspicious star Jyeñöhä was in the
ascendant, she brought forth a lustrous son. As soon as he was born a celestial
voice was heard in the sky: “This child will be the best and most virtuous of
men. He will be devoted to truth, highly powerful and famous throughout the
three worlds. Known as Yudhiñöhira, this boy will rule the earth.”
Päëòu was overjoyed. The gods had not forsaken him after all! Here was a
child worthy of his great dynasty. He no longer had to be anxious.
Then he began to consider the situation. He saw that by Durväsä’s boon Kunté
could obtain more powerful sons, born of the gods themselves, who would
ensure the Kuru’s welfare and become great leaders in the world. Päëòu
approached Kunté again, a year after Yudhiñöhira’s birth, and said, “The wise
have declared that a ruler should possess strength as well as righteousness.
20

Therefore, please invoke the wind-god, Väyu, the strongest of the gods. By him
we shall get a son who will be the most powerful man upon this earth.”
Kunté folded her palms and bowed in assent. She again sat in meditation, this
time calling for Väyu. In moments the god appeared, riding a huge deer. In a
voice that sounded like thunderclouds, the effulgent god said with a smile, “O
Kunté, what do you desire from me?”
Kunté was bashful as she replied, “O best of the celestials, please give me a son
who will possess immense bodily strength, and who will be capable of humbling
the pride of everybody.”
The god agreed, and by his yogic power he approached Kunté and conceived a
child within her womb. When Väyu’s child took his birth a voice was again
heard from the sky, saying, “This child will be the best of all those endowed
with strength and power.”
Päëòu and Kunté were even more joyful to see their second son, whom they
named Bhéma. Along with Mädré, and in the company of the åñis and Siddhas,
they lovingly raised their children in the remote and beautiful woodlands on
the mountainside.
Some months after Bhéma’s birth, Kunté was sitting near the edge of a
mountain cliff with Bhéma asleep on her lap. Suddenly a tiger roared nearby.
She jumped up in fear and the baby rolled from her lap over the cliff edge.
Struck with horror, Päëòu quickly descended the cliff. When he reached the
bottom he saw the child lying unharmed amid a pile of rocky fragments. The
baby had landed upon a large rock and had smashed it to pieces. In amazement
Päëòu gently lifted his child and took him back to Kunté.
Even with two sons, Päëòu continued to reflect on the future of his dynasty.
He thought, “Success in this world depends upon exertion, but exertion is
always subordinate to destiny. Yet even destiny is controlled by the will of the
Supreme Lord. How then can I obtain a son who will be the best of all those
devoted to the Lord?”
Päëòu thought of Indra, the king of all the gods and a famous devotee of the
Lord. Indra had formerly performed a thousand sacrifices for Lord Viñëu’s
pleasure, and he possessed immeasurable might, prowess and glory. From him
would surely come a son who would be superior to all.
Päëòu consulted with the åñis and was advised that he and Kunté should
practice an ascetic vow for one year to please Indra. At the end of that period
Kunté should summon the god with her mantra.
21

The monarch and his wife then accepted a vow of standing on one leg from
sunrise till sunset, taking neither food nor water. They kept their minds
absorbed in meditation and prayer for one complete year, with an aim to please
Indra. At the end of the year Indra spoke to Päëòu in his meditation. “I have
become pleased with you, O King. I shall give you a son who will protect
religion and chastise the wicked. He will delight his friends and relatives and
slay his foes. Indeed, this boy will be the best of men.”
Following Päëòu’s request, Kunté again chanted her mantra. Indra appeared
immediately, his bodily luster lighting up the whole region. By the power of the
thousand-eyed Indra, Kunté conceived, and in time a dark-complexioned child
was born. For the third time the heavenly voice was heard, resounding over the
mountainside: “O Kunté, this child will be equal in strength to Indra and
indeed Çiva himself. He shall be called Arjuna and he will spread your fame
everywhere. He will subjugate many powerful kings and greatly increase the
prosperity of your dynasty. Agni, Çiva and Indra will all be gratified by this
boy’s service. He shall have no equal in prowess and will be famous throughout
the three worlds.”
Overhearing this as well as other prophecies regarding Arjuna’s future
greatness, the åñis on that mountain were filled with joy. They uttered blessings
while the celestial drums reverberated and showers of flowers fell from the sky.
Many gods and heavenly sages appeared before Kunté and offered the child
benediction. Only the ascetic åñis could see them as they appeared in their
ethereal forms, standing in chariots and on mountain peaks. The åñis were
astonished by that wonderful sight and they stood with folded palms.
Päëòu was delighted. He now had three matchless sons. Seeing the wonderful
result of Durväsä’s boon, he decided to ask Kunté to use the mantra a fourth
time and summon yet another powerful god. When he approached her again,
however, Kunté refused. “O learned man, even in times of emergency it is
never sanctioned by scripture for a woman to have intercourse with more than
three men. Have you forgot the ordinance? I would become debased if I again
conceived by another.”
The king fell silent. Kunté was right. He decided not to ask for any more sons
and continued to live peacefully in the forest with his two wives. Their three
sons grew luxuriantly in their care.
Then one day Mädré approached Päëòu privately. “My lord, I do not complain
that you treat me less favorably than Kunté. Even though I am of a higher
22

birth, I still have no complaint. My one grief is that you have no sons by me.”
Mädré found her position unbearable. No princesses in her line had ever gone
without issue. Kunté had three sons. Mädré had heard that Dhåtaräñöra’s wife,
Gändhäré, had given birth to a hundred sons in Hastinäpura. Yet she, the
lawful wife of a great hero, was childless. She asked Päëòu to request Kunté to
teach her the mantra. Mädré explained that she was too shy to ask her directly,
since Kunté was her rival.
Päëòu smiled. He felt compassion for his younger wife. “O Mädré, I had already
been considering this myself. I was reluctant to ask you because I was not sure
how you might feel. Now that I know your mind, I shall certainly speak with
Kunté. I do not think she will refuse.”
The monarch approached Kunté immediately. He told her of Mädré’s sorrow
and asked her to be gracious to her co-wife. Päëòu made it clear that he also
desired more sons to secure more fully the good of his race, including that of
himself and indeed Kunté.
Kunté assented to her husband’s request and told Mädré, “O gentle lady, I shall
recite the mantra for your benefit. Please think of some deity from whom you
desire offspring.”
Mädré thought carefully. Most probably Kunté would allow her to use the
mantra only once. If she summoned the inseparable twin Açviné gods, she
would get two sons at once. Even as she thought of the two gods they appeared
before her, aglow with celestial splendor. Bashfully, she asked that they unite
with her to conceive children and they immediately agreed. They begot upon
Mädré two boys of incomparable beauty who were named Nakula and
Sahadeva. Upon their birth the divine voice said, “These virtuous and
accomplished sons will transcend in energy and beauty even their celestial
fathers.”
The åñis performed all the rites of passage for the five boys and they grew up
swiftly. Even at age one, they appeared as if they were five years old. Päëòu was
overwhelmed with happiness at seeing his sons’ extraordinary strength, beauty,
energy and wisdom. All the boys became favorites of the åñis and they sported
like five Gandharvas descended to earth.
Päëòu wondered if he might again have another son through Mädré. But when
he asked Kunté if she would permit Mädré to use the mantra again, Kunté
became angry and replied, “My lord, I was deceived by that wicked woman.
Although I gave her the mantra only once, she obtained two sons. If I give it to
23

her again I fear she may surpass me in the number of children. Pray do not ask
me for this favor any more.”
Päëòu reconciled himself to the fact that he would have only five sons, but he
was not disappointed. His boys grew up like gods. They were all as handsome as
the moon-god, Soma, and as powerful as Indra. They all became fearless
bowmen who were capable, even in their early youth, of facing furious
mountain lions. The åñis schooled them in every facet of Vedic knowledge. The
ascetics were astonished to see the boys growing so rapidly, like lotuses
blooming in a lake. Päëòu and his wives offered prayers of thanks to Lord
Viñëu for their great fortune, and they went on living in the Himälayan
region, raising their children with affection.

Chapter 3
The Päëòavas Come to Hastinäpura
In Hastinäpura, Dhåtaräñöra had performed five sacrifices with the wealth
Päëòu had bestowed upon him. He gave charity to hundreds of thousands of
Brahmins and satisfied the gods with his offerings. The kingdom flourished and
the citizens had everything they desired. They were devoted to virtue, sacrifice
and truth. Bearing love and affection for one another, they grew in prosperity.
Hastinäpura was like the ocean filled with numerous palaces and mansions.
There were golden arches and crystal fountains everywhere. Between broad,
paved highways lay beautiful gardens and the air was filled with the sweet
fragrance of blossoming trees. The clatter of horses’ hooves and chariot wheels
mixed with the trumpeting of elephants and the blare of conchshells which
mark the beginning of sacrificial performances. Holy chants uttered by
numerous Brahmins emanated from tall and exquisitely carved temple
buildings, which graced the city in their thousands. Hastinäpura appeared like
Indra’s celestial capital, and each day dozens of feudal kings would arrive
bringing tribute.
Assisted by Bhéñma, Dhåtaräñöra ruled over the kingdom on Päëòu’s behalf.
After hearing of Päëòu cursed and his subsequent retirement, Dhåtaräñöra,
despite his blindness, was officially installed as monarch. He thought sadly of
24

his brother and missed him greatly, but in his absence he competently managed
all the affairs of state.
It once came to pass that Vyäsadeva arrived hungry and thirsty at Dhåtaräñöra’s
palace. Gändhäré attended to him conscientiously. Vyäsadeva was pleased with
the girl and blessed her, “You shall soon have one hundred sons as powerful as
your husband.” In due course of time Gändhäré conceived. For two years she
bore the embryo within her womb, becoming increasingly anxious. Then one
day news reached her that Kunté had given birth in the forest to a boy as
effulgent as the morning sun. Out of frustration and anger at her own
excessively long gestation, she struck violently at her womb. She then brought
forth a hard mass of flesh that resembled an iron ball. As her nurses informed
her of the stillbirth, she was afflicted by grief and thought of Vyäsadeva and
his boon.
At once the sage appeared before her and said, “What have you done?”
Gändhäré told him how she had become overwhelmed with envy and
frustration when she had heard of Kunté giving birth to Yudhiñöhira. With
tears in her eyes she said, “I struck my womb and this lump of flesh came out.
What then was the meaning of your boon?”
Vyäsadeva replied that his words could never prove false. He asked the
servants to bring one hundred one pots filled with ghee. He then sprinkled
cool water on the lump of flesh and it gradually divided into one hundred and
one parts, each the size of a thumb. These were placed in the pots which were
then sealed and placed in a concealed spot. Vyäsadeva instructed that the pots
should be opened only after two more years had passed. He then departed for
his lonely mountain äçrama.
Exactly after the two years had elapsed the pots were opened one by one. From
the first came a child who was named Duryodhana. At the moment he was
brought out of the pot the sound of braying asses and screaming vultures was
heard. Jackals howled and the wind blew fiercely. Without any apparent cause,
fires sprang up all around the city and raged in all directions.
The frightened King Dhåtaräñöra summoned the Brahmins, Bhéñma, Vidura
and other ministers and counselors. He asked them the meaning of the omens.
“The eldest of the princes is undoubtedly Yudhiñöhira and he should inherit
the kingdom. I do not dispute that. But will my own son become the king after
him? O wise ones, please tell me what is right and lawful.”
As Dhåtaräñöra spoke the terrible sounds began again from all sides. Hearing
25

this, Vidura replied to the king, “When these omens are seen at the birth of a
child, it is evident that he will be the exterminator of his race. Our prosperity
and future depend upon his being abandoned. Do not hesitate, O King. This
child must be cast away at once.”
Vidura told Dhåtaräñöra that he would still have ninety-nine other sons. There
would be no sin in abandoning this child, as the scriptures clearly state that an
individual can be abandoned for the sake of a family. Indeed, a family can be
abandoned for the sake of a village, a village for the sake of a city and the
world itself can be abandoned for the sake of the soul.
Dhåtaräñöra was unable to accept Vidura’s counsel. He could not allow his son
to be cast away. He shook his head slowly and said nothing in reply. As the
nurse stood by holding the baby, the king waved her toward Gändhäré and the
child was handed to her. Bhéñma and Vidura looked at one another but said
nothing. Dhåtaräñöra was the monarch; his word was final.
Over the course of the next month, all the pots were opened and one hundred
boys and one girl were brought out. All the boys bore the signs of being great
warriors and rulers. The king and queen rejoiced in their good fortune.
Dismissing the evil omens, they dwelt contentedly in Hastinäpura, attended by
Bhéñma and Vidura.
***
On Saptasrota Mountain, spring had arrived. Päëòu, surrounded by his five
youthful sons, felt young again. He sported with the boys in the hills, scaling
rock faces and challenging lions in their caves. They dived and played in
mountain pools and climbed tall trees. Wrestling and laughing together, they
rolled about the soft grassy slopes.
One evening Päëòu went into the woods with Mädré to fetch roots and fruits
for their evening meal. As they strolled, they saw countless varieties of
blossoming trees and bushes. The air was heavy with scent and the sounds of
cuckoos and other birds filled the air. Black bees swarmed about the manycolored flowers that surrounded lakes overgrown with lotuses. The celestial
atmosphere awoke romance in Päëòu’s heart. He gazed at the beautiful Mädré,
his mind influenced by Cupid. It was a hot day and Mädré was clad in a long
silk robe. In the bright sunshine, Päëòu could see the outline of her exquisite
form, which resembled that of a goddess. The soft breeze made her dress cling
to her body, revealing her slender waist and firm, round breasts.
26

Päëòu could not suppress his desire. He had kept himself in check for twelve
years and had not dared to contemplate embracing his wives. Kindama’s curse
was always uppermost in his mind and he had resigned himself to practising
celibacy with the determination of a åñi. It seemed ages ago when he had been
able to enjoy conjugal love with his wives. Now Päëòu again felt those stirrings
moving his heart. His mind was confounded and he moved closer to Mädré,
gently placing his hand on her arm.
Mädré at once understood what was in Päëòu’s heart. She was seized by
conflicting emotions. How was her lord suddenly approaching her in this way?
Out of fear of the curse he had carefully avoided any physical contact with
either her or Kunté for a long time. Although she herself had longed for his
embrace, she had scrupulously avoided any situation that might entice her
husband. She did not even apply cosmetics or perfumes. But as the powerful
Päëòu embraced her, she felt her resolve weaken. Delight and fear seized her
heart at once. As her emotions clashed, her mind was petrified. What about
the curse! If Päëòu did not stop, he would doubtlessly be destroyed. She had to
prevent him.
Mädré tried to push her husband away. Päëòu smiled, incited further by her
protests. His mighty arms, deeply tanned and marked with scars from his
bowstring, closed around her like serpents. Overpowered by desire, he could
not even hear her as she reminded him about the curse. He pressed her lips
with his and dropped down to a grassy slope with the beautiful queen held
tightly in his arms. Lifting her robes, he pushed himself firmly against her soft
body. Mädré’s struggles only inflamed his passion more.
As if impelled by the lord of death himself, the monarch entirely lost his
reason under the influence of lust. No thought of Kindama’s curse entered his
mind as he lost himself in enjoyment with his fair-skinned wife. Even as he
tried to consummate the act with Mädré, the åñi’s words took effect. Päëòu’s
chest was seized with a terrible pain and a shocked look crossed his face. His
body stiffened and went slack.
As Päëòu’s body fell from hers, Mädré let out a wail of sorrow. Her worst fears
had been realized. Despite all her protests she had not been able to prevent her
husband’s death. The distraught queen repeatedly embraced her dead husband
and lamented loudly.
Kunté heard Mädré’s cries and ran over to where she lay. As Kunté approached,
the tearful Mädré told her to come alone, without children. Kunté quickly sent
27

the boys back to the äçrama, then rushed to Päëòu’s side. She dropped to the
ground. Kunté realized at once what had happened, and she cried out, “My
lord!” Tears welled into her eyes as she turned to Mädré. “O noble one, how
have you allowed this to happen? I was always so careful to protect our lord
from this very danger. How did he embrace you, knowing of the åñi’s curse?
Why did you tempt him when you were alone together? He was always grave in
our company as he thought of Kindama’s words. How did he become so
careless?”
Mädré wept, unable to reply. Kunté tossed about on the ground next to her. The
two beautiful ladies embraced their husband’s dead body and shed profuse
tears. Kunté again addressed Mädré. “O princess of Madra, you are surely more
fortunate than I, for you saw our lord’s face light up with joy as he approached
you in this lonely place.”
Gathering her senses, Mädré replied, “O sister, with tears in my eyes I tried to
resist him, yet he could not control himself. He seemed bent on fulfilling the
åñi’s curse.”
Kunté prayed for strength. Somehow this was God’s arrangement. The ways of
Providence were always mysterious. But what should be done now? What was
her duty? She gently stroked the head of her younger co-wife and said, “O
Mädré, there is only one recourse for me. Please allow me to ascend to heaven
with our lord. Rise up and raise our children. Give me the body and, tightly
embracing it, I shall enter fire.”
Mädré shook her head. She pleaded with Kunté, “The monarch died as he
approached me for intercourse. His desire was not satiated. Should it not be I
who goes to the region of the dead to gratify him? I am still clasping him even
now and will not allow him to go without me. O Kunté, please let me go!”
Mädré felt incapable of bringing up the children by herself. Kunté would be a
far better mother. Mädré had seen her gentle dealings with the boys. She would
surely treat them all equally. Mädré begged Kunté’s permission to enter the fire
with Päëòu. “O Kunté, the king sought me with desire. Grant me leave to fulfill
that desire. You would be doing me the greatest good. I shall leave my sons in
your care without any fear.”
Kunté looked compassionately upon Mädré as she lay with her arms around
Päëòu and bathing him with her tears. The noble Kunté felt her heart torn.
Although as the elder wife it was her privilege to choose to follow the king to
the next world, how could she deny Mädré? It was to her that Päëòu had been
28

attracted. If Mädré were to live, she would live with the memory of that brief
and terrible moment all her life. Guilt would consume her, along with the
anguish of being unable to fulfill her lord’s last desire. Although she longed to
follow her husband, Kunté could not be so cruel to her co-wife. She touched
Mädré gently and said, “So be it.” Kunté then went with a heavy heart toward
the äçrama.
When the boys heard of their father’s death they were struck with grief. They
ran crying to where he lay and fell to the ground, like powerful lions rolling on
the earth. Mädré blessed them tearfully and told them that she would be
ascending the pyre with her husband. She asked her two sons to remain with
Kunté and to serve her steadfastly. The boys were too shocked to reply. They
watched as the åñis built a pyre next to the king’s body, then, while reciting
mantras, placed his body upon the pyre. They asked Yudhiñöhira to step
forward. The prince, blinded by tears, set fire to the pyre and stood back. As
the flames rose, Mädré folded her palms and fell upon her lord’s body, holding
tight as the fire consumed them both. Within minutes both she and Päëòu
were gone.
The griefstricken Kunté then asked the åñis what she could do. The åñis advised
Kunté to return to Hastinäpura with her boys as soon as possible. They also told
her they would accompany her, carrying the remains of Päëòu and Mädré with
them
The large number of åñis, Siddhas and Cäraëas formed a procession, walking
ahead of Kunté and her sons. By their mystical powers, they all arrived at
Hastinäpura within a short time. Kunté then presented herself at the northern
gate and messengers ran swiftly to inform the king.
Upon hearing of her arrival, Dhåtaräñöra, Bhéñma, Satyavaté and all the other
Kuru elders hurried to the gate, followed by a large number of citizens, who had
heard that an assembly of celestials had arrived. Everyone was struck with
wonder to see the brilliant åñis surrounded by Siddhas and Cäraëas. People
came out in the thousands to see those divine beings.
Dhåtaräñöra, along with his one hundred sons, bowed before the åñis. Bhéñma
and the others also offered their obeisances to the sages and, after offering
them seats, they sat before them on silk mats spread out on the ground. When
the crowd was finally settled, Bhéñma went forward and worshipped the åñis by
bathing their feet and offering them arghya. He answered their enquiries about
the kingdom’s welfare, saying that everything was well. Then one of the
29

leading åñis stood up and addressed the Kuru elders. “The virtuous monarch
went to the Saptasrota mountain to observe the vow of celibacy. Somehow by
the Lord’s inscrutable plan and the arrangement of the gods, his five sons were
born.”
The åñi then introduced each of Päëòu’s sons and revealed the identities of
their divine fathers. He told them how the boys had been trained in Vedic
knowledge and had grown to youthhood in the company of åñis and Siddhas.
Glancing around the large concourse of men who had assembled outside the
city, the åñi said, “Steadily adhering to virtue, and leaving behind him these
children, Päëòu has ascended to the higher worlds. The chaste Mädré has gone
with him. Now his sons should be accepted as the kingdom’s rightful heirs.”
The åñi pointed to a bier lying nearby, covered with a white cloth. “Here are
the remains of Päëòu and his wife. Perform the funeral rites and accept his
sons as if they were your own. We shall now depart.”
When the åñi stopped speaking he, along with all the other åñis and celestial
beings, vanished. In astonishment the citizens returned to their homes. Bhéñma
then led Kunté and the boys into the city and arranged for their
accommodation in a royal palace. Dhåtaräñöra ordered the funeral rites to be
performed and declared a state of mourning in the city for twelve full days.
The Kurus were distracted with grief over Päëòu’s loss. Päëòu had been dearly
loved by all the citizens and they loudly lamented. Päëòu’s five sons, known as
the Päëòavas, lay on the bare ground for twelve days, giving full vent to their
grief. They did not accept royal comforts or beds, and they wept along with the
Kuru elders.
At the end of the mourning period, the Kurus performed Päëòu’s çraddhä.
They distributed vast amounts of food and wealth to the Brahmins on behalf of
the departed souls. Then life returned to normal in Hastinäpura and Päëòu’s
sons took their place in the royal family.
It was at that time that Vyäsa chose to again appear in the city. He spoke
privately to the bereaved and sorrowful Satyavaté. “O Mother, fearful and
terrible times lie ahead. The dark age of Kali now approaches. Sin increases
day by day. Soon, by the evil acts of the Kurus, your race will be destroyed and
a great havoc will be wrought in the world.”
Vyäsa advised his mother to immediately retire to the forest rather than
staying to witness the pain and horror that would soon follow. She should
devote herself to yoga practice and meditation.
30

After Vyäsa left, Satyavaté reflected on his words. She decided to follow his
advice. She then told her two daughters-in-law of her intentions, and asked
Päëòu’s distraught mother, Ambälikä, to accompany her. The two royal ladies
soon left for the forest to dedicate themselves to asceticism. In time they gave
up their bodies and went joyfully to the higher regions. Ambikä remained at
Hastinäpura with her son, Dhåtaräñöra.

Chapter 4
Duryodhana Begins His Evil Schemes
The Päëòavas began to enjoy life in Hastinäpura. They sported with the
hundred sons of Dhåtaräñöra, who became known as the Kauravas. Pandu’s sons
excelled the Kauravas in all areas: in strength, knowledge and prowess with
weaponry. Bhéma was especially powerful and he took delight in defeating the
Kauravas in sport. They could not equal him in anything. The exuberant
Bhéma possessed the indefatigable power of his divine father. At wrestling and
fighting he was unapproachable and could easily hold off the attacks of any
number of Kauravas. Out of a boyish sense of fun he would often play practical
jokes on them, laughing when they became angered and tried futilely to get
back at him.
Duryodhana in particular found Bhéma’s antics and power intolerable. As the
eldest son of the blind king, Duryodhana had enjoyed the most prestige in the
Kuru house. The Kuru elders had carefully raised him and trained him in the
kingly arts, thinking of him as the potential future world emperor. Mindful of
the omens seen at his birth, the elders were especially careful to teach him
moral codes. The prince was both powerful and capable in all areas of
weaponry and politics, and was accustomed to being the center of attention in
the royal palace since his birth. When the Päëòavas arrived, however, all that
changed. Pandu’s sons were gentle, modest and devoted to their elders. They
soon became dear to Bhéñma, Vidura and the other senior Kurus. Their
behavior was a welcome change from that of Duryodhana and his brothers,
who tended to be self-centered and proud, and often quite arrogant.
Duryodhana quickly became envious of his five cousins. His envy grew up like
31

an oil-fed fire when he saw Bhéma’s pranks.
After another day of humiliation at Bhéma’s hands, Duryodhana felt he could
take no more. He spoke with Dushashana, the next eldest of the hundred
Kauravas. “Dear brother, this Bhéma is a constant thorn in our sides. He
challenges all hundred of us at once and throws us about like pieces of straw.
We cannot better him at anything. Why, even at eating he humbles us by
consuming as much as twenty of us put together. Something has to be done to
check his pride.”
Duryodhana’s eyes narrowed as he spoke. His intentions were vicious. The
prince was inclined to wicked acts, and he had been spurred on by his uncle
Shakuni, who had taken up residence in Hastinäpura. The Gandhara prince
had been offended by Bhéñma’s decision to give his sister to the blind
Dhåtaräñöra rather than to Pandu. Now he wanted revenge. He involved
himself in court intrigues in order to find a way to avenge himself against
Bhéñma. Hurting the Päëòavas, who were obviously dear to Bhéñma, was one
good way. And, of course, he would simultaneously be advancing the cause of
his sister’s sons. Duryodhana was a willing accomplice. The boy saw his
scheming uncle as a mentor. When Duryodhana had come to him complaining
about Bhéma it did not take much to convince him to do something terrible to
the Pandava boy.
Duryodhana revealed his heinous plan to Dushashana. “Tomorrow I shall feed
Bhéma an enormous poisoned feast. When he falls unconscious after eating I
shall bind his limbs and toss him into the Ganges. With Bhéma gone the other
brothers are helpless. We can easily deal with them. Thus my claim to the
throne will be unchallenged.”
Dushashana smiled in agreement. He too found Bhéma’s behavior intolerable
and, like Duryodhana, had also found his own status in the Kuru house
diminish since the Päëòavas’ arrival. He put his arm around his brother and
the two of them made their way back to their palace, laughing together as they
walked the forest path.
The next morning Duryodhana suggested that all the princes go to the river
for some water sports. Soon they mounted their shining chariots, which
resembled cities and had great wheels which rumbled like thunderclouds as
they headed out, sending up clouds of dust. Upon arriving on the river bank,
the mighty youths dismounted from their cars, laughing and joking, and
entered the large pleasure house Dhåtaräñöra had built for them.
32

The elegant palace was built of white marble and it stood seven stories high.
Many-colored pennants flew from tall golden flagstaffs on its roof. There were
dozens of rooms offering every kind of luxury. Each room was tastefully
decorated with tapestries, fine paintings, and ivory and coral furnishings,
studded with gems and covered with golden cushions. Royal musicians and
dancers stood by, ready to entertain the princes, and a hundred of the king’s
select force of bodyguards stood ready to protect them.
Once inside Duryhodhana invited everyone to enjoy the great feast he had
arranged for them. He led them through the mansion and out into the central
gardens. The boys looked with pleasure upon the large ponds filled with red
and blue lotuses and surrounded by soft, grassy banks. Crystal waterfalls made
tinkling sounds that blended with the singing of brightly colored exotic birds.
The heady scent of numerous blossoms filled the air. Fine cushions had been
arranged in lines on the grass and many servants stood by, waiting to serve the
feast.
Duryodhana chose the seat next to Bhéma. Then he ordered the servants to
bring the food. The dishes were exquisite. Duryodhana had personally mixed
the poison with the food he had brought to him. He then offered the plate to
Bhéma, feigning love and feeding him with his own hand. The guileless Bhéma
suspected nothing and he cheerfully consumed his normal amount.
Duryodhana rejoiced within as Bhéma hungrily swallowed the poisoned cakes,
pies, creams, drinks and other preparations.
When the feast was over, Duryodhana suggested they all go down to the river
for sport. The boys raced to the river in great joy. They wrestled and rolled
about on the ground, tossing each other into the clear blue water of the river.
As usual, Bhéma was the most energetic. The poison did not appear to have
affected him. The prince, who stood head and shoulders above his peers, was a
peerless wrestler. Anyone who approached him quickly found themselves
sailing through the air and landing in the water. Bhéma would then dive in and
create huge waves by thrashing his arms. The other princes were then dunked
under the waters by the playful Bhéma.
Late in the afternoon the boys began to tire. They came out of the water and
dressed themselves in white robes, adorned with gold ornaments. Then they
wearily made their way back to the mansion to spend the night.
Bhéma had consumed enough poison to kill a hundred men, but it was not until
evening that the wind-god’s son began to feel its effects. As night fell he felt so
33

drowsy that he decided to lay down by the river and rest. Gradually he lapsed
into a deep sleep.
When the other princes had gone back to the mansion, Duryodhana saw his
opportunity. Along with Dushashana, he bound Bhéma’s arms and legs with
strong cords. Looking furtively around, the brothers quickly rolled the
unconscious prince into the river.
Bhéma sank to the bottom of the river and was carried by underwater currents.
The celestial abode of the divine serpent beings, the Nägas, could be reached
through the Ganges, and Bhéma was swept along a mystical path right into
their midst. At once the snakes began to bite the human so suddenly arrived
among them. Their virulent poison proved to be the antidote to the plant
poison Duryodhana had administered. Bhéma slowly came back to his senses as
the effect of the poison wore off. He woke to find himself on a strange river
bank, surrounded by large serpents baring their fangs.
Bhéma burst the cords binding his limbs. He picked up the snakes and dashed
them to the ground. He pressed some into the earth with his feet and hurled
others to a distance. Seeing him render dozens of snakes unconscious, the
others fled away in terror.
The Nägas went quickly to their king, Väsuki. With fearful voices they said, “O
king, a human fell among us, bound with cords. Perhaps he had been poisoned,
for he was unconscious. When we bit him he regained his senses and
overpowered us. You should go to him at once.”
Väsuki assumed a human form, rose from his bejeweled throne, and walked
gracefully out of his palace. Arka, a Näga chief, went with him. Arka had long
ago lived upon the earth in human society. He was Kunté’s great grandfather
and he immediately recognized Bhéma as his great-grandson. Smiling, he
introduced himself and embraced the prince.
Seeing this, Väsuki was pleased and said to Arka, “What service can we render
this boy? Let us give him an abundance of gems and gold.”
Arka looked at the powerful Bhéma and replied, “I think this prince would be
best served by us if we let him partake of our rasa.”
Väsuki agreed. Bringing Bhéma back to his palace, he arranged for pots of the
ambrosial rasa to be brought for him. This drink was distilled from celestial
herbs and by drinking even one pot a man would become permanently
endowed with the vigor and strength of a thousand elephants. The Nägas
placed a number of pots in front of Bhéma and invited him to drink. Bhéma sat
34

facing the east and, as he always did before eating or drinking, offered prayers
to the Lord. He then lifted one of the large pots of rasa and quaffed it down in
one gulp.
The Nägas watched in amazement as Bhéma drank eight pots of the divine
elixir, each in a single draft. Even the most powerful among them would not
have been capable of such a feat. After Bhéma had satisfied himself with the
rasa, he again felt drowsy. Väsuki offered him a celestial bed and the prince lay
down. He remained in deep sleep for eight days as his body assimilated the
rasa. On the ninth day he awoke, feeling strong beyond measure. The Nägas
told him that the rasa had given him the strength of ten thousand elephants.
He would now be invincible in battle. Väsuki told Bhéma to bathe in the
nearby sacred waters of the Mandäkiné, then dress himself in the robes the
Näga king had brought for him. He should then quickly return to his home as
his kinsfolk were in much anxiety about him.
After he had bathed and eaten the celestial foods the Nägas provided, Bhéma,
dressed in white silks and gold ornaments, was led to the river. They entered
with Bhéma and within moments they brought him out of the water near the
place where he had been pushed in. Filled with wonder, Bhéma ran back to
Hastinäpura.
In the city Kunté saw her sons arrive back without Bhéma. The other princes
were surprised that he was not already there. They had assumed he must have
gone ahead without them. Duryodhana and Dushashana feigned concern, but
secretly they rejoiced, thinking Bhéma to be dead.
The virtuous-minded Yudhiñöhira believed that others were as honest as he
was. Suspecting nothing, he told his mother, “We searched for Bhéma in the
gardens and mansion for a long time. We went into the woods and called out
for him. Finally we concluded he must have already left.”
Yudhiñöhira became fearful. Perhaps Bhéma had been killed. Kunté shared his
fears and she asked him again to go to the mansion with his brothers and
search for the missing Bhéma. When her sons left, she summoned Vidura and
said, “O wise one, I am afraid for Bhéma’s safety. He did not return with the
others. I often see an evil look in Duryodhana’s eye. I know he is filled with
malice toward Bhéma. Perhaps he has killed him.”
Kunté hoped Vidura would give her solace. His words were always deeply
considered and comforting. Vidura did not disappoint her. He replied, “Do not
think in this way, O gentle lady. The great åñi Vyäsadeva has said that your
35

sons will be long-lived. His words can never be false. Nor indeed can those of
the gods, who have predicted a great future for your sons.”
Still, Vidura remembered the omens surrounding Duryodhana’s birth. He
warned Kunté to be on her guard. The evil prince might try anything.
For eight days Kunté and her sons waited anxiously for any news of Bhéma.
Then early on the ninth day they saw him running toward them, his white
silks flowing in the wind. He came straight to Kunté and bowed at her feet. As
he rose each of his brothers embraced him warmly. With tears of joy they
eagerly asked where he had been.
Bhéma knew everything about the circumstances by which he had come to be
in the river. When he had found himself bound with cords he had suspected
the envious Duryodhana. Väsuki had confirmed his suspicions. The Näga king
could see everything by virtue of his divine sight. Bhéma related the whole
story to his brothers––how he had gone to the Näga kingdom and been given
the rasa. The brothers could understand that even though the Kauravas had
plotted Bhéma’s death, somehow by the arrangement of Providence he had
become most fortunate.
Yudhiñöhira was shocked to learn of his cousins’ antagonism. He considered the
situation carefully. If their elders were informed of what had ocurred, then
there would be open enmity between the princes. Duryodhana would certainly
try to dispose of them as quickly as possible. And the Päëòavas’ position was
not strong. Their father was dead and Dhåtaräñöra was the king. He doted on
Duryodhana and his other sons, and it was unlikely he would side against his
own sons, to protect his nephews. Yudhiñöhira ordered his brothers to remain
silent. They should tell no one about what had occurred.
Kunté, however, confided in Vidura. He advised her to follow Yudhiñöhira’s
suggestion. Thus the Päëòavas said nothing, but from that day forward they
became vigilant, always watching the Kauravas, especially Duryodhana and
Dushashana.
Besides Gandhari’s one hundred sons, Dhåtaräñöra had conceived another son
by a servant maid who had waited on him during his wife’s lengthy pregnancy.
Unlike his half-brothers, this boy, Yuyutsu, felt no envy or antagonism toward
the Päëòavas. One day he secretly informed Yudhiñöhira that Duryodhana,
who had been deeply disappointed to see that his plan to kill Bhéma had failed,
had again cooked a large quantity of the deadly datura poison into Bhéma’s
enormous meal.
36

Bhéma laughed when he heard the news. Having drunk the Nägas’ celestial
elixir, he had no fear of Duryodhana. He sat down before him and cheerfully
consumed the entire quantity of poisoned food. Duryodhana was amazed to see
that Bhéma was not in the least affected. He gazed at the Pandava with open
hatred.
Although the Kaurava princes detested the Päëòavas, Bhéñma and Vidura
loved them and would spend much time with the five virtuous and gentle
princes. Bhéñma had been especially fatherly toward them since the time they
had arrived from the forest. He had been fond of Pandu; now he felt the same
fondness for Pandu’s sons. The boys reciprocated his love, and served him in
various ways.
The Päëòavas were also favored by their military teacher, Kåpa. Kåpa was the
noble-minded son of a brahmin who had adopted the warriors profession. He
told the princes his history. His father, a åñi named Gautama, had been
engaged in fierce austerities and weaponry practice, for which he had an
affinity. Gautama’s asceticism and martial skills were so great that even Indra
feared the åñi might exceed him in power and usurp his position in heaven.
That anxious god therefore sent a beautiful Apsarä, a heavenly nymph, to
divert Gautama from his aceticism. When the åñi saw the semi-clad Apsarä
before him, he lost control of his mind and semen fell from his body. It landed
in a clump of heath, and from it two children were born. Gautama fled after
seeing the Apsarä, not realizing that he had miraculously sired the children.
Soon after he left, some of the king’s soldiers found the two babies and brought
them into Hastinäpura.
Some time later, Gautama, understanding everything by his mystic power,
came to the city and explained to the king what had happened. The åñi taught
his son all his military skills and in time Kåpa became the teacher of the
princes.
Bhéñma was pleased with Kåpa’s teaching. The boys were becoming highly
adept at weaponry. But he wanted them to learn the secrets of the celestial
weapons as well so that they would be unmatched in warfare. Kåpa did not
have this knowledge. Bhéñma had therefore been searching for a suitable
teacher to take the princes further in military science. None he had seen had
impressed him as qualified to train the princes.
Then one day the boys ran to Bhéñma with a strange tale to tell. They had been
out playing ball in the woods. The ball fell into a deep, dry well and the princes
37

could not recover it. As they stood by the well looking at one another in
embarrassment, a dark man approached them. He was a brahmin, appearing
emaciated and poor, but with a bright effulgence and glowing eyes. The princes
surrounded the brahmin and asked if he could help them. Smiling a little, the
brahmin said, “Shame upon your prowess as warriors. What use is your skill in
arms if you cannot even retrieve a lost ball? If you give me a meal I’ll recover
the ball, as well as this ring of mine.”
He then took off his ring and threw it into the well. Yudhiñöhira said to him,
“O brahmin, if you can recover the ball and the ring, then, with Kåpa’s
permission, we shall ensure that you are maintained for your whole life.”
The brahmin took a handful of long grasses and said, “Watch as I invest these
grasses with the power of weapons. With these I shall pierce the ball and bring
it to the surface.” He chanted mantras and threw the grasses one by one into
the well. The first one pierced the ball and each subsequent blade he threw
stuck into the last one to form a long chain. The brahmin then pulled the ball
out of the well.
The princes were astonished. “This is truly wonderful, but let us now see you
raise the ring.”
The brahmin borrowed one of the princes’ bows and shot a single sharppointed arrow into the well. With it, he brought up the ring, caught on the
arrow’s head. The princes crowded around him and asked him to reveal his
identity. They had never seen such skill. The brahmin told them to go to
Bhéñma and describe what they had seen. He would know his identity. The
brahmin said he would wait there until they returned.
Thus the boys ran back to the city and told Bhéñma everything. When he heard
the tale his eyes shone with joy. Surely this could only be Droëa, the disciple of
his own martial teacher, Paraçuräma. Bhéñma had heard much about Droëa
from the åñis. This was certainly providential. The princes could have no better
teacher. Bhéñma went in person with the boys to see the brahmin. Finding as
he had suspected that it was Droëa, Bhéñma immediately offered him the
position of a royal teacher. Droëa accepted and went to Hastinäpura with
Bhéñma.
When they were back in the city Bhéñma had Droëa tell everyone of his
history. Droëa looked around at the eager-faced princes. They wanted to know
everything about this unusual brahmin. He was the son of Bhäradväja, the allpowerful åñi who had dwelt for thousands of years in the deep forest and who,
38

not long ago, had finally ascended to heaven. Although he too was a brahmin,
Droëa was inclined toward martial arts. While living in his father’s hermitage
he had learned the science of arms from Agnivesha, another powerful åñi. He
had also received knowledge of the celestial weapons from the great
Paraçuräma. Despite having such great learning, however, Droëa remained a
poverty-stricken brahmin. He could hardly maintain his family. Thus he had
been on his way to Hastinäpura hoping to be engaged as the princes’ teacher.
Bhéñma said, “Make your residence here in the city. You shall enjoy every
luxury along with the Kurus. Indeed the Kurus are at your command.
Whatever wealth, kingdoms and followers that belong to our house are also
yours. O best of brahmins, it is our good fortune you have arrived here.”
Droëa was given a large, well-furnished house, stocked with everything
enjoyable and attended by many servants. He then brought his wife and son to
Hastinäpura to live among the Kurus with him, and he accepted both the
Päëòavas and Kauravas as his disciples.
Droëa taught the princes everything he knew about weaponry. The boys
practiced every day from dawn till dusk. As the news of his martial school
spread, princes from other kingdoms also came to learn from the famous
Droëa. The Vrishnis, the Andhakas and other famous and powerful dynasties
sent their princes to Droëa and he accepted them all as his pupils. Soon Droëa
had thousands of students.
Among all the boys Arjuna excelled at his lessons. He remained always at
Droëa’s side, eager to learn any little skill or extra tips. His ability, speed,
perseverance and determination were unequalled by the other princes. Arjuna
became foremost; Droëa felt none could match his skills.
Out of his natural fatherly affection, Droëa also wished to impart extra lessons
to his own son, Açvatthämä. He gave all the princes narrow-mouthed water
pots and asked them to fill them at the river, but to his own son he gave a
wide-mouthed pot so he could return first and receive extra teaching. Arjuna
realized Droëa’s intentions and he filled his own pot with a celestial water
weapon, and thus returned before Açvatthämä. Droëa smiled when he saw
Arjuna’s determination. His desire to learn from his preceptor was beyond
compare. Arjuna always carefully worshipped Droëa and was attentive to his
every command. Because of his devotion to studies and his guru, he became
Droëa’s favorite student.
Once Arjuna was eating his meal at night. Suddenly the lamp blew out. It was
39

pitch black. Arjuna continued to eat as if nothing had happened. As he did so,
he realized that simply by habit he was able to place the food in his mouth,
although he could see nothing in the darkness. He then began to practice with
his bow and arrows in the night, aiming at invisible targets. When Droëa saw
this dedication he was overjoyed. He told Arjuna, “I shall make you unmatched
upon the earth. No warrior shall be your equal.”
Droëa then taught Arjuna how to fight on horseback, on an elephant, from
chariots and on the ground. He showed him all the skills of fighting with clubs,
swords, lances, spears and darts, as well as many other types of weapons. Droëa
also taught him how to contend with any number of warriors fighting at once.
As Droëa promised, his skill soon became without compare on earth.
One day, a prince of the Nishada tribe of forest dwellers asked Droëa to teach
him. His name was Ekalavya. Droëa replied that his school was only for kings
and princes. Ekalavya went away dismayed. Strongly desiring greatness in
martial sciences, he practiced alone in the woods. He built an effigy of Droëa
and worshipped him daily, praying to him for skills at weaponry. Gradually he
became an expert archer.
Once, as he was practicing, a dog began to bark loudly and disturb him.
Immediately he released seven arrows, even without seeing the dog, and sealed
the animal’s mouth.
It so happened that Arjuna and his brothers were in the woods at the time and
they saw the dog, its mouth closed with arrows. They marvelled at this and
wondered who was responsible for such a feat. Soon they came upon Ekalavya
and, seeing the dark-skinned Nishada, smeared with filth, his hair matted, they
asked him who he was. He replied, “I am Ekalavya of the Nishadas, a disciple of
Droëa. I practice alone in these woods with a desire to become the best of
archers.”
Arjuna was seized with anxiety. This boy posed himself as a disciple of Droëa,
even though he had been rejected by him. It was completely against all
religious principles. No one could claim to be a disciple of a guru unless he was
accepted as such by that teacher. And Ekalavya had even flouted his so-called
guru’s order. Droëa had told Ekalavya that he could not be his student. The
Nishadha clearly had no devotion to Droëa, despite his outward show of
dedication, as he did not accept Droëa’s order. How then could he be allowed
to present himself as Droëa’s disciple––and practically his best one at that? His
skills were astonishing, but they had been gained by disobedience. Arjuna went
40

at once to his guru to inform him.
After bowing at Droëa’s feet, Arjuna said, “O master, embracing me to your
bosom you told me that I shall be the best of all your students. By your grace
this has become true. But I see you have another disciple, the mighty Nishada
prince Ekalavya, whose skills approach mine. The warrior practices alone in
the forest, worshipping your holy feet. Has he become my equal?”
Droëa was immediately perturbed. He remembered dismissing Ekalavya and he
could understand Arjuna’s intimations and anxiety. After thinking for some
moments he replied, “Come with me, Arjuna. We shall see today what caliber
of disciple is this prince.”
Droëa went at once with Arjuna into the woods. When Ekalavya saw them
approach he fell to the ground and touched Droëa’s feet. Then he stood before
Droëa with folded palms, saying, “My lord, I am your disciple. Please order me
as you will.”
Droëa looked with surprise at Ekalavya and at his own effigy nearby. He
recalled the day the forest prince had come to him and been turned away.
Droëa was angered that he was now claiming to be his student. The Kuru
preceptor had not desired to impart any martial skills to Ekalavya. Generally
the lower caste tribespeople lacked the virtuous qualities of royalty, and they
did not follow the Vedic religion. To give a low-class man great martial power
could be dangerous. Droëa had been especially concerned about Ekalavya, as
the Nishadha tribe did not cooperate with the Kuru’s virtuous rule. Droëa
would not accept any princes into his school if they belonged to races
antagonistic to the Kurus.
Droëa stood thinking for some time. His first assessment of Ekalavya had
obviously been correct. The Nishadha had shown himself to be lacking in
virtue by falsely posing as his disciple. Clearly he desired only to be great,
known as a student of the famous teacher, but not to actually obey him.
Smiling a little, Droëa said to the Nishada, “O hero, if you really wish to be my
disciple then you must give me some dakñiëa. The disciple should be prepared
to give anything to his guru. Therefore I ask you to give me your right thumb.”
Droëa knew that this was asking a lot from Ekalavya. The loss of his thumb
would impair his skill at bowmanship. But if he wanted to be known as Droëa’s
disciple, he could not refuse. Droëa also wanted to show that one cannot please
his teacher and achieve perfection by dishonest means. By taking Ekalavya’s
thumb, he was also removing any threat he or his race might pose to the Kurus.
41

Droëa looked expectantly at the Nishadha prince. Ekalavya immediately took
out his hunting knife. Although he had been unable to accept Droëa’s first
order, the prince did not want to be considered at fault for failing to give
dakñiëa to his guru. And he knew that all his knowledge and skills would be
nullified if he refused Droëa’s request. Without the least hesitation, he cut off
his thumb and handed it to Droëa.
Droëa took the thumb and thanked the prince. Raising his hand in blessing he
turned and walked quickly away, followed by a relieved Arjuna. With his firm
action, Droëa had clearly upheld religious principles.

Chapter 5
The Martial Exhibition
Among Droëa’s pupils, Bhéma and Duryodhana, deadly rivals, both became
matchless in mace fighting. Yudhiñöhira was the greatest spearman and chariot
fighter, Nakula and Sahadeva were the best swordsmen and Açvatthämä
showed the greatest ability at mystical weapons. Arjuna, however, excelled
everyone in all respects. He became an atiratha, a warrior capable of fighting
sixty thousand other warriors simultaneously. This only increased the envy
Dhåtaräñöra’s sons felt toward him, as well as toward his brother, the mighty
Bhéma.
One day, Droëa decided to test his students’ abilities. He placed an artificial
bird high in a tree. Calling together all the princes, he said to each of them,
“Take your bows and aim for the bird’s eye. One by one I shall call you forward
to shoot.”
The first to be called was Yudhiñöhira. When he had placed an arrow on his
bow and aimed, Droëa said, “O prince, tell me what you see.”
Yudhiñöhira replied that he saw his brothers, Droëa, the tree and the bird.
Droëa asked him again and again what he saw and each time received the same
reply. Droëa then reproached him and told him to stand down without firing
his arrow. “You will not be able to hit the mark,” he said with annoyance.
Duryodhana was the next to be called. When he was ready to fire Droëa asked
him the same question. The prince replied as Yudhiñöhira had replied, and
42

again Droëa told him to stand down. One by one the princes were called and
each responded to Droëa similarly and was not allowed to shoot at the bird.
Finally Arjuna was called. When he was prepared to shoot and was standing
with his bow drawn in a semicircle, Droëa said, “Tell me what you see. Can you
see myself, your brothers and the tree?”
Arjuna replied, “I see only the bird. I cannot see you or my brothers, nor the
tree.” Droëa was pleased. He waited a moment and asked, “If you see the bird,
then please describe it to me.”
Arjuna responded, “I see only the bird’s head. I cannot see its body.”
Droëa felt his hair stand on end with delight. He said, “Shoot!”
Arjuna released his arrow and it struck the wooden bird in the eye, sending it
tumbling to the ground. With tears of joy Droëa embraced his disciple as
Duryodhana and his brothers looked on in anger.
Some time after that Droëa went with the princes to the Ganges to bathe. As
he entered the water he was seized by a fierce crocodile. Although capable of
freeing himself, Droëa cried out, “O princes, quickly kill this beast and rescue
me!”
The princes were confounded with sorrow at seeing their teacher held by the
crocodile. They froze in fear––all except Arjuna. He instantly fired five arrows
which struck the reptile under the water and cut it to pieces. Its mouth fell
open and released Droëa’s leg. Droëa came to the river bank and took Arjuna
aside. He said to him, “I wish to give you the greatest of weapons. Take from
me the knowledge of the brahmästra, the irresistible missile endowed with
Brahmä’s power. This weapon should only be used against supernatural foes,
for if released against others it may destroy the very world.” Droëa then told
Arjuna that no one would ever become superior to him with a bow. He was
now invincible.
Seeing that the princes had become expert in arms and warfare, Droëa went to
Dhåtaräñöra and said, “O King, your sons have completed their education.
With your permission they may now display their proficiency. Let me therefore
arrange an exhibition.”
Dhåtaräñöra thanked Droëa for instructing the princes and said, “I envy those
who will be able to witness the prowess of my sons. I shall attend the display
with Vidura who will be my eyes. With his assistance please make the
preparations, O best of Brahmins.”
Droëa and Vidura then went outside of the city and selected a large, flat piece
43

of land. After sanctifying the spot with prayers and offerings to the gods,
Droëa had skilled architects construct a great stadium. It had a vast central
area and platforms rising on all four sides. Wealthy merchants sponsored the
installation of thousands of beautiful seats carved from wood and inlaid with
ivory and pearls. Rows of golden thrones encrusted with coral and gems were
built on the royal platform. The stadium’s sides reached up to the sky and were
adorned with tall white flagstaffs bearing colored pennants that fluttered in
the breeze.
On an auspicious day determined by the royal astrologers, the citizens entered
the stadium eager to see the princes display their power. Bhéñma and Vidura,
leading Dhåtaräñöra by the arm, walked at the head of the procession. They
were immediately followed by Droëa and Kåpa, along with other members of
the royal party such as Bählika, Somadatta and other kings visiting from
surrounding kingdoms. The royal ladies came out of the city dressed in dazzling
robes and ornaments, accompanied by numerous maids-in-waiting. The ladies
ascended the royal platforms like goddesses ascending the holy Mount Meru.
Crowds of citizens of all four castes thronged into the stadium and marvelled at
its beauty. Large sections were built of pure gold and were studded with
priceless vaidurya gems. It was decorated with countless garlands of bright
flowers and strings of pearls. The sound of people filling the stadium was like
the surging ocean. Trumpets were blown and drums beaten, mixing with the
blasts of thousands of conches and the excited talk of the people.
When everyone was seated, Droëa entered the arena with his son Açvatthämä.
He wore white robes and white garlands, and his body was smeared white with
sandalwood paste. His hair and beard were also white, and with his powerful
son he looked like the moon accompanied by Mars. The noise of the crowd
subsided as Droëa entered. Droëa then had a large number of Brahmins
perform auspicious rites in the arena. The mantras echoed around the stadium.
Expert musicians simultaneously played their instruments, creating a sound
that pleased and calmed the audience, who sat in expectation.
The princes then entered the arena, headed by Yudhiñöhira and striding like
proud and mighty lions. They were clad in brilliant armors and equipped with
every kind of weapon. Droëa ordered them to show off their different skills.
Beginning with Yudhiñöhira, the princes stepped forward one by one. They
mounted swift horses and rode them expertly, wheeling about the arena and
hitting both still and moving targets with arrows engraved with their
44

respective names.
Thousands of arrows sped in all directions, and some of the citizens ducked in
fear. Others were fearless, their eyes wide with wonder. Sounds of “Excellent!
Well done!” resounded through the stadium. The princes’ weaponry skills,
horseback riding and chariot driving were breathtaking. After displaying all
these skills, they pulled out their gleaming blue swords and rushed, shouting, at
one another. They thrust and parried, adroitly dodging each others’ attacks.
The people saw with delight the grace, speed and strength of all the princes.
Droëa then had Bhéma and Duryodhana step forward to display mace fighting.
The two heroes glared at each other and bellowed like furious bulls. Holding
aloft massive iron maces they circled, each with his gaze fixed on the other. As
Vidura described the scene to Dhåtaräñöra, and Kunté to Gändhäré, the two
princes aimed terrific blows at each other. Their maces collided with
thunderous crashes, sending showers of sparks into the air.
The crowd became divided. Some supported Bhéma while others supported
Duryodhana. Shouts of “Behold the mighty Bhéma!” and “Just see the powerful
Duryodhana!” filled the stadium. Droëa realized that the fight was becoming
too earnest, and he also saw that the people were becoming too excited. He
told his son to step between the roaring rivals and stop them. Açvatthämä
obeyed his father and, moving quickly forward, managed to separate the two
princes.
When Bhéma and Duryodhana had stood down, still glaring at each other,
Droëa stepped into the middle of the arena. He stopped the musicians and
spoke in a voice that resounded like thunder. “Behold now Arjuna’s abilities.
He is dearer to me than my own son. This son of Indra is incomparable at every
kind of martial skill.”
As Droëa spoke Arjuna entered the arena. Clad in golden armor, with a large
golden quiver of arrows on his back, the lustrous prince appeared like a cloud
reflecting the rays of the evening sun and illumined by a rainbow and flashes
of lightning. The invincible prince walked with the gait of a lion, and as he
glanced about the arena, he terrified all those upon whom his eyes fell.
A cry of joy went up from the audience. People blew conches and played
musical instruments. “This handsome youth is Kunté’s third son, and he is the
best of all virtuous men and the most powerful,” some people said. “He is the
son of the mighty Indra and the best protector of the Kuru race,” others added.
All kinds of praises were heard from the crowd. Hearing these, Kunté felt milk
45

flow from her breasts and, along with her tears, it drenched her bosom.
Dhåtaräñöra asked Vidura why the people were shouting so joyously. When
Vidura told him that it was because Arjuna had appeared, Dhåtaräñöra said,
“How blessed I am by Kunté’s three sons. They are like three sacrificial fires
and Kunté is like the sacred fuel.”
But Dhåtaräñöra burned secretly within himself. Why had the people not
cheered his own sons in this way? Was not Duryodhana Arjuna’s equal? If only
he could see what was happening.
Vidura described the scene to the blind king. Arjuna displayed one celestial
weapon after another. With the Ägneya weapon he produced fire; with the
Varuëa weapon he produced volumes of water; with the Väyavya weapon he
caused a great wind to blow; and with the Parjanya weapon he created a huge
downpour of rain. Arjuna created land with the Bhouma weapon and with the
Parvatya weapon he made a hill appear in the arena. Then, by invoking the
antardhäna weapon, he made all those things disappear.
As the citizens gasped, the prince displayed all kinds of mystical powers. One
moment he appeared as tall as a massive palm tree and in the next he became
as small as a thumb. In an instant he went from standing on his chariot to
standing on the ground a distance from his chariot. Droëa had a mechanical
iron boar run swiftly across the arena and Arjuna shot five arrows into its
mouth as if they were one shaft. He shot twenty arrows into the hollow of a
cow’s horn swinging on a rope around a pole. After showing his skill with a
bow, Arjuna took out his sword and mace, demonstrating many dexterous
moves with them both.
The exhibition was almost over. The music had stopped and the crowd’s
excitement had cooled. Suddenly they heard at the stadium gate the sound of
someone slapping his arms with great force and roaring like an enraged
elephant. Obviously some hugely powerful man had arrived. The people looked
around for the source of the sounds. “Are the mountains cracking asunder? Is
the earth itself splitting apart?” Others thought that some jealous god had
come there wishing to display his might.
Droëa jumped up and stood surrounded by the five Päëòavas, resembling the
moon surrounded by bright stars. Duryodhana stood with his hundred brothers
like Indra with the celestials. Everyone looked toward the gate. Coming toward
them was a warrior who looked like the blazing sun. He had a brilliant coat-ofmail which was a natural part of his body, and was adorned with earrings that
46

shone like fire. The earth resounded with his steps and he seemed like a
moving hill. The crowd was motionless. They stared at the new arrival. Who
was this?
The handsome youth strode straight up to Droëa. He bowed somewhat
indifferently at his feet, then offered his respects to Kåpa. Turning again to
Droëa, he spoke in a voice that could be heard in every part of the stadium. “I
am Karëa. With your permission, O Brahmin, I shall show skills equal to those
of Arjuna. Indeed, I shall excel all the feats displayed by Kunté’s son. Watch
them and be amazed.”
The crowd stood up together as if lifted by some instrument. They roared and
cheered. Arjuna felt abashed and angry. He clenched and unclenched his fists,
which were covered with iguana-skin finger protectors. His eyes seemed on fire
as he glared at Karëa.
Droëa nodded his assent and Karëa moved to the center of the arena. At once
he began to show his skills. He matched every feat Arjuna had displayed and
the crowd shouted their approval. When he had finished, Duryodhana went
over and warmly embraced him. Here was someone who could stand against
that haughty Arjuna. The Päëòava prince had been the center of attention for
too long. Here was his equal. Duryodhana laughingly said to Karëa, “You are
welcome, O mighty hero. By good fortune you have come here today. Tell me,
what can I do for your pleasure? I and the Kuru kingdom are at your
command.”
Duryodhana had seen Arjuna’s anger. He smiled at the Päëòava as Karëa
replied, “By your words I already consider my desire fulfilled. I only wish for
your undying friendship. But I have one request: please allow me to engage in
single combat with Arjuna.”
Arjuna stiffened and grasped his bow. The minute he had seen the obviously
arrogant Karëa he had felt an intense rivalry. Maybe he would get the chance
to end it immediately.
Duryodhana laughed. “Enjoy with me the good things of life, O hero,” he
replied. “Together we shall reside in happiness.”
Arjuna had heard enough. He interrupted Duryodhana in a thunderous voice.
“O Karëa, the path belonging to the unwelcome intruder or the uninvited
speaker shall now be yours.”
Karëa smoldered like a glowing ember. “O Pärtha, this arena is not meant for
you alone. It is open to all heroes, including those superior to you. Why do you
47

argue with words alone? Those who are strong do not waste words. Speak with
your arrows and I shall sever your head before your guru’s eyes.”
Arjuna turned to Droëa who nodded slightly. Fixing his gaze on Karëa, the
Päëòava advanced for combat. Duryodhana embraced Karëa who went before
Arjuna, his weapons at the ready. Suddenly the sky was filled with heavy
clouds and bright flashes of lightning. Indra’s great rainbow appeared
overhead. The clouds above Karëa, however, dispersed, and the sun shone
brightly, lighting up his form. Dhåtaräñöra’s sons stood behind Karëa, while
Droëa, Kåpa and Bhéñma stood behind Arjuna.
In the terraces the crowd became divided. The royal ladies also could not
choose between the two heroes. As they faced each other, Kunté was filled with
horror and fainted. Vidura was surprised to see this and raised her gently,
sprinkling her face with cool water. He asked her what was wrong, but Kunté
said nothing. She sat holding her head. How could she tell anyone the secret
she had kept hidden for so long? Seized by fear she looked at the arena and,
feeling helpless, prayed silently.
Just as the two warriors were about to duel, Kåpa, who knew all the rules of
combat, stepped forward and asked, “This son of Päëòu is the child of Kunté
and a descendent of the royal Kuru race. Let us hear from his opponent what is
his lineage and race. Once he knows this, Pärtha may decide whether or not to
fight.” Kåpa looked at Karëa. Duels were fought only among equals.
Karëa blushed and said nothing. It was clear that he was not from a royal line.
Seeing his discomfiture, Duryodhana spoke out. “Nobility does not depend
only upon birth. Those who are heroes and leaders of soldiers may also claim
nobility, even if not born in royal lines. But if Arjuna will duel only with
another king, then I shall immediately give Karëa a kingdom.”
Without delay Duryodhana arranged for a ceremony right there in the arena.
He sent someone to fetch sanctified water and sprinkled it upon Karëa’s head.
“You shall become the king of Aìga.” The crowd cheered as Brahmins chanted
the appropriate mantras and offered Karëa rice, flowers and holy water. Karëa
sat upon a golden seat and was fanned with yak-tail whisks. He was deeply
moved by Duryodhana’s gesture of friendship and said in a choked voice,
“What can I ever do to repay you, O King? I shall always be at your command.”
Duryodhana replied, “Your friendship alone is all that I desire.”
The two men embraced each other, and the citizens became even more excited.
Then, just as the duel between Karëa and Arjuna seemed about to commence,
48

another man suddenly ran into the arena. He was trembling with age and
supported himself on a staff. Perspiring and with his cloth hanging loosely from
his body, he moved quickly toward Karëa. At once Karëa got down from his
seat and placed his head, still wet from the coronation, at the man’s feet. He
stood up and said to the inquisitive Duryodhana, “This is my father,
Adhiratha.”
Adhiratha had been present in the crowd and wanted to congratulate his son
upon his coronation. He was a charioteer and was instantly recognized as such
by both his dress and his name. He embraced his son tightly and shed tears of
happiness.
Seeing all this Bhéma jeered, “O son of a charioteer, you do not deserve death
at Arjuna’s hands. You had best take up the whip and guide a chariot. Indeed,
you no more deserve the kingship of Aìga than a dog deserves the sacrificial
offerings of ghee meant for the gods.”
Karëa looked down in embarrassment. Duryodhana rose up in anger from the
midst of his brothers, like an infuriated elephant rising out of a lake full of
lotuses. “O Bhéma, you should not speak such words. How can someone like
this be of inferior birth. A hero’s first quality is his strength and prowess. We
have all seen Karëa’s power today.”
Duryodhana then named different gods and heroes whose births had been
unusual. Droëa himself was said to be born from a pot, Kåpa from a piece of
heath and the great god Kärttikeya from a clump of reeds. Even the Päëòavas’
birth was mysterious. “Can a deer bring forth a lion? Look at this man, his
natural coat of armor and his marks of auspiciousness. I do not consider him to
be a charioteer at all.”
Duryodhana gazed defiantly at the Päëòavas. “If anyone dislikes my having
crowned Karëa, then let him step forward and bend his bow in combat.”
The crowd was roused by Duryodhana’s heroic speech. They cheered and sat
expectantly. Now there would surely be a great duel between two mighty
heroes. But during Duryodhana’s speech the sun had set. The dispute would
have to be settled another day. Duryodhana took Karëa by the hand and led
him out of the arena, which was now lit by countless lamps. The Päëòavas also
left, along with Droëa, Kåpa and Bhéñma. Then the citizens returned to their
homes. Some of them named Arjuna and some Karëa, while others pointed to
Duryodhana, as the victor of the day.
Kunté thanked the Lord within herself. As she watched Karëa leave the arena
49

her mind went back to the day of his birth. She had only wanted to test
Durväsä’s boon. She had no idea the mantra would prove so powerful. Kunté
remembered how she had been lying on her couch watching the brilliant sun
rise over the Ganges. What if she could call the sun-god to her? The mantra
had come to mind and almost at once the blazing Sürya was standing before
her. Kunté had been amazed, then horrified when he told her that he could not
leave without giving her a child. “I am yet a maiden,” she protested. “What will
everyone say?” Sürya smiled. By his power she would conceive a son and still
remain a maiden.
And so it had happened. The god left and in due course the boy was born.
Kunté had marvelled at the baby’s natural golden armor and earrings, the same
armor and earrings she had seen on Karëa as he marched into the arena. She
recalled how that armor had shone in the morning sun as the boy floated away
in his basket on the river. Kunté wept again as she recalled how she could not
tell anyone she had given birth and how, blinded by tears, she had pushed the
baby out into the flowing river. Adhiratha must have found the basket and
raised her son. As Karëa strode off with Duryodhana, Kunté led Gändhäré back
to the palace.

Chapter 6
The Kauravas’ Hatred Grows
It was now time for the princes to leave Droëa’s school. To complete their
training they had to pay their guru’s fees by offering him dakñiëa.
Traditionally, the dakñiëa was determined by the guru himself. Droëa
assembled the princes and said, “There is only one thing I want. You should
take King Drupada prisoner. Then bring him before me as your captive.”
The princes replied, “So be it.” They knew of their guru’s enmity with the king.
Drupada and Droëa had lived together as children under the Åñi Agniveçya.
Drupada had promised that when he inherited his kingdom he would bestow
half of it on his dear friend Droëa. Later, when they had both grown to
maturity, Droëa went to Drupada and reminded him of their friendship and
the promise. Seeing the poor Droëa standing before him, Drupada had said, “O
50

luckless Brahmin, how do you consider me as your friend now? Past friendships
are meaningless. Only equals can be friends. I am a great king and you are an
indigent Brahmin. Do not try to invoke a long-dead relationship.”
Drupada had then laughed at Droëa and offered him a little charity. Deeply
insulted, Droëa had left Païchäla, Drupada’s vast kingdom, his mind fixed on
revenge. The time for that revenge had arrived. Droëa looked about at his
accomplished students and knew that Drupada would soon regret his
arrogance.
The princes mounted their chariots and sped toward Païchäla. Accompanied
by a large force of horsemen, they soon arrived at Drupada’s capital, Kämpilya.
Duryodhana and his brothers vied with one another to lead the attack. They
rushed toward the city gates with weapons raised. Sending up cries, they burst
into Kämpilya along its main highway while the terrified citizens hid in their
houses.
Outside the city Droëa waited with the Päëòavas. Arjuna had suggested to his
brothers that they not accompany the Kauravas. “They will not be able to
overpower the mighty Drupada,” Arjuna had said. “We should make our attack
after theirs has been repulsed.”
Drupada heard the attacking Kauravas crashing through his city and came
straight out of his palace, mounted on his huge, white chariot. Roaring with joy
at the chance for battle, he charged at the head of his army to defend the city.
He showered his enemies with forceful arrows. His speed and lightness of
motion were such that the Kauravas thought they were facing many Drupadas.
He careered fearlessly in his chariot and entered into their midst, his bow
constantly drawn to a circle and his searing shafts flying in all directions.
The Païchälas sounded thousands of conches, trumpets and drums, creating a
noise that sounded like the roar of a tremendous lion. Drupada struck the Kuru
princes with his arrows and sent them reeling. Seeing their king in the
forefront of battle, the citizens came out of their houses to hurl clubs, maces
and other missiles at the Kurus. The princes were surrounded by thousands of
assailants and they felt oppressed and overwhelmed. They fled howling from
the city with the Païchälas in pursuit.
The Päëòavas laughed. Arjuna said scornfully to Yudhiñöhira, “Here come the
proud Kauravas, put to flight by Drupada. They are strong in words only. It is
time for us to fight. You stay here. I shall go with the others.”
Yudhiñöhira remained behind with Droëa. His four brothers flew toward
51

Kämpilya. Bhéma bounded along with mace held aloft, while Arjuna raced
behind him on a chariot with Nakula and Sahadeva on either side. The
Païchälas were waiting for them and had blocked the city gates with a row of
elephants. Bhéma struck at them with his club. With their heads smashed and
covered in blood, the elephants fell to the ground like cliffs broken off by
thunderbolts. Bhéma spun like a furious tornado amid the Païchäla warriors.
Elephants, chariots and infantrymen fell in the thousands. The Päëòavas
drove the hostile force back as a herdsman drives cattle.
Arjuna, keen to please his preceptor, released volleys of arrows at the immense
Païchäla forces. His straight-flying shafts came in an endless stream and sped
unerringly at the enemy warriors. Arjuna resembled the all-devouring fire that
appears at the end of an aeon. Protected on either side by his two brothers, he
felled thousands of fighters.
Drupada raced to the head of his troops and they rallied with lion-like roars.
Led by their king, they mounted a powerful counterattack against the
Päëòavas. Arrows, darts, spears and clubs rained down on the four brothers.
Arjuna repelled all their missiles with his arrows. The Païchälas enraged him
with their furious attack and fought with redoubled energy. His foes could not
mark any interval between his pulling an arrow from his quiver and bending
his bow to fire it. All they saw was a constant stream of shafts speeding toward
them. The mighty Païchäla warriors shouted praises at Arjuna for his prowess.
Along with his commander-in-chief Satyajit, Drupada personally rushed
toward Arjuna. Like the king, Satyajit was a warrior capable of contending
with thousands of other warriors at once. He struck Arjuna with a hundred
fierce arrows and sent up a great roar. Not tolerating the attack, Arjuna
pierced Satyajit with ten arrows and simultaneously cut his bow to pieces with
three more shafts. Seeing this wonderful feat, the other warriors cheered.
Satyajit grasped another bow and immediately pierced Arjuna’s steeds as well
as his charioteer. Arjuna again split Satyajit’s bow, then killed his horses and
smashed his chariot to pieces.
Drupada came quickly to his commander’s assistance. A powerful exchange of
arrows and other missiles followed between the king and Arjuna. Gradually
Arjuna overpowered Drupada. He shattered the king’s bow, tore off his armor,
felled his flagstaff and killed his horses. Seeing Drupada confounded, Arjuna
threw down his own bow and took up a huge scimitar. He leapt down from his
chariot and jumped onto Drupada’s, seizing him and holding the sword to his
52

throat.
Bhéma had meanwhile been wreaking havoc among Drupada’s troops. Arjuna
shouted to him to withdraw. They had achieved their aim and captured
Drupada. The troops saw their king’s plight and fled in fear. Arjuna then
dragged Drupada onto his own chariot and rode back toward Droëa.
When Droëa saw the captive king, he smiled. “So, O mighty king, do you now
desire to revive our old friendship? It seems that your kingdom and wealth
have become mine.”
Drupada squirmed and blushed. He looked down as Droëa continued, “You
need not fear for your life for I am a Brahmin and it is my duty to be ever
forgiving. Indeed, I have always cherished an affection for you since we were
children.”
Droëa then ordered Arjuna to release Drupada. The king listened in silence as
Droëa continued. “I still desire your friendship, Drupada, but how can one who
is not a king be a king’s friend? Therefore I have decided to allow you to keep
half your kingdom. I shall take the other half.”
Drupada was in no position to argue. He knew that Droëa’s martial power far
exceeded his own––especially as he now had the mighty Kurus as disciples.
There would be no question of defeating him in battle. Drupada nodded in
assent. “You are a truly noble soul to act in this way, Droëa,” he replied,
summoning all his patience. “Great personalities like yourself are always
magnanimous. I, too, desire your friendship. Let us live peacefully, each ruling
his own half of the Païchäla kingdom.”
Drupada had Brahmins perform appropriate rituals and bestowed the northern
half of his kingdom upon Droëa, who then left with the Päëòavas for
Hastinäpura. Drupada burned with humiliation. Somehow he had to avenge
his honor. Absorbed in thought, the king returned to his palace.
As they returned to Hastinäpura, Droëa rode on Arjuna’s chariot and spoke to
him affectionately. He loved this prince as dearly as his own son, and he knew
there was nothing Arjuna would not do for him. Droëa said, “O hero, you are
now the best of all bowmen in this world. Although you have repaid me by
defeating Drupada, I will ask one more thing from you as dakñiëa. You must
fight with me when I come to fight with you.”
Arjuna was surprised. How could he ever fight with his teacher? Still, he
replied without hesitating, “It shall be so. I am always your servant.”

53

***
The Kurus had heard of a wonderful occurrence in Mathurä, the city where
Kunté had been born. Kunté had a brother named Vasudeva who had been
imprisoned by the wicked King Kaàsa. This powerful monarch had been
viciously terrorizing Brahmins and other kings. Hearing a divine prophesy that
Vasudeva’s eighth child would kill him, Kaàsa imprisoned both Vasudeva and
his wife Devaké. He then killed their first six children at birth. But somehow,
despite Kaàsa’s vigilance, the seventh and eighth children, Balaräma and
Kåñëa, had escaped death. By some mystical arrangement Kåñëa had been
carried away from Mathurä and raised in Våndävana, a small village of
cowherds, by its leader, Nanda. The great åñis said that Kåñëa was in fact the
Supreme Lord and that it had been by his own divine arrangement he had
gone to Våndävana. The Kurus were amazed to hear from the sages that God
himself had appeared in the neighboring kingdom of the Yadus.
When he became a youth, Kåñëa had returned to Mathurä and killed Kaàsa
with his bare hands. This tremendous deed astonished all those who saw it and
confirmed for them Kåñëa’s divine identity. Kaàsa had struck fear even into
the gods’ hearts. There had been no earthly king capable of standing against
him. But the young Kåñëa, still only a boy, and His brother, Balaräma, had
overpowered Kaàsa’s troops and generals, finally killing the king along with
his evil ministers. The two brothers then became chiefs of the Yadu dynasty.
They maintained a friendship with the Kurus in Hastinäpura, taking a special
interest in the welfare of their Aunt Kunté and her five fatherless sons.
Balaräma, also said by the åñis to be a manifestation of the Supreme Godhead,
became famous as a peerless mace fighter. At Droëa’s request, he agreed to
train Bhéma and Duryodhana in the skills of handling a mace. Thus Balaräma
spent time in Hastinäpura. While there, he learned of the fierce rivalry and
envy the Kauravas felt toward their cousins. When Kåñëa heard this, He
became concerned for Kunté and her sons. Therefore He asked one of his
advisors, Akrüra, to visit Hastinäpura and assess the situation, and to see if he
could be of any help.
The Kurus received Akrüra in friendship. Kunté was overjoyed to see him. She
inquired about her kinsmen and friends in Mathurä. Kunté especially wanted
to know everything about Kåñëa, whom she accepted as the Supreme Lord.
“Does my nephew Kåñëa think of me and my sons?” she asked. “Does he know
54

how I am suffering in the midst of my enemies, like a doe in the midst of
wolves?”
Akrüra asked her to tell him more about the situation in the city and she
began explaining everything. Kunté knew that Duryodhana and his brothers
were always intriguing against her sons. The Kauravas could not tolerate the
Päëòavas’ superior prowess. The humiliation they had recently received at
Kämpilya had made them even more keen to dispose of Päëòu’s sons. Kunté
spoke to Akrüra with tears in her eyes, “Will Kåñëa come here to console me? I
always pray to that all-powerful protector of the universe. Indeed, I see no
other shelter for myself and my sons.”
Kunté cried out to Kåñëa in front of Akrüra. He gently reassured her that
Kåñëa was often speaking about her and had sent him to analyze the situation.
Both Akrüra and Vidura comforted Kunté and reminded her about her sons’
extraordinary birth. The Päëòava boys were expansions of the gods. There was
no way that the evil Kaurava princes could overcome them.
Akrüra remained in Hastinäpura for several months. Then, when he felt he
had understood the situation fully, he decided it was time to return to
Mathurä. Before leaving, however, he met with Dhåtaräñöra to offer some
advice. Ultimately the blind king was responsible for his sons’ acts and he
could certainly check their behavior if he chose. Akrüra said, “My dear King,
you have obtained the throne only because your brother Päëòu passed away
prematurely. Therefore Päëòu’s sons have first claim on the throne. You
should not discriminate against them in favor of your own sons.”
Akrüra also advised Dhåtaräñöra to rule the kingdom strictly according to
moral principles. He should treat all his subjects equally, what to speak of the
Päëòavas, his own nephews and heirs to the throne. Over-attachment for one’s
close relatives is simply born of ignorance. Every creature in the world is born
alone and dies alone. He experiences the results of his own good and evil deeds
and in the end leaves the present body to accept another. The belief that one
person is the relation of another is nothing more than illusion.
Dhåtaräñöra listened in silence as Akrüra spoke. He understood the
implications of his words. Akrüra had made it clear that the Päëòavas’ cause
was righteous and that by opposing them he would reap only grief. Dhåtaräñöra
bowed his head as Akrüra concluded, “By favoring your own sons, O lord of the
earth, you are acting out of ignorance. How then can you hope for any good
result? Ignorance always leads to sorrow. Therefore, act virtuously and deal
55

with Päëòu’s sons as they rightfully deserve.”
Dhåtaräñöra sighed, “O wise one, your words are like the immortal nectar of the
gods. I could go on hearing them forever. You have surely spoken the truth.
But just as a person on the verge of death cannot be saved by nectar, so your
instructions do not stay in my heart.”
Dhåtaräñöra admitted that he was prejudiced by affection for his sons. He told
Akrüra that he felt helpless to overcome that affection. Like Kunté, the king
also understood Kåñëa’s position. “Surely everything moves according to the
will of the Supreme Lord. No man can influence the Lord’s will. Now he has
appeared to relieve the earth’s burden and that will surely happen. What then
can I do? Destiny is surely all-powerful.”
Dhåtaräñöra had heard the sages describe how Kåñëa’s mission was to destroy
the large number of demonic kings who had begun to populate the earth.
Päëòu had managed to check them, but since his retirement they had formed
alliances and built huge armies, posing a constant threat to world security.
Akrüra could understand that Dhåtaräñöra was set upon a course that would
lead to his ruin. By favoring his own sons over the Päëòavas, the king would
ultimately ignite a conflict between them which would result in the
destruction of the Kuru race. Akrüra felt there was nothing more he could do.
Dhåtaräñöra refused to accept responsibility for his acts. Taking his leave from
the king, Akrüra made his way back to Mathurä.
When Akrüra was gone, Dhåtaräñöra pondered on his words. It was true that
Päëòu’s sons were the rightful heirs to the kingdom. That could not be denied.
It was especially clear that the eldest of them, Yudhiñöhira, was qualified to be
the king. The king had seen how the prince was noted for his honesty,
patience, kindness and unswerving adherence to duty. Along with his brothers,
he was a firm favorite of the people. The citizens had loved Päëòu and it
seemed to them that he returned to live among them as his sons. Everywhere
people were speaking of their desire to see Yudhiñöhira installed as the king.
Dhåtaräñöra had heard of their talks: “Now we have a qualified prince. Why
should the blind Dhåtaräñöra remain king? Let us place the pious Yudhiñöhira
on the throne. He will surely be a righteous and benevolent ruler.”
Dhåtaräñöra consulted with Bhéñma, Vidura and the Brahmins. They all
decided that Yudhiñöhira should be installed as prince regent. The ceremony
was soon performed and the people rejoiced.
Duryodhana, however, was seething. How had his father bypassed him to make
56

Yudhiñöhira prince regent? When Bhéma sneered at his distress, making it even
more unbearable, he went with Karëa and Dushashana to discuss with Çakuni
a way to eradicate the Päëòavas.
Çakuni’s eyes narrowed as Duryodhana and the others vented their rage. He
pressed his fingertips together to think. “The only answer,” he said finally, “is
to get the Päëòavas out of Hastinäpura to a place where they can be killed
without interference. We should somehow contrive to have them burned to
death, making it seem like an accident.”
Duryodhana smiled, but Karëa was not so sure. He did not like Çakuni’s
devious ways. “Only cowards resort to deceit and underhanded methods.
Powerful men favor open combat. If the Päëòavas are our enemies, then let us
march out to the battlefield and settle this dispute.”
Çakuni’s lips tightened. Then he smiled slightly. “My child, you are powerful
but foolish. It seems you have forgotten Bhéma’s superhuman strength. And do
you not remember the incident at Kämpilya? All of the Kaurava princes, with
you by their side, could not overpower Drupada. But with only four fighting,
the Päëòavas were successful. It is unlikely that we will win in a confrontation
with those five brothers. Take heed of my words.”
Reminded of Kämpilya, Karëa was embarrassed. He let out an angry shout.
They had been taken by surprise there. Drupada had been stronger than they
expected. The Päëòavas had the advantage, confronting Drupada after having
witnessed his actual power. Next time, if the Päëòavas confronted the
Kauravas directly, things would be different. Karëa shook his head and left the
room. “Do what you will, but I cannot be a party to such cowardice.”
The cunning Çakuni had carefully assessed the situation. He pressed
Duryodhana to approach his father and ask for the Päëòavas to be sent away.
He knew that Dhåtaräñöra would not refuse his son anything. Duryodhana
nodded slowly. He trusted Çakuni’s judgment. Together they worked out the
details of their plan. Then Duryodhana went to see the king.
***
Dhåtaräñöra knew well of his sons’ hatred for the Päëòavas. He knew that
Yudhiñöhira’s installation as the heir-apparent had been a bitter blow to
Duryodhana. The king thought about what he could do for his sons. He had
spoken with Çakuni. His brother-in-law, knowing that Dhåtaräñöra never acted
without counsel, had suggested that he seek advice from Çakuni’s Brahmin
57

friend, Kaëika. This Brahmin, Çakuni had said, was an expert in statecraft and
politics. Çakuni then personally brought Kaëika to see Dhåtaräñöra.
Kaëika told Dhåtaräñöra that he should feel no compunction about rooting out
his enemies before they harmed him. If he saw the Päëòavas as his enemies,
then he should destroy them without hesitation by any means possible. Because
they were stronger than his own sons, a direct confrontation would probably
fail. Better to employ some devious means. In the meantime the king should
continue to appear as the Päëòavas’ well-wisher. Then as soon as an
opportunity arose, he should strike.
Dhåtaräñöra thanked the Brahmin for his advice and dismissed him. He sat
alone in his chamber for some time. The thought of killing Päëòu’s sons
distressed him. Perhaps there was some way they could be removed from
Hastinäpura. While they were present his own sons would never be happy.
Duryodhana complained constantly about his cousins. Now the monarchy was
about to pass back to Päëòu’s line. Dhåtaräñöra had enjoyed his opportunity to
occupy Hastinäpura’s throne as the world emperor. Although the firstborn son,
and thus the first in line for the throne, he had thought his blindness had
forever denied him the chance to be king. But in the years since Päëòu’s
departure he had become accustomed to holding the reins of power. It would
not be easy to let go.
As Dhåtaräñöra sat in his darkened room, Duryodhana came to see him. He
heard his son’s heavy steps approaching and his sighs as he sat before him.
Dhåtaräñöra gently greeted the prince and asked what ailed him.
“I am hearing ill news of the kingdom, Father. The citizens are growing restless.
They want you to soon hand over the throne to the Päëòavas. ‘Why should we
have the blind king now that Yudhiñöhira is grown?’ are the words they utter.
They care not for you or for myself.”
Duryodhana stood up sharply and began to pace, his gold ornaments jangling.
As he strode about, he punched his hand with his clenched fist.
“Soon we shall become dependent upon the Päëòavas. They will be the kings
and after them their sons will inherit the throne. Thus our line will be plunged
into misfortune. We shall become powerless and lose the honor we have long
enjoyed. What could be more painful for us? I have been considering how to
deliver us. Listen as I explain my idea.”
Duryodhana first suggested the Päëòavas be sent to a distant city. On the
pretext of sending them on holiday, they could be sent to Väraëävata, where a
58

splendid festival honoring Çiva would soon be celebrated. The town was noted
for its attractions. The Päëòavas would surely be pleased to visit it. Once they
left Hastinäpura, perhaps they would never return.
Dhåtaräñöra immediately understood what was on his son’s mind. How could he
possibly agree? “Päëòu was always devoted to virtue,” he said. “He did not care
for wealth. My pious brother was devoted to me. He gave me everything,
including this wide and prosperous kingdom. How could I hurt his sons?”
Besides that consideration, said Dhåtaräñöra, the people love the Päëòavas.
They would be angered if the Kurus sent them away. Perhaps they would rise
up against their leaders and remove them by force. And certainly Bhéñma and
the other senior Kurus would favor the Päëòavas.
Duryodhana was ready for this objection. Before sending the Päëòavas away,
the Kurus should try to win over the people by various means. By bestowing
wealth and honors on them they would gain their love and trust. Then, in the
Päëòavas’ absence, it would be possible for Duryodhana to become king. The
prince went on, “Once my position is established in Hastinäpura, Kunté and
her sons could even return. Do not fear for their welfare.”
Dhåtaräñöra sat up and leaned toward his son. “This very thought has been on
my mind, but I have not spoken it because it is a sinful thought. I am still
doubtful. How do you propose that we deal with Bhéñma, Vidura, Droëa and
Kåpa? They love the Päëòavas as if they were their own sons.”
Duryodhana smiled. “Bhéñma will remain neutral, as he always does. Droëa’s
son is my staunch supporter. His father will never go against him. Droëa has
married Kåpa’s sister. Therefore Kåpa’s support is assured. Vidura is the only
one we cannot trust––he will certainly side with the Päëòavas––but what
harm can he alone do to us?”
Duryodhana implored his father to agree. If the Päëòavas were allowed to
remain in Hastinäpura, he would not be able to live. His heart was burning and
he lived in constant anxiety.
Dhåtaräñöra was torn. He sat sighing for some moments. Finally, he gave his
assent. Everything lay in the hands of Providence. What could he, a mere
mortal filled with desire and fears, do against destiny? The king called his
servants and retired for the night.

59

Chapter 7
The Päëòavas Sent Away
During the weeks that followed, Duryodhana and his brothers slowly began to
win over the people. They distributed wealth and honors liberally and provided
the citizens with all kinds of amenities and pleasures. At the same time,
Dhåtaräñöra’s ministers spoke continuously in the court about Väraëävata, as
they had been instructed by the king. The Päëòavas heard them describe the
city’s attractions. “The festival of Päçupäta is starting soon. The procession has
no equal anywhere in the world. The decorations, gems, jewels and
entertainments delight the heart.”
The young princes were attracted. When Dhåtaräñöra saw that their curiosity
had been aroused, he said, “I have been hearing a lot about Väraëävata of late.
It occurred to me that you boys would derive much pleasure from visiting that
city. Why not make a state visit? Bestow charity on the people and take your
leisure. After enjoying yourselves there, you may return here whenever you
please.”
Yudhiñöhira, however, was intelligent; he understood that this was simply a
ploy to remove them from the city. Why did the king not ask his own sons to
go to Väraëävata? Yudhiñöhira had seen the unusual kindness that Duryodhana
had been displaying toward the people lately, and he knew that he was
hatching a plot. But he felt helpless. He decided it would be better to do as the
king suggested for the time being. Their position was not strong. The Päëòavas
had few friends or supporters and the king’s sons were constantly inclined to
harm them in any way they could. Perhaps a time away from Hastinäpura
would help.
A date was set for the Päëòava’s departure. Duryodhana was overjoyed that
the Päëòavas had agreed to go, and immediately began to make plans. He
summoned his confidential counselor, Purochana. Taking him by the hand, the
prince said, “This world and all its wealth is as much yours as it is mine. You
should act so it will be protected. You are my most trustworthy supporter. I am
completely dependent on you. Listen as I tell you what must be done, and done
secretly. Do not repeat to anyone what I shall now say to you.”
60

Duryodhana asked Purochana to go at once to Väraëävata. Using skilled and
trusted artisans, he should construct a spacious mansion for the Päëòavas. It
should be elegant and full of rich furnishings, but it should be made entirely of
flammable materials. “Mix ghee and oil with earth and a large quantity of lac.
Plaster the walls with it and then paint over it carefully. Then scent the house
so no one will suspect anything.”
The prince also instructed Purochana to leave pots of ghee and oil in the
house. He wanted to ensure that the building would burn to ashes within
minutes. Duryodhana then revealed to Purochana the whole plan he had made
with Çakuni. Purochana should meet the Päëòavas as soon as they arrived in
Väraëävata. He should then show them to their quarters. He should be sure
they knew that the house had been built for them on the king’s orders.
Purochana should live with them to help allay their suspicions. Then, when
they were least suspecting it, Purochana should set fire to the house while they
were asleep.
Duryodhana squeezed his minister’s hand. “Everything depends upon you,
Purochana. Know that I shall reward you with unlimited wealth if you do me
this favor. Leave immediately, for the Päëòavas will be there soon.”
Purochana promised to do everything he had been asked. Gathering a number
of his men, he left immediately for Väraëävata on a swift chariot drawn by
asses. They began work on the house the moment they arrived.
On the day of their departure, the Päëòavas went before their elders and
bowed down in respect. They touched Bhéñma and Dhåtaräñöra’s feet, and
embraced their equals with love. Taking leave of the ladies, they walked
respectfully around them with folded palms. Then they mounted their fine,
golden chariots. The citizens crowded around them as they made preparations
to leave, then followed the chariots as they slowly made their way out of the
city. The young princes felt sorrow at leaving their homes and loved ones.
Seeing their grief, some of the people spoke out. One Brahmin said, “King
Dhåtaräñöra does not have equal vision. He favors his sons over these virtuous
princes. Päëòu’s sons will never commit any sin. They are blameless and pure
and do not deserve to be sent away.” Some of the people censured Bhéñma for
allowing it to happen, while others condemned the blind king and his son.
Many of them declared that they would go with the Päëòavas to Väraëävata
rather than remain with the cruel-minded monarch.
But Yudhiñöhira checked them. “The king is our father, our preceptor and our
61

superior. He is always worthy of our worship and should be obeyed without
question. This is the eternal injunction of scripture and we should abide by it
with a peaceful mind.” When the time came, he said, they could render his
brothers and him service in another way. The citizens then circumambulated
the chariots and departed, tears flooding their eyes.
When the Päëòavas reached the edge of the city, Vidura met them. Vidura had
learned of Duryodhana’s scheme through his palace spies. He wanted to warn
Yudhiñöhira without anyone else understanding his message. Going before the
prince who was still in the people’s midst, he spoke to him in the language of
the mleccha tribes people. Speaking cryptically, Vidura said, “One who knows
there are sharp weapons capable of cutting the body although not made of
metal is not injured by them. He survives who understands that the consumer
of wood and straw does not reach the dwellers of a hole in the forest. Always
stay alert. One who keeps his senses under control can never be overcome by
any enemy.”
Vidura spoke for some minutes and Yudhiñöhira, who was versed in many
languages, understood his meaning, although the message was not
understandable by others. When Vidura finished, Yudhiñöhira replied, “I
understand.” Vidura smiled, then walked respectfully around the princes.
Bidding them farewell, he left for his own house.
On the road to Väraëävata, Kunté asked Yudhiñöhira what Vidura had said.
Yudhiñöhira replied that Vidura had told him that their house in Väraëävata
would be burned down. He had also told the prince that the means of escape
would be revealed to him. “The learned Vidura then said that he who is selfcontrolled wins the sovereignty of the earth.”
When the citizens of Väraëävata heard that the famous Päëòava brothers were
approaching their city, they came out in the thousands to greet the princes.
The people saw Yudhiñöhira leading his brothers, like Indra leading the
celestials. They worshipped and welcomed the princes and led them into their
city to the accompaniment of trumpets, drums and conchshells. Cheers filled
the air as the brothers proceeded slowly along the road. Reaching the city’s
main concourse, they got down from their chariots and went first to meet the
Brahmins. Then they met with the city officials, then the warriors, the trades
people and finally the workers and servant classes.
After the greetings were over, the Päëòavas were received as guests of one of
the city’s chief officials. Remembering Vidura’s warning and unsure of what to
62

expect, they remained there for ten days. Then Purochana told them that their
own residence was ready. He personally led the princes and Kunté to the house
he had named ‘The Blessed Dwelling’. As they entered the house Yudhiñöhira
said quietly to Bhéma, “From the odors I detect here it is evident that this
house has been made of lac and other materials soaked in ghee and oil.
Without doubt Purochana intends to burn us to death in this place. It is just as
Vidura told me. Duryodhana has obviously entrusted Purochana with the job
of killing us.”
Bhéma replied, “Then why should we live in this death-trap? Let us return to
where we have already been staying.”
Yudhiñöhira did not think Bhéma’s idea to be a wise one. “If we let Purochana
realize we suspect him, then he may try anything in order to kill us. Obviously
he is without scruples and is determined to do the will of the ruthless
Duryodhana. We should not give him any indication that we are aware of his
wicked intentions.”
When Purochana left the brothers spoke openly together. Yudhiñöhira said
they should dig a tunnel under the house in order to escape when the time
came. That was what Vidura had instructed. Bhéma and Arjuna wondered why
they should live in fear of Duryodhana. Why not challenge him outright?
Bhéma was especially angry, remembering the times when Duryodhana had
tried to poison him. He slapped his biceps and said menacingly, “Just order me,
dear brother, and I shall immediately crush the Kauravas with my bare hands.”
No, Yudhiñöhira said, their position was in no way equal to that of their
cousins. “They are one hundred and we are five. They have rank, power,
friends, allies and wealth. Dhåtaräñöra will never abandon his sons, and Bhéñma
and Droëa will always stand by the king. We cannot challenge the Kurus
directly.”
The twins suggested that they immediately fly from Väraëävata. Yudhiñöhira
again disagreed. “Once he knows we are running in fear, Duryodhana will use
spies and agents to find us and kill us by any devious means.”
Yudhiñöhira decided that their best hope lay in living in the lac house
seemingly unaware of the danger. Remaining constantly alert, they should
prepare an escape tunnel under the house. They should also spend their days
hunting in the woods and looking for a route that would take them away from
the city. When Purochana set light to the house, they could escape without
anyone knowing. Duryodhana would think them dead and would not then
63

pursue them.
His brothers agreed. They then searched the house for a place to dig the
tunnel. As they were looking, a man came to the house and introduced himself
as a friend of Vidura. He told Yudhiñöhira that he was a skilled miner and had
been sent there by Vidura, who had informed him that on a new moon night,
Purochana planned to set light to the door of their house.
Yudhiñöhira looked at the man carefully. Was this yet another of Duryodhana’s
deceits? The miner reassured him by mentioning the incident when Vidura
had spoken to him in the mleccha dialect. Yudhiñöhira then welcomed him
warmly and replied, “We are ever protected by the virtuous Vidura. It is our
good fortune that you have come here. The wicked and sinful Duryodhana has
had this house constructed from all sorts of flammable materials. In command
of wealth and allies he pursues us relentlessly.”
The miner said he would begin construction of a subterranean passage
immediately. He began to dig from the center of the house and covered the
hole with planks and a large rug.
As the miner worked, the Päëòavas spent their days wandering in the
surrounding woods. They soon ascertained a route leading away from
Väraëävata through the forest. While living in the house the brothers gave to
Purochana the appearance of being peaceful and happy so as not to arouse his
suspicions, but at night they slept with their arms at the ready, one of them
always remaining alert in case Purochana made an unexpected move. No one
but the miner knew of their plans.
A full year passed in this way. Purochana was satisfied, thinking the Päëòavas
unaware of his intentions. When Yudhiñöhira saw that the minister suspected
nothing and trusted them completely, he said to his brothers, “Let us pre-empt
Purochana before he can enact his plan. I think we should ourselves set light to
the house and make our escape.”
The tunnel was complete. Yudhiñöhira considered that their best hope lay in
deceiving Duryodhana into thinking his plan had succeeded. That would allow
the brothers to escape without being pursued. They would then have time to
consider their next move. After discussing all the angles, the brothers decided
that they would set fire to the house the next night.
The following day a festival was being celebrated in Väraëävata. Kunté
distributed food and wealth to the Brahmins, and many poor people came to
the Päëòavas’ mansion to beg charity. By the arrangement of Providence, a
64

niñäda tribeswoman also arrived with her five sons. The servants Kunté had
placed in charge of distributing the food sat the woman and her sons down,
then brought them food and a large quantity of wine. Gradually they became
drunk and fell asleep where they had been eating. The servants, unable to
rouse them, decided to leave them there for the night, although the Päëòavas
were unaware of this.
Outside as night fell, a storm blew up. The Päëòavas sat together in their room
waiting until they were sure that Purochana, who occupied the room by the
door of the house, was asleep. Yudhiñöhira then instructed Bhéma to set the
house on fire. Bhéma then took a torch and lit the door and several other
places, as his brothers and Kunté made their way along the tunnel. He followed
them quickly, and in moments the whole house was ablaze.
Hearing the roar of the fire, the citizens of Väraëävata all came out and saw
with horror the blazing mansion. They were aware of the rivalry between
Duryodhana and the Päëòavas and they immediately guessed what had
happened. “This is undoubtedly Duryodhana’s doing,” they said. “He has
employed his evil minister to destroy the innocent and unsuspecting sons of
Päëòu. Fie upon that wicked man, whose understanding is so crooked!”
The bewailing people of the city surrounded the burning mansion and
remained through the night. When morning came they threw water onto the
embers and searched the burnt-out ruins. They found the remains of
Purochana and also of the niñäda woman and her sons. Concluding that the
Päëòavas were dead they lamented loudly, censuring Duryodhana and his
father. Some of them even condemned Bhéñma, Droëa and the other Kuru
elders for allowing such a terrible thing to happen.
The miner, who was present among the citizens, ensured that the searchers did
not find the tunnel. Thus no one in Väraëävata even guessed that the
Päëòavas were alive, and that they were at that time making their way through
the forest. The city leaders then sent messengers to Hastinäpura with the news
of the Päëòavas’ death.
When Dhåtaräñöra heard the messengers from Väraëävata he cried out in grief.
“Alas, my brother Päëòu has died again today because his heroic sons and their
illustrious mother have been killed. What a cruel destiny! How can I face life
without my gentle nephews?”
Dhåtaräñöra then ordered that the royal Brahmins go immediately to
Väraëävata to perform the funeral rites for Kunté and her sons. Along with
65

Bhéñma, Droëa, Kåpa and the other elders, the king went to the Ganges to
offer sacred water to the departed souls. As they stood in the river they cried
out, “O Yudhiñöhira! O Bhéma! O Arjuna!” Others called out the names of
Kunté and the twins. Thousands of grieving citizens came out of Hastinäpura
to offer oblations. Sounds of wailing and sorrow filled the air. Bhéñma was
particularly afflicted as he remembered the young princes, who had always
been like sons to him. Only Vidura did not lament, as he knew the truth. But
still, he did not speak about it to anyone. He knew he could not risk telling
even Bhéñma, who was always loyal to the king and Hastinäpura.
***
The Päëòavas and Kunté emerged from their tunnel some distance from
Väraëävata. As their eyes became accustomed to the darkness they proceeded
in the direction they had already charted. They were tired and afraid, and they
found it difficult to hurry. Seeing this, the tireless Bhéma lifted them all onto
his vast frame. To everyone’s astonishment, he placed his mother on his
shoulders, the twins on his two sides and Yudhiñöhira and Arjuna on each arm,
then ran through the forest, knocking down trees and treading down bushes
and brambles.
At dawn they arrived at the Ganges, where another of Vidura’s emissaries met
them. This man was sitting in a boat and he called out to the Päëòavas as they
stood measuring the depth of the river with a stone tied to a creeper. Startled,
the brothers looked around. Yudhiñöhira approached the man in the boat, who
told them that he been told by Vidura to wait there for them. He had been
there every night for months, carefully watching for signs of the brothers. The
man assured Yudhiñöhira of his credentials by repeating to him the
conversation the prince had had with Vidura in the mleccha tongue.
Explaining that he had come to ferry them across the river and help them on
their way, the man said, “Vidura has sent his embrace and said that you will
surely be victorious over your enemies. He said that you should remain always
alert and depend upon the Lord, by whose arrangement auspiciousness will
always attend you. Get into this boat quickly and I shall take you far from
here.”
Propelled by an engine and sails, the boat moved swiftly through the flowing
river toward the south. The Päëòavas journeyed for some hours and were
finally set down on the opposite bank near a broad path leading into the
66

woods. The boatman wished them success and departed, taking with him a
message of thanks for Vidura.
The brothers continued south. They soon entered a dense forest. Feeling tired
and hungry, they sat down. Yudhiñöhira said in an anguished voice, “What
could be more painful? Here we are lost in some deep and fearful forest. We do
not know if the sinful Purochana has somehow survived and informed
Duryodhana of our escape. What dangers lay ahead for us now?”
Kunté was exhausted and could walk no further. She sat on a tree root,
glancing around fearfully. Her sons searched about for a way to go deeper into
the jungle. It appeared virtually impregnable with its huge trees and bushes
enmeshed in a tight network of creepers. The cries of birds and animals filled
the air. Yudhiñöhira gazed into the forest and said to Bhéma, “O mighty son of
Väyu, you must again carry us into these dreadful woods. I can see no other
way for us to continue.”
Bhéma bowed his head in respect to his elder brother. Once again he placed his
mother and four brothers on his powerful body. When they were all holding on
tightly, he ran straight into the forest. He bounded high into the air and broke
trees with his feet, clearing a path as he progressed. Tall flowering trees fell on
all sides with great cracking sounds, sending up showers of blossoms. Forest
animals fled in all directions as the prince crashed through the woods. He
seemed like an angry elephant king charging through the jungle. So swift was
his movement that Kunté and her sons almost fainted. Still carrying the five of
them, Bhéma also swam the streams and lakes that crossed his path.
As evening fell they stopped for the night under the shelter of a large banyan
tree. Bhéma set down his mother and brothers and they fell to the ground
overwhelmed by fatigue, hunger and thirst. Kunté asked Bhéma to bring her
some water. He replied, “I hear the sweet singing of waterfowl not far from
here. Undoubtedly there is a lake nearby.”
The unflagging Bhéma went at once toward the sound and soon found the lake.
After bathing and drinking deeply, he soaked his upper garment and went back
to the banyan tree. But by the time he returned his mother and brothers had
fallen into a deep sleep. Seeing them lying on the bare ground, Bhéma
lamented to himself. “What more painful sight could there be? Here are my
five brothers, who could not even sleep in Väraëävata on the costliest of beds,
sleeping now on the cold earth. My gentle mother, as delicate and resplendent
as the filament of a lotus flower, lies exhausted on the hard forest floor.”
67

Bhéma wrang his hands in anguish and frustration. If only the Kauravas were
present before him now. They would regret their treachery. It was only by the
grace of God that Yudhiñöhira did not command him to kill them all. Bhéma
looked at his sleeping elder brother. Surely he deserved to rule the entire earth.
He never abandoned virtue or gave way to anger. Only because of this were the
Kauravas still alive.
Bhéma sighed and looked around. They had traveled many miles through the
forest. Perhaps there was a town or village not far away. He would remain
awake guarding his brothers and in the morning they could continue. The
prince sat on a root of the banyan tree with his mind and senses alert to
danger.
Not far from where the brothers had stopped was a massive sal tree on which
lived a Räkñasa named Hiòimba. He had slept through the day and was just
awakening as the Päëòavas were falling asleep. Yawning and stretching his
enormous arms, he sniffed the night air. At once he detected the scent of
humans nearby. He sat up quickly and called out to his sister, who lived on the
same tree. “Hiòimbé! Wake up. I smell human flesh. It has been a long time
since we tasted our favorite food. My mouth is already watering. Quickly find
the humans and, after killing them, bring them here. Tearing their necks with
my long fangs I shall quaff their hot, foaming blood. Both of us shall eat our fill
and then dance happily.”
The Räkñasa woman shook her long, orange hair and opened her blood-red
eyes. She cackled and looked at the long claws protruding from her black
fingers. Hiòimbé and her brother had often slain and eaten hapless travelers.
Swinging down from the branch she went silently through the trees, following
the scent. In a few minutes she arrived at the spot where the Päëòavas lay. The
Räkñasé saw the invincible Bhéma seated nearby. As soon as her eyes fell upon
him, her heart was moved by desire. The prince looked like a god. His skin was
the color of molten gold and his shoulders resembled those of a lion. His neck
resembled a conch and his eyes were like large lotus petals.
Hiòimbé decided immediately that he should be her husband. If she killed him,
she and her brother would enjoy the brief pleasure of eating his flesh; but if she
united with him, her pleasure would be far greater. Deciding to ignore her
brother’s order, Hiòimbé assumed the form of a beautiful woman. Decorated
with celestial ornaments and clothed in crimson silks, she walked slowly up to
Bhéma. With a bashful smile she said, “O best of men, who are you and what
68

brings you to this dark and dangerous forest? Who are these godlike men laying
on the ground, and who is that woman of transcendent beauty lying with
them?”
Bhéma looked at her in surprise. Was she the forest deity? What was such a
beautiful woman doing alone at night in such a place? He listened carefully as
Hiòimbé continued. “This forest belongs to my brother Hiòimba, a powerful
man-eating Räkñasa. With the intention of eating your flesh he sent me here
to kill you.”
She raised her hand as Bhéma suddenly stood up. “Do not fear. I have been
smitten with desire upon seeing you, who are as handsome as a god. Please
accept me as your wife, for I am being victimized by Cupid’s shafts.”
Hiòimbé told Bhéma that she would save him from her brother. She would carry
him through the sky and far away from Hiòimba. Then they could enjoy
together in a celestial mountain region.
Bhéma sat down again. He shook his head. “O Räkñasé, how do you expect me
to abandon my sleeping mother and brothers simply to gratify my lust?”
Hiòimbé looked down at the sleeping Päëòavas and Kunté. “Wake them up. I
shall carry you all away from this place.”
Bhéma shook his head again. “I shall not wake my mother and brothers out of
fear of any Räkñasa. There is no Räkñasa, Yakña or Gandharva able to
withstand my strength. O beautifully shaped lady, you may stay or go as you
please. Or if you like you may send your man-eating brother to me.”
As they were speaking together, Hiòimba was becoming impatient. Where was
his foolish sister? Why had she not returned? The Räkñasa jumped down from
his tree and moved toward the human scent.
Hiòimbé sensed her brother’s approach and she became alarmed. She pleaded
with Bhéma. “Please do not argue with me. My brother is coming. Do not tarry
here and become his meal. Wake up the others and allow me to rescue all of
you.”
Bhéma simply smiled. “This cannibal presents no problem to me. Indeed I shall
kill him here before your eyes. Do not consider me an ordinary human being.
My two arms are like the trunks of mighty elephants and my thighs resemble
iron clubs. My prowess is no less than Indra himself. I fear nothing.”
Hiòimbé was still doubtful. She had seen the Räkñasa giants prove their
superiority over men on many occasions. They were more on a level with the
celestials than with humans. It was a rare human who could overpower a
69

Räkñasa.
Bhéma looked over Hiòimbé’s shoulder and saw her brother approaching. He
was as dark as a rain cloud and he had hideous features. His ears were shaped
like arrows and the shock of red hair on his head stood erect. His powerful
body, clad in a loin cloth, was covered in wiry red hair. The Räkñasa was as tall
as a tree and had broad shoulders. His arms, thick like tree trunks, reached
down to his knees. His huge mouth was open, revealing rows of fearful fangs.
He opened his crimson eyes in surprise as he saw his sister standing in a human
form next to Bhéma. Seeing her so beautifully bedecked with celestial
ornaments, Hiòimba immediately understood that she had become lustful
toward the human. He spoke angrily.
“Who is so foolish as to create obstacles for me when I am hungry? O sister,
have you become so senseless that you do not fear my anger? Fie upon you, O
unchaste woman! Simply out of lust you are ready to do me an injury and
sacrifice the very honor of our race. I shall kill you along with these humans.”
Pressing his teeth together, Hiòimba ran at his sister with his arms raised.
Bhéma stood up at once and stepped forward. His voice boomed out. “Stop!
How dare you awaken my peacefully sleeping brothers. Nor should you attack
this innocent woman. O wicked-minded one, your sister is not in control of
herself. She has been brought under Cupid’s control. Therefore, she should not
be punished.”
Bhéma smiled scornfully at the cannibal. Challenging him to a fight, the prince
said, “Today you shall reach the land of the dead. I will pound your head to
pieces. Your sister shall see me drag your mountain-like frame even as a lion
drags an elephant. Hawks, vultures and jackals will then gleefully tear apart
your corpse. Today this forest shall be rendered safe for all travelers.”
Hiòimba flared up. He laughed at the human’s impudence. Advancing toward
Bhéma, the cannibal screamed, “What use is this boasting? First accomplish all
this and then speak. You think yourself strong but you shall learn the truth
today. For now your brothers may sleep peacefully. First I shall kill you, O foulmouthed one. After drinking your blood I will then slay the others.”
The Räkñasa rushed at Bhéma with his arms outstretched. Bhéma immediately
seized the giant’s arms and, not wanting to disturb his sleeping brothers,
dragged him away a full thirty-two cubits, even as a lion might drag a small
deer.
Hiòimba broke free from Bhéma’s hold and wrapped his arms around him. He
70

tightened his grasp and tried to crush him to death. Bhéma was unharmed.
Even while held in the Räkñasa’s powerful grip, Bhéma pulled him still further
away so that his terrible yells might not disturb the others. He then burst free
from Hiòimba and clasped him in turn. The two fighters displayed their might
as they lifted and hurled each other violently. They crashed about like two
great elephants fighting for supremacy. Huge trees were smashed and
splintered. The noise awoke the other princes and their mother. They sat up
and looked around. They were astonished to see the extraordinarily beautiful
Hiòimbé. Kunté addressed her with gentle words.
“O celestial maiden, who are you? To whom do you belong? Why have you
come to this forest? Are you the forest deity or an Apsarä? Please tell me
everything.”
Hiòimbé explained who she was and how she had come to be standing there.
Pointing to the combatants, she said, “I have chosen your golden-hued and
immensely powerful son as my husband. Greatly angered by this, my brother
has attacked him. See now how they struggle together, man and Räkñasa, filling
the forest with their roars.”
Yudhiñöhira and the other Päëòavas stood up hastily and looked across at
Bhéma. He was pounding Hiòimba with his fists, making a sound like thunder
claps. The Räkñasa pressed forward and reached for Bhéma’s neck with his large
hands. As they grappled, a dust cloud rose and covered them. They appeared
like two cliffs enveloped in mist.
Arjuna ran over and, with a smile on his lips, said to his brother, “O mightyarmed one, why did you not wake me? I can see that you are growing tired
fighting this terrible Räkñasa. Rest now and I shall kill him. Nakula and
Sahadeva will protect our mother.”
Arjuna was taunting his brother only to incite his anger, and his words had the
desired effect. Bhéma blazed up with fury and replied, “You need only be a
spectator, dear brother. Have no fear. Now that this evil cannibal has entered
my clutches he shall not escape with his life.”
Arjuna urged Bhéma to make haste. Twilight was approaching and the
Räkñasa’s strength would be doubled. Bhéma should kill him at once before he
was able to use mystic powers and illusions to fight.
Bhéma summoned his father Väyu’s latent power. With a roar he lifted the
Räkñasa above his head. Whirling him around, Bhéma said, “O cannibal, you
have led a life of sin. Your existence has been in vain. Therefore you deserve
71

an unholy death. Now I shall slay you like the beast you are, thereby freeing
this forest from its thorny plant.”
Bhéma whirled the Räkñasa one hundred times and dashed him to the ground.
Hiòimba let out a terrible roar which reverberated around the forest like a
massive drum. Now Hiòimba was only semi-conscious. Bhéma lifted him again
and, by smashing him onto the trunk of a large sal tree, broke his back in two.
He then stood up and smiled at his brothers, who by then had gathered around
him. They embraced him and, looking at the lifeless form of the giant Räkñasa,
congratulated him for his incredible feat.

Chapter 8
Ghaöotkaca Born and Baka Slain
Soon after Bhéma had killed Hiòimba, the sun rose and the brothers could see
paths through the forest. They decided to continue south. They were bound to
come to a town at some point.
As they walked off with Kunté between them, Hiòimbé followed behind. Bhéma
became concerned and said, “The Räkñasas are known to avenge themselves on
their enemies. They use deceptions and illusions. Therefore, O Hiòimbé, you
shall go the way your brother has gone.”
Bhéma turned menacingly toward Hiòimbé. He did not fear her in the least, but
wished only to scare her away before she tried any trickery. But Yudhiñöhira
stopped his younger brother. “O Bhéma, you should never kill a woman even in
anger. The attainment of virtue is always a higher duty than the protection of
one’s body. Besides this, what harm can this woman do to us? You have already
slain her more powerful brother.”
Hiòimbé folded her palms to Yudhiñöhira and thanked him. She approached
Kunté and said with tears in her eyes, “Noble lady, you know well the suffering
of a woman afflicted by desire. The god of love has pierced me with his shafts
and I am consumed by desire for your son Bhéma. If he does not accept me as
his wife, I will not be able to live. Do not doubt this.”
Hiòimbé begged Kunté to be merciful and allow her to marry Bhéma. She would
carry all of them to a celestial region where they could rest for some time.
72

There she could sport alone with Bhéma. Hiòimbé promised Kunté that she
would always be available to serve the Päëòavas. They had only to think of her
and she would appear before them at once. Kneeling before Kunté, Hiòimbé
said, “Please do not kill me by saying no. My request is in accord with virtue
and indeed saving one’s life by any means is always considered virtuous by the
wise. Virtue itself protects and sustains life; therefore grant me my desire, for it
is not sinful.”
Yudhiñöhira smiled. He was impressed by Hiòimbé’s knowledge of religion. She
would be a good wife for Bhéma, whom he had noted was not above her
sidelong glances. Yudhiñöhira said, “You have spoken well. O highly attractive
lady, it must be as you say. You shall become Bhéma’s wife. Remaining with him
by day, you may sport with him as you please. At night, however, he should
always be returned to our presence.”
Hiòimbé’s face blossomed with happiness. She looked at Bhéma with eyes full of
love. The prince smiled at her and said, “I agree to this union, but I shall make
one condition. As soon as you obtain a son I shall depart and leave you alone.
My brothers and I have much to achieve in order to win back our father’s
kingdom.”
Hiòimbé agreed. Then, assuming a large form, she carried them all to a high
mountain lake called Salivahana. In that beautiful woodland region the
brothers constructed a wooden hut on the lake shore. There they lived
peacefully. Hiòimbé took Bhéma with her during the daytime. She soared
through the sky to celestial places and showed Bhéma the numerous exquisite
gardens frequented by Siddhas and Gandharvas. There they lay together on
the sandy banks of crystal streams covered with blue and red lotuses. Hiòimbé
also took him to the land of the Guhakas, which was situated on the shore of
the divine Mänasa lake. Bhéma saw beautiful towns full of shining mansions
and palaces and groves of blossoming trees and heavenly flowers, whose
fragrance completely enchanted the mind.
Hiòimbé was as dazzling as a goddess. She adorned herself with fine gems and
gold ornaments and she constantly poured forth sweet song. Bhéma was
captivated by her and the seven months they enjoyed together seemed to pass
as quickly as if it were seven days. At the end of the seven months she gave
birth to a son named Ghaöotkaca. Within days of his birth the boy grew to
youthhood and he took on the terrible form of a Räkñasa. His huge body was
fearsome, with knotted muscles, a head as bald as a pot, terrible red eyes, a long
73

pointed nose and ears like sharp arrows. His chest was broad and he stood as
tall as a palm tree.
Although a Räkñasa by nature, Ghaöotkaca was inclined to virtue and he
became a great favorite of the Päëòavas. He was devoted to their service and
they looked on him as a younger brother. Taught by the Päëòavas, the boy
quickly became proficient at weaponry and fighting. After a couple of months
he asked permission from his parents to leave for the northern regions where
Yakñas and Räkñasas dwell. He promised the Päëòavas that they need only
think of him and he would return to render them any service they required.
After touching the feet of his mother and of all the Päëòavas, he rose up to the
sky and departed.
The time had come for Bhéma to leave Hiòimbé. She embraced the Päëòava
tearfully and asked if she would ever again see him. Bhéma assured her that in
the future, after he and his brothers had overcome their obstacles and were
free from danger, they could be reunited.
Leaving Hiòimbé in their mountain dwelling, the Päëòavas and Kunté resumed
their travels. They disguised themselves as ascetics by matting their hair and
wearing tree-bark garments. Bhéma carried his mother as they traveled through
the many different lands. Going from forest to forest they passed through the
countries of the Matsyas, the Trigartas and the Païchälas. No one recognised
them. They proceeded slowly, unsure of what to expect and awaiting the Lord’s
indication as to what they should do next. While travelling they studied the
Vedic scriptures together and all five brothers imbibed the science of morality
and many other subjects described in the Vedas.
One day as they sat in the forest by their sacred fire, Vyäsadeva came to see
them. After being received with due worship, the åñi sat down and said, “I have
been aware of the Kauravas’ unjust behavior toward you. Although I see both
the Kauravas and yourselves equally, I feel a greater affection for you brothers
due to your misfortune. I have therefore come here wishing to do you some
good.”
Vyäsadeva informed them of a nearby village called Ekacakra. He instructed
them to live there for some time, saying that he would come again to give them
further directions. The åñi then reassured the sorrowing Kunté. Her sons would
in time rule the world. The virtuous Yudhiñöhira, protected by his powerful
brothers, would certainly become king. Soon he would perform the great
Räjasüya sacrifice, establishing himself as the emperor of the entire globe.
74

The sage personally led them to Ekacakra. He brought them to a Brahmin’s
house where they were received as guests. Vyäsadeva then took his leave,
telling them again that he would return to them before long.
The Päëòavas surveyed their new abode. The little village of Ekacakra was
situated amid beautiful woodlands. The Brahmin had kindly given the brothers
two rooms in his house for their residence. He had taken a vow that he would
always receive any travelers who came to his door. By day they went about the
village begging for food and, due to their gentleness and humility, they soon
became dear to the people there. Everyone accepted them as wandering
ascetics staying briefly in the village and they gladly gave them alms.
Every night the brothers offered their mother whatever alms had been
collected. She would then prepare their meal. Half of the food was given to
Bhéma, and the rest was divided among the other four brothers and Kunté.
When the brothers went out begging, a different one of them would remain
behind each day to protect Kunté. One particular day it was Bhéma’s turn to
stay back. He was sitting with his mother when they heard loud crying in the
house. Hearing the piteous lamentations, Kunté’s heart was moved and she
spoke to Bhéma. “O son, due to this Brahmin’s kindness we are living here
peacefully with no fear of Duryodhana and his brothers. I am always thinking
how we might repay this gentle Brahmin. A virtuous man should always return
the good done to him with an even greater good. Perhaps now our chance has
come.”
Kunté could understand that the Brahmin had fallen into some great distress.
Bhéma told her to try to ascertain the cause. He would then try to remove it, no
matter how difficult a task it may prove to be.
Kunté slipped quietly into the inner apartments where the Brahmin lived with
his family. She stood unnoticed by the door while the Brahmin and his wife
and children sat with downcast faces. As Kunté watched, the Brahmin said to
his wife, “Fie upon this wretched life which affords one only misery. To live is
to experience nothing but disease and pain. Pursuing in turn religion, wealth
and pleasure, one endeavors much but receives little happiness. While
everything leads to salvation, that is an impossible goal to achieve. Those who
desire riches suffer, while those who have riches suffer even more. Alas, why
do I live?”
Kunté listened in silence as the Brahmin continued to condemn himself and
his misfortune. He spoke of a terrible danger that had befallen them. His wife
75

wept as he censured her, blaming their present predicament upon her wish to
remain in the village due to affection for her now dead relatives. The Brahmin
held his head in anguish. “How can I abandon you to save my own life? You
were given to me by your parents. It is my duty to protect you. You have always
served me and borne my children. I can in no way let you go. Nor can I
abandon my only son or daughter. I shall go. Or maybe we should all die
together.”
The Brahmin fell to the ground sobbing. His wife lifted him gently and said,
“This lamentation does not befit a learned man like yourself. No one should
lament inevitable death. Nor shall you or our children die. I shall go. Indeed, a
woman’s highest duty lies in sacrificing her life to serve her husband.
Undoubtedly such an act will confer upon me regions of eternal bliss.”
Kunté was curious. The Brahmin’s wife continued to implore her husband to
allow her to die. She said that neither she nor her children could possibly
survive in his absence. If she were left a widow, she would become a prey to
dishonorable men, who would seek her just as crows descend upon a piece of
meat left on the ground. How then could she protect their two young children
and keep them on the path of truth and virtue? She folded her hands and
begged her husband for permission to leave. He could then accept another
wife, while she would earn undying religious merits by her final service.
The Brahmin sat with his head in his hands and made no reply. Then his
daughter began to speak. “O father, why are you sorrowful when you have me?
Allow me to go and thus save yourself. It is a child’s duty to save the parent.
This is why the wise have called one’s child putra, one who delivers the parents
from hell. My duty to my forefathers is to bear a son to offer them the sacred
çraddhä, but by the grace of Providence I may now serve my forefathers by
saving my father. O Father, you will one day have to abandon me. Therefore
do not hesitate to do so now.”
The girl wept along with her parents. The Brahmin’s small son then said in
broken speech, “None of you should cry. Send me and I shall kill the cannibal
Räkñasa in a moment.” The boy smiled and brandished a piece of long grass as
if it were a weapon.
Although they were grief-stricken, they all laughed at the young boy’s words.
Kunté took the sudden change of mood as an opportunity to inquire about the
cause of their distress. Could she do anything to help? The Brahmin replied
that their grief could not be removed by any human being. The country where
76

they lived was protected from enemies by a powerful Räkñasa named Baka. He
had long terrorized the people, who found no protection from their weak king.
The Räkñasa used to come whenever he wanted and kill them for his food.
Finally the people went to Baka and proposed that if he would stop attacking
them at will, then each week one of them would go to him with a large cartload
of food. In turn he should protect them from attackers. The cannibal agreed,
but he demanded that he also eat the man who delivered his food.
The Brahmin told Kunté that the turn of each man in their country came only
after many years. Tomorrow it was his turn. He did not know what to do. He
could not leave his young family alone, nor could he send them to their deaths.
Therefore they would all go to meet the demon. Perhaps Baka would show
compassion and spare them. Or they would all be devoured at once.
Kunté said, “I see a means by which you may be delivered from this fear.
Although you have but two children, I have five sons. Therefore let one of
them go with the Räkñasa’s tribute.”
The Brahmin was shocked. “I can never cause the death of a guest and a
Brahmin to save my own life. Even the most sinful man would not do this.
Rather, one should sacrifice himself and his children for the sake of a
Brahmin.”
Kunté was grave. “I am of the same opinion that Brahmins should always be
protected, but you need not fear for my son. The Räkñasa will not be able to
kill him. He is powerful and knows the science of mantras.”
Kunté told the Brahmin that she had already seen her son kill a powerful
Räkñasa. Baka would prove no problem to him. She asked the Brahmin not to
disclose to anyone else what she had told him. If others learned of her son’s
powers, they would harass him for his knowledge and the power of the mantras
would be diminished if they were given to others.
The Brahmin looked carefully at Kunté’s expression. She was obviously
speaking the truth. Her son must surely possess some extraordinary powers.
With tears in his eyes he assented to her suggestion.
Kunté went to Bhéma and told him everything. She asked him to go to Baka.
Bhéma agreed at once. His eyes lit up at the thought that he would be able to
exercise his strength, while at the same time show their gratitude to the gentle
Brahmin and his family.
Just as Kunté and Bhéma finished speaking, the other Päëòavas returned.
Yudhiñöhira caught Bhéma’s eye and sensed at once that his younger brother
77

was contemplating something wonderful. He sat by his mother and asked
quietly, “What does Bhéma have on his mind? It seems he is about to do some
extraordinary deed. Is it something you have ordered, or is it some plan of his
own?”
Kunté told her son what had transpired. When Yudhiñöhira learned that Bhéma
was about to go out to meet Baka he became alarmed. “O Mother, you have
made this Brahmin a rash promise. Surely it is never sanctioned to sacrifice
one’s own son for that of another. All my hopes of overpowering Dhåtaräñöra’s
sons and regaining the kingdom are dependent on Bhéma’s power.”
Kunté smiled slightly and reassured Yudhiñöhira. She reminded him of Bhéma’s
superhuman prowess––how even as an infant he had crushed a great rock to
powder, how he had easily carried all of them through the forest while running
at the speed of the wind, how he had slain the immensely strong Hiòimba. “It
was not out of foolishness that I made my offer to the Brahmin. It is always a
ruler’s duty to protect the Brahmins. By this act we will achieve two things: we
will reward the Brahmin’s kindness toward us, and we will earn much religious
merit.” Kunté told her son that she had been wondering how to repay the
Brahmin for some time. This opportunity was obviously the Lord’s
arrangement for them.
Yudhiñöhira pondered Kunté’s words. Looking across at the smiling Bhéma, he
replied, “You have spoken well. Your decision is well considered. Because of
your compassion toward the Brahmin, Bhéma will surely kill the demon Baka,
but you must ensure that no one comes to know that it was him.”
Yudhiñöhira was not sure if the Kauravas knew that he and his brothers were
still alive. Their spies would soon inform them of Baka’s death. They may well
suspect that it was Bhéma who had killed him. Few other men were capable of
killing such a powerful Räkñasa.
That night while the village slept Bhéma quietly left the Brahmin’s house. He
drove the cart loaded with food toward the forest where Baka dwelt. The
aroma of the food was overpowering. After living for so long on meager forest
fare and whatever alms the brothers were able to collect, Bhéma was ravenous.
He began to eat the food from the cart. On his way into the forest, he shouted
Baka’s name.
The Räkñasa heard Bhéma’s approach and became inflamed with anger. He ran
toward the Päëòava, yelling, “I am Baka!”
Bhéma saw him emerge from among the trees. The earth resounded with his
78

footsteps and his shouts were deafening. He had a huge body, red eyes, red
beard and red hair. His mouth opened from ear to ear, and his forehead was
furrowed into three lines as he looked upon Bhéma eating his food. Baka
stopped near the cart and thundered, “Who is this fool who desires to be
dispatched at once to death’s abode by eating in my presence the food intended
for me?”
Bhéma glanced derisively at the Räkñasa and smiled. He ignored his challenge
and continued eating.
Baka roared in fury. He rushed at Bhéma with his arms upraised. Still the
Päëòava continued to eat. Baka brought his two fists down upon Bhéma’s back
with the force of a thunderbolt. Without flinching, Bhéma went on eating. He
did not even look at the Räkñasa. Baka roared again and tore up a huge tree. As
he whirled it above his head, Bhéma stood up and washed his hands from the
pitcher of water on the cart. Then he leapt down from the cart and faced the
infuriated demon.
Baka hurled the tree at Bhéma with all his strength. Bhéma smilingly caught it
in his left hand and threw it back. The Räkñasa uprooted one tree after
another and hurled them at Bhéma, who caught each of them and sent them
back. Soon the whole area was cleared of trees. Screaming out his own name
again and again, Baka threw himself upon Bhéma and seized him. Bhéma also
gripped the demon with his own powerful arms. The two dragged each other
violently, each trying to kick the other’s legs out from underneath him. Then
they fell to the ground, still locked in one another’s arms. They rolled about,
making the ground tremble. Bhéma tightened his grip. He repeatedly smashed
the demon’s head with his own forehead.
Gradually, Baka tired. Bhéma pulled free of his grasp and pounded the demon
with his fists. He pressed down on Baka’s chest with his knees and struck him
crushing blows which made the earth shake. Baka fell unconscious and Bhéma
rolled him onto his stomach. Placing one knee on his back, he seized his neck
with one hand and his waist-cloth with the other. With great force Bhéma
broke the demon’s back in two. As he died Baka vomited blood and let out a
fearful yell which filled the forest.
Hearing him scream, Baka’s friends and relatives came out of their houses.
They looked with horror at his mountainous form lying in a pool of blood.
Bhéma reassured the terrified Räkñasas that he was not going to attack them.
“This one has been killed due to his excessive fondness for human flesh. Give
79

up killing men. Otherwise this fate awaits you all.”
The Räkñasas immediately assented saying, “It shall be so.” Then they ran from
that place, leaving Bhéma with Baka’s body. From that time on the people of
Ekacakra noticed the Räkñasas became peaceable toward them.
Bhéma lifted Baka’s corpse and placed it on the cart. Unseen by anyone, he
deposited it by the town gates and then returned to the Brahmin’s house. His
mother and brothers were relieved to see him, and he described to them all
that had happened.

Chapter 9
The Gandharva Aìgaraparna
When the sun rose the people of Ekacakra found Baka’s dead body. They were
astonished to see it lying there in a twisted mess, its mouth and eyes wide open.
The citizens’ hair stood on end and their mouths fell open in amazement.
Thousands of people gathered, all asking who had killed him. Gradually they
realized that it had been the Brahmin’s turn to take food to the demon the
previous night. A noisy crowd soon gathered outside the Brahmin’s house.
While the Päëòavas remained inside, the Brahmin spoke to the people.
“Yesterday as I sat by the roadside weeping at the thought of mine and my
family’s plight, a Brahmin came by. When he found out the cause of my
distress, he promised to deliver me and the town from this constant danger.
Learned in the incantations that invoke celestial weapons, the Brahmin
assured me that he would take the food to Baka on my behalf and kill him. He
must have been successful at this inconceivable feat, because Baka now lies
dead.”
The people looked at one another in wonder. Then they laughed and shouted
in joy. They declared a festival to the Räkñasa’s death.
The Päëòavas continued to live at the Brahmin’s house as Vyäsadeva had
instructed them. It had been months since the sage had last spoken with them.
They expected his return at any time, and they passed their days in begging
alms and studying the Vedic scriptures.
One day a wandering ascetic came to the Brahmin’s house and accepted his
80

invitation to stay for a few days. After he had been duly worshipped and fed by
the Brahmin and his family, the ascetic told stories from his travels. The
Päëòavas listened along with the Brahmin’s family. They heard about a great
svayaàvara ceremony soon to be held in Kämpilya for Draupadé, King
Drupada’s daughter. This princess, the ascetic said, was not born of a woman
but had been born, along with her brother Dåñöadyumna, from the sacrificial
fire.
The Päëòavas were intrigued. They asked, “Please tell us how it is possible that
Draupadé and her brother could appear from the fire. We desire to hear
everything you know.”
The ascetic first told them about Droëa. The sage Bharadväja had once seen
Gritachi, a divinely beautiful Apsarä, and as a result he had dropped his vital
seed. He caught his seed in a pot and from that seed Droëa was born. As a
child Droëa had been friends with Drupada, who had come to study at
Bharadväja’s hermitage.
Some time after Drupada left the hermitage, Droëa heard that the invincible
Brahmin-warrior Paraçuräma was retiring to the forest and was giving away all
his possessions. Droëa approached him and asked for charity. Paraçuräma
replied, “Having once won this wide earth from the ruling class, I am now
without wealth. I have already given it to the Brahmins. I possess only my body
and my weapons. Which of these would you prefer, O Brahmin?”
Droëa asked Paraçuräma for his celestial weapons, along with the knowledge to
use them. The åñi bestowed his weapons upon Droëa, who then left to again see
his friend Drupada. By then, Drupada had become the king of Païchäla.
The Päëòavas listened as the ascetic told them what they had already heard
from Droëa himself––how Drupada had insulted his friend most terribly. Not
knowing that it was the Päëòavas who were listening, the ascetic told them
how Drupada had then been overpowered by the Päëòavas at Droëa’s
command.
After being humiliated by Droëa and losing half his kingdom, Drupada
thought only of revenge. He knew he could never defeat Droëa in battle, so he
had gone to the forest to seek out a powerful Brahmin. He knew that only a
Brahmin’s spiritual power could match Droëa’s strength.
After some time Drupada came across two Brahmin brothers named Yaja and
Upayaja, descendents of Kaçyapa, a powerful son of Brahmä. The king
worshipped and served the two Brahmins for some time, then asked for their
81

assistance. He approached the younger of the two, Upayaja, first, knowing him
to be the more powerful. Drupada asked him to conduct a sacrifice that would
give the king a son capable of killing Droëa. Drupada offered him ten thousand
cows as payment, but the Brahmin replied, “I shall not perform any act
directed toward material gain, either for myself or for another.”
The disappointed Drupada continued serving Upayaja in the hope that he
might relent. Finally after a full year had passed the Brahmin took pity on him
and said, “I once saw my elder brother take up and eat a fruit from the ground
without considering whether or not it was clean. When we were both boys
studying in our guru’s house I often saw him eat the remnants of other people’s
food. One who has no regard for purity in one thing will not have such regard
in another. Therefore approach him, for he will surely perform your sacrifice.”
The Brahmin’s words proved true and Yaja agreed to Drupada’s proposal. The
Brahmin, realizing what difficult a task the king had requested, engaged his
younger brother to assist him. Although Upayaja had no personal desire to
perform Drupada’s sacrifice, he could not refuse his elder brother’s request.
Thus the two Brahmins went to Kämpilya to perform a fire sacrifice intended
to propitiate the gods headed by Lord Viñëu. Thus Drupada would be able to
get a son capable of killing Droëa.
As the sacrifice commenced the king again spoke with Yaja. Remembering the
day he had been overpowered by Arjuna, he asked the priest if, as well as a son,
he might obtain a beautiful daughter whom he could offer to Arjuna as his
wife. Drupada thought that if Arjuna became his son-in-law, his happiness
would be complete. Yaja replied, “It shall be so,” and Drupada joyfully sat down
by the sacrifical fire with his queen.
As the ritual neared completion Yaja called for Drupada’s wife. “Come quickly,
O queen. A son and daughter have now come for you.”
The queen replied, “O Brahmin, I am not pure. My mouth is filled with saffron
and my body is smeared with perfumes. I am not ready to receive the sacrificial
ghee.”
Yaja replied, “Whether or not you are ready the object of this sacrifice, which I
have prepared and Upayaja has sanctified, cannot be thwarted.”
Yaja had then poured the oblation into the fire. Immediately there arose from
the flames a god-like boy. He was encased in brilliant golden armor and he
shone like fire. He wore a bright crown on his head and held a long bow and a
sword. That youth was terrible to behold and he rose from the fire roaring.
82

Stepping clear of the flames, he mounted the king’s chariot and immediately
rode about, displaying all kinds of skill.
The people of Kämpilya had shouted with joy upon seeing this boy who would
fulfill the king’s desire and kill his enemy. As their cries of happiness
resounded a celestial woman appeared from the fire. Her complexion was dark
and her smiling eyes were shaped like lotus petals. Her long and curling hair
was bluish in color and it fell down her back as she emerged from the flames.
She had rising breasts and tapering thighs. At the end of her graceful fingers
were nails that shone like bright copper. Her body emanated the sweet
fragrance of blue lotuses which could be perceived at a distance of two miles.
That divine woman captivated the mind of every man who saw her. She had
no equal even among the gods or the Gandharvas.
The ascetic then told his attentive audience how a heavenly voice had spoken
from the skies as soon as the boy and girl had appeared. Booming like thunder
it had said, “This dark-skinned beauty will be the best of all women and she
will be the cause of the destruction of the world’s warriors. The boy shall be
called Dåñöadyumna and he shall slay Droëa.”
Droëa heard about this prophesy, but, considering destiny to be supreme, he
neverthless agreed to train Drupada’s son in martial arts. The noble Droëa did
this to repay Drupada for taking half his kingdom.
The ascetic stopped. Having heard that Dåñöadyumna would kill their beloved
teacher, the Päëòavas felt as if their hearts had been pierced. Kunté saw their
perplexity and, after they had retired for the night, said to Yudhiñöhira, “We
have lived here for many months. I think it would be wise to leave now. You
are all restless. I also sense that you desire to go to Païchäla for Draupadé’s
svayaàvara.”
Kunté had seen her sons’ eyes open wide when the ascetic had described
Draupadé’s celestial beauty. Therefore she suggested that they leave the next
day for Païchäla. All five brothers agreed to her proposal, and the following
morning they made their farewells to the Brahmin and his family. Walking in a
line with Kunté in their middle, they then headed toward Païchäla, traveling
again through the forest.
On the first evening of their journey, as they sat around their fire, Vyäsadeva
arrived. Upon seeing him, the Päëòavas prostrated themselves at his feet. They
then stood with their palms folded as Vyäsadeva offered them blessings. When
everyone was seated, Vyäsadeva said, “O conquerors of foes, are you following
83

the path of virtue enjoined in the scriptures? Do you worship the Brahmins? I
hope you always honor those worthy of your respect.”
The åñi spoke for some time, giving the attentive princes various instructions.
At the end of his discourse, Vyäsadeva told them that they should try to win
the hand of the princess of Païchäla. Her father was setting an archery test in
order to find her a qualified husband. Arjuna should enter the contest.
Vyäsadeva then stood up to leave and, after again receiving obeisances from
the Päëòavas, vanished into the woods.
Reassured by Vyäsadeva’s directions, the brothers continued their journey the
next day with joyous hearts. They walked day and night, eager to arrive at
Païchäla in time for the svayaàvara. It was just after nightfall several days
later when they came upon the gently flowing waters of the Ganges. Arjuna
was leading the party with a torch in his hand to light their way. They all
bowed respectfully to the sacred river before walking along her banks,
searching for a place to cross.
Suddenly, from out of the darkness, they heard a loud voice. “Halt! Who dares
approach this river at such a time? The night belongs to Yakñas, Gandharvas
and Räkñasas. Only during the first portion of night, the twilight time, are
other beings allowed to bathe. You appear to be human beings, therefore
return the way you have come.”
A shining figure emerged from the waters, rose into the air, and descended
onto a golden chariot. Clasping a huge bow he continued to address them in a
thunderous voice, “I am the Gandharva Aìgaraparna, friend of Kuvera,
treasurer of the gods. I am bathing here. Not even the gods or demons would
dare come to this river when I am bathing. How then have you humans been so
bold? Leave quickly or I will kill you. I fear no one.”
Arjuna could not tolerate the Gandharva’s haughty speech. “O wretch, rivers
and mountains are never barred to anyone at any time. There is no such thing
as a special time when we are not allowed to approach this sacred river, nor do
we care for your threats. Only the weak would fear someone like you. Make
way, because we are now going to bathe in this river.”
Aìgaraparna blazed with anger. He drew his bow and shot a hundred arrows at
the brothers. Arjuna moved with blinding speed and struck down all those
shafts simply with the torch he was holding. He laughed at the Gandharva.
“Do not attempt to frighten those who are skilled in warfare. Your weapons
simply vanish like froth on the ocean when hurled at more powerful
84

opponents. O sky-ranger, I know you are superior to men in prowess. Therefore
I shall use a celestial missile against you. The fire-weapon I will now discharge
was first given to Bharadväja by Båhaspati. Bharadväja then gave it to
Agniveçya, who gave it to my preceptor Droëa. Droëa gave it to me. Guard
yourself from its power if you can.”
Chanting the incantations to invoke the Ägneyästra, Arjuna imbued his torch
with its tremendous power. Angrily he threw it at Aìgaraparna and his chariot
was immediately destroyed, burnt black. The Gandharva fainted from the
missile’s force and fell headlong from the smoking chariot. Arjuna seized him
by his hair, which was adorned with garlands of flowers, and dragged him
before Yudhiñöhira.
Suddenly a celestial woman rushed out of the water and approached
Yudhiñöhira. Folding her palms she said, “O exalted one, I am Kumbhinashi,
Aìgaraparna’s wife. Please bestow your mercy upon me and set him free. I seek
your protection.”
The Gandharva came to his senses and sat up before Yudhiñöhira, who said to
him, “O Gandharva, who would slay one who has been vanquished in battle,
who stands deprived of his fame, who is unable to protect himself, and who is
being protected by a woman? You may go.”
Aìgaraparna stood and offered his respects to Yudhiñöhira. He spoke with
humility. “My pride has been crushed by your younger brother. My celestial
chariot lies burnt to ashes. I had been known as Citraratha, ‘one of the
beautiful chariot’ but from now on I shall call myself Dagdharatha, ‘he of the
burnt chariot’.”
Aìgaraparna thanked Arjuna for not killing him, even though able. In return
for Arjuna’s mercy, Aìgaraparna offered him the divine knowledge possessed
by the Gandharvas along with a team of celestial horses. Smiling, Aìgaraparna
said, “This knowledge, known as Chakshushi, will give you the ability to see
anything within the three worlds, along with that thing’s intrinsic nature. It is
this knowledge that gives the Gandharvas the powers that make them superior
to men.”
Aìgaraparna waved his hand toward the river bank and the Päëòavas saw
there a group of lustrous white steeds. “These are the horses I wish to give you.
They will go anywhere at their owner’s will. They are said to be a portion of
Indra’s thunderbolt and will always unfailingly fulfill your desire.”
Arjuna said, “O Gandharva, if you desire to give your knowledge and these
85

horses in return for your life, then I shall not accept them. It was my duty to
release you on my brother’s order. I cannot accept charity, for that is never the
duty of the ruling class.”
Aìgaraparna smiled again. “This need not be charity. O best of the Bharata
race, I desire to learn from you how to throw the fire weapon which you used
to overpower me.”
Arjuna agreed to this exchange, but said he first wanted to know why the
Gandharva had challenged him and his brothers, although they were all
virtuous men, learned in the Vedas and born in a noble line of kings.
The Gandharva replied, “O Arjuna, I have heard from Närada Åñi of your
ancestors’ great accomplishments. I also know your fathers personally because
Dharma, Väyu, Indra, the Açvinés and even Päëòu all reside in heaven.
Although I knew you are all high-souled, virtuous, powerful and obedient to
your vows, I nevertheless censured you. No man, possessed of strength and
arms, ought to tolerate a confrontation in front of his wife. I was overpowered
by wrath.”
Aìgaraparna went on to explain why Arjuna had been able to defeat him
although he was a celestial. “Because you have been observing a vow of
celibacy, O hero, your power became insurmountable. If a warrior engaged in
satisfying his desires fights with the Gandharvas at night, he will not escape
with his life.”
Aìgaraparna said that even a warrior who is not celibate could defeat a
powerful enemy if he is accompanied by a Brahmin priest. The Gandharva
concluded, “Men with learned and self-controlled priests can conquer the
earth and acquire every good fortune, finally attaining even heaven itself.
Therefore, O descendent of Tapati, you should seek out a qualified priest as
your guide.”
Arjuna was listening carefully. He was curious that Aìgaraparna addressed
him as a descendent of Tapati. He asked, “As the sons of Kunté we are known
as the Kaunteyas. Why did you address us as Tapatyas? I have not heard this
before.”
It was a long story. Aìgaraparna invited the brothers to sit comfortably on the
river bank while he recited the history of their distant ancestor, Tapati,
daughter of the sun-god. Tapati had descended from the heavens and married
Saàvaraëa, an early king in the Päëòavas’ line. The Gandharva narrated this
history, along with many other incidental stories. He spoke for much of the
86

night and the enthralled brothers could see the first faint glow of dawn when
he finished his narration. Arjuna then said to him, “O Gandharva, you know
everything and can see everything by your divine sight. Please tell us where we
can find a Brahmin who knows the Vedas and can become our priest.”
Aìgaraparna replied that not far from there was a forest äçrama called
Utkachaka. A Brahmin named Dhaumya, the younger brother of the famous
Åñi Devala, resided there. They should approach him and ask that he become
their preceptor.
Seeing the Gandharva’s friendship toward them and grateful for his advice,
Arjuna gave him the mantra by which he could call the Ägneyästra. In return
Aìgaraparna again offered him the horses. Arjuna replied, “I will not take
anything from you now. I do not desire your knowledge and we cannot take the
horses at present. O best of the Gandharvas, your friendship is sufficient.
Perhaps if a time comes when we need these steeds, we shall then take them.”
Aìgaraparna and the Päëòavas saluted one another respectfully and took their
leave. The Gandharva and his wife disappeared into the sky, leaving the
Päëòavas to continue on their journey.
After Aìgaraparna left, the Päëòavas went north along the bank of the
Ganges, toward where the Gandharva had indicated they would find
Dhaumya’s äçrama. The sun had risen, and they could now see many åñis
bathing in the river, wearing a single piece of cloth and with their matted locks
tied in knots on their heads. The brothers could hear the sages reciting sacred
hymns from the Vedas––some in praise of the sun-god Sürya, some
worshipping Çiva, the mighty destroyer, and others praying to the supremely
powerful Lord Viñëu. The Päëòavas took their own baths in the Ganges. Using
the sacred clay from the river bank, they daubed their bodies with markings
that showed them to be Vaiñëavas, devotees of Viñëu. Kunté entered the water
fully clothed and then changed her dress in a secluded place. She thought
constantly of Kåñëa, praying that He would help them through their
difficulties.
The sages told the brothers where to find Dhaumya’s hermitage. They then
approached Dhaumya and fell at his feet. Yudhiñöhira said, “O greatly learned
one, we are Päëòu’s sons, traveling with our mother Kunté. On the
Gandharvas’ advice we seek your shelter. Please become our guide and
protector. We are your servants.”
The effulgent Dhaumya smiled and bade them be seated. His disciples brought
87

them offerings of wild fruits and water. As he looked upon the five young
princes and the gentle Kunté, the åñi felt affection rise in his heart. He could
see that they worshipped Viñëu, his own deity, and this too attracted him.
Therefore he consented to become their priest. The Päëòavas were overjoyed
and felt as if their wealth and kingdom had already been regained and
Draupadé won. Dhaumya then formally accepted them as disciples by initiating
them with Vedic mantras.
The many sages in Dhaumya’s äçrama offered the princes their blessings.
Seeing such godlike boys, the åñis felt that the brothers, by their own
accomplishments, would soon become rulers of the earth. Accompanied by
Dhaumya, the Päëòavas continued on their journey to Païchäla.

Chapter 10
Draupadé’s Svayaàvara
After a few days journey the forest paths brought the Päëòavas and Dhaumya
onto the road leading to Païchäla. As they made their way along that broad
stone highway, they met a group of Brahmins. The Brahmins asked, “Who are
you and where are you going?” Yudhiñöhira replied that they were five
brahmacärés, celibate students, who had come from Ekacakra along with their
teacher. The Brahmins then exhorted the brothers to attend Draupadé’s
svayaàvara. “Accompany us. We are going straight there. The magnanimous
King Drupada will be distributing vast wealth to the Brahmins on his divine
daughter’s behalf.”
Again the Päëòavas heard of the extraordinary birth and beauty of Draupadé,
as well as details of her impending svayaàvara. All of Kämpilya would be
celebrating. There would be actors, singers, dancers and expert reciters of the
ancient Vedic histories. Powerful wrestlers would compete, and athletes would
give wonderful displays. Food and drink of the best quality would be served in
abundance. And at the end of the celebration Draupadé would then select a
husband from among the kings and princes, who had been assembling from all
parts of the world. The Brahmins told the Päëòavas that they had heard that
Drupada had set a most difficult task for the man who would win his daughter’s
88

hand. The kings who were coming to compete would also be distributing much
charity to the Brahmins in hopes of invoking auspiciousness for themselves
and obtaining victory at the svayaàvara.
The Brahmins laughed as they spoke. They pointed to the simple cloth the
Päëòavas were wearing. “It seems you boys could use some new cloth. Follow
us. Having received all that you require, you may return with us or go wherever
you will.” Inviting the five brothers to travel with them, the Brahmins
continued, “Who knows? The princess may even select one of you boys, all as
handsome as the celestials.” They pointed to Bhéma. “This godlike youth has a
body like a thunderbolt. Surely he will win much wealth if he enters the
wrestling competitions.”
Yudhiñöhira smiled. “We shall all accompany you to Kämpilya. Pray lead the
way!”
The party proceeded. They traveled by day and at night stopped in roadside
woods or on lakeshores. With their gentle speech and amiable behavior the
Päëòavas endeared themselves to whomever they met, but no one recognized
them. As they reached the outskirts of the city they came to a small village.
Walking from house to house to find accommodations, they were soon
admitted by a potter and his family. The brothers settled there and lived by
begging, just as they had done in Ekacakra. They learned from the villagers
that the svayaàvara was to take place in a few days. The king had set a stiff
test for winning Draupadé. A small target had been placed on top of a tall pole.
Beneath it was a rotating plate with one small hole in it. An arrow had to be
shot through that hole at the moment it was aligned with the target. The king
had also determined that a particular bow should be used, one which an
ordinary man could barely lift. Only an extraordinary warrior would be able to
pass the test and win the divine Draupadé’s hand.
Arjuna was enlivened. He prayed to Kåñëa that he might have the chance to
try for the princess. From Vyäsadeva’s words it seemed that she was destined to
be the wife of one of them, and by such a union the brothers would gain the
friendship and alliance of the powerful Drupada. That would probably prove
useful in the future. Arjuna eagerly awaited the svayaàvara.
***
Drupada had made lavish preparations for the ceremony. A huge stadium had
been constructed. In its massive sandstone walls were one hundred gates, each
89

one inlaid with gold and precious gems. Each gate was wide enough to admit
crowds passing through. Within the stadium were gently sloping terraces made
of coral and lapis lazuli. At the front of these terraces were hundreds of jewelencrusted thrones arranged for the many monarchs in attendance. All around
the stadium the king had built white mansions for their residence. The
buildings were many-storied and looked like the cloud-kissing peaks of Mount
Kailäsa. The windows of those mansions were covered with gold lattices and
the walls studded with diamonds and emeralds. Costly rugs were spread on
their marble floors.
When the day of the svayaàvara arrived, the kings were invited into the
stadium. They came through the northern gate and took their seats on the
golden thrones. As the monarchs entered, thousands of trumpets blared and
kettledrums resounded throughout the stadium. Many åñis, all of them shining
like the sun, entered through the eastern gate. The terraces, adorned with
countless wreaths and garlands, were filled with Païchäla’s citizens. As they
flooded into the stadium the colorfully dressed people made a sound like the
roar of the ocean. The scent of black aloe and frankincense wafted throughout
the stadium as everyone settled into their places.
The Päëòavas entered with the Brahmins and took their place in their midst,
unnoticed by anyone. They looked around the arena. At the head of all the
assembled kings sat Duryodhana and his brothers, resembling a blazing planet
surrounded by a hundred bright stars. Bhéma felt his anger rising but
Yudhiñöhira checked him with a glance. They could not risk being discovered–
–yet.
The ceremony had begun. Actors and dancers were entertaining the crowd.
Brahmins were performing fire sacrifices. Drupada was distributing charity. All
of this continued for fifteen days and, with each day, the attendance swelled.
The Päëòavas were astonished to see Drupada’s affluence. The Païchäla king
was distributing heaps of gold and gems to the Brahmins. Although dressed as
Brahmins, the Päëòavas did not go forward to collect charity, but remained in
their places, awaiting the day when Draupadé would appear.
On the sixteenth day the princess, dressed in robes of shining yellow silk and
adorned with brilliant ornaments, entered the arena. In her hands she held a
golden dish containing the nuptial garland, which she would place around the
neck of the man who successfully passed the test her father had set. Gentle
music from the flute, tabor and véëä played as Draupadé walked toward her seat
90

next to her father. Seeing her beauty, the kings and princes suddenly stood up
and brandished their weapons. They boasted to one another in loud voices: “I
shall win this princess!” “None can equal my strength and prowess!” “Draupadé
will be mine!”
That host of princes seemed like an agitated ocean as they rose and boasted of
their power. Afflicted by the god of love and staring at one another in jealousy,
they slapped their arms and held aloft their bows and swords, looking like so
many Himälayan elephants maddened by desire while in rut.
The celestial chariots of the gods––led by the guardians of the four quarters of
the universe, Yamaräja, Indra, Kuvera and Väyu––settled above the arena.
Siddhas, Cäraëas, Nägas, Rudras, Daityas, Dänavas and Guhakas assembled in
the canopy of the sky, curious to witness Drupada’s sacrifice and the selection
of Draupadé’s husband. The great åñis, headed by Närada, Aìgirä and Parvatya,
stood in the sky among the gods, appearing like suns.
When the five Päëòava brothers saw Draupadé’s dark and lovely face, they felt
their hearts pierced as if by darts. They stood up from their seats and gazed at
her exquisite form as she moved gracefully to her father’s side. On the opposite
side of the arena were the Yädavas from Mathurä. Sitting in their midst, Kåñëa
noticed the Päëòavas stand. He looked closely at the five brothers and, turning
to Balaräma, said, “In My opinion, those five men over there are the
Päëòavas.” Kåñëa indicated the brothers with a slight nod of His head. “I heard
a rumor that My cousins survived the fire in Väraëävata. This now seems true.
What is Your opinion, Räma?”
Balaräma carefully observed each of the five brothers. There was no doubt.
They were Kunté’s sons. He turned and smiled at Kåñëa, who returned His
smile, but They remained silent about Their discovery.
By now, all the princes were gazing only at Draupadé and her father. None of
them noticed the Päëòavas in their midst. Drupada waved to them and, biting
their lips in anger and envy toward one another, they sat down. As celestial
flowers fell from the sky, the sound of countless conches and kettledrums filled
the stadium. Draupadé’s brother Dåñöadyumna stood up like a golden flagstaff
raised in honor of Indra. The stadium fell silent as he announced the names of
all the kings and princes present. He first named the princes from Hastinäpura,
then those from Mathurä, then all those attending from hundreds of other
countries and provinces.
Dåñöadyumna held his sister’s arm and said in a voice that rumbled like
91

thunder, “This princess will be won today by he who can hit the mark.” The
prince pointed to the huge bow lying on a golden table. “There is the bow and
the arrows you must use. Truly do I say that whoever shoots an arrow through
the device and into the target will win Draupadé’s hand. Only one of noble
birth and great prowess will be capable of this feat.”
Dåñöadyumna sat down near his father. Drupada instructed his priest to kindle
the sacrificial fire for the svayaàvara ceremony. The sounds of thousands of
Brahmins reciting Vedic prayers filled the arena. The king looked around at
the assembled princes. He was not impressed. None of these proud monarchs
looked like a suitable match for his daughter. The king thought of Arjuna. If
only that prince were still alive. He had heard a rumor that the Päëòavas had
escaped the fire, but where were they now? This test could only be passed by
someone of Arjuna’s ability. Drupada had deliberately devised a test that only
Arjuna could pass in hopes that the Päëòava might appear. Yaja had promised
him he would obtain a daughter from his sacrifice who would become Arjuna’s
wife. How could the åñi’s words prove false? Drupada looked on anxiously as
each king and prince was called to try the test.
With their crowns and golden earrings glinting in the warm sunshine, the
kings and princes strode up one by one to the bow. It was only with
considerable effort that they were able to even lift the massive weapon from
the table. Having somehow managed that, and finally getting it upright, they
then had to bend and string it. These kings could not manage the task even in
their imaginations. The bow would bend slightly, then spring back with great
force. The princes were thrown to the ground, their bodies bruised and their
crowns and garlands scattered. As they each took their turn and were, in turn,
humiliated, they returned to their fine golden thrones, straightening their
shining ornaments as they walked. Panting for breath, their romantic ardor
dispelled, the princes sat silently shaking their heads.
Karëa’s turn came. Seeing him march toward the bow like a golden mountain
entering the arena, the Päëòavas considered that the target had been struck
and the princess won. As he approached the bow, however, Draupadé stood up
and said in a loud voice, “I shall not accept a charioteer’s son as my husband.”
Knowing that Karëa was the son of Adhiratha, leader of the sutas who
generally acted as chariot drivers, Draupadé exercised her prerogative and
denied him the opportunity to attempt the test.
Karëa blushed deeply and laughed in vexation. Glancing at the sun, he turned
92

and strode back to his seat. He ground his teeth and wrung his hands in anger,
but said nothing.
The powerful king of the Cediç, Çiçupäla, was next. With great effort he bent
the bow into a semi-circle, then lost his grip as he tried to string it. He was
thrown onto his back and lay there exhausted for several moments before
returning to his seat, defeated. Then Jaräsandha, lord of the Magadha country
and scourge even of the gods, took his turn. He bent the bow and held it in one
hand while trying to string it with the other. Again the bow resisted and he
was thrown to his knees.
Sneering at the other monarchs’ weakness, Duryodhana strode up. A silence
fell upon the assembly as the king of Hastinäpura bowed to Drupada. The king
nodded slightly and Duryodhana lifted the bow. He strung it deftly and placed
on its string one of the golden-shafted arrows. Taking careful aim he loosed the
arrow. It sped upwards and passed cleanly through the rotating hole but missed
the target by a hair’s breadth. The prince angrily threw down the bow and
returned to his seat.
Knowing that it was Draupadé’s destiny to marry Arjuna, none of the Yädava
kings, including Kåñëa and Räma, attempted the test. They simply watched
and laughed as the bow hurled each of the princes to the ground. They
breathed a sigh of relief when Duryodhana’s arrow whistled past the target.
That wicked man did not deserve a prize like Draupadé. But where was Arjuna?
Only Kåñëa and Balaräma felt no apprehension. They looked across at the
Brahmins’ compound.
Now all the kings had tried and failed. Draupadé was still holding the bright
red garland on its golden dish. Dåñöadyumna called for any last contestants.
Arjuna looked at Dhaumya who smiled and nodded. The prince stood up and
walked into the center of the arena. The assembled Brahmins roared in joy and
waved their deerskins. Maybe a simple Brahmin would succeed where even the
proud, mighty kings of the earth could not. And if any Brahmin could succeed,
it would be this one. Arjuna looked like a dark cloud as he advanced toward
the bow. He moved like a lion.
Not all the Brahmins agreed. Some of the elder Brahmins were doubtful.
Fearing that Arjuna would humiliate the Brahmin class by this rash act, they
spoke out loudly. “How can one untrained in arms and lacking strength
succeed where even the lords of this world have failed? Stop that youth! It is
merely out of childish impetuosity or vanity that he is attempting this
93

impossible task. We shall all be made to look ridiculous.”
Other Brahmins demurred. “Just look more closely at this boy. His arms and
thighs resemble the trunks of mighty elephants. His shoulders are broad and he
appears as powerful as a maddened lion. He may well succeed. Surely he would
not have gone forward if he lacked energy and power.”
Some of them described the power of Brahmins. Whether possessed of physical
strength or not, Brahmins were always powerful by virtue of their spiritual
strength. No Brahmin should ever be disregarded. Once all the earth’s warriors
had been annihilated by Paraçuräma, who was a Brahmin. The great Åñi
Agastya had drunk the entire ocean. There was nothing a Brahmin could not
achieve. This youth should not be checked. “Yes! Let him go forward. He will
easily string the bow and strike down the target.”
The elders replied, “So be it,” and again took their seats.
Arjuna reached the center of the arena and, after bowing to the king, spoke in
a voice that echoed around the stadium. “Is it permissible for a Brahmin to
attempt this test?”
Drupada looked curiously at the Brahmin, then gave his assent. “It is never
disgraceful for rulers to be subordinated by the power of Brahmins,” the king
replied. “Indeed, they are protected by that power even as Viñëu protects the
gods.”
Arjuna turned to the bow and, folding his palms, bowed low before it. Within
his mind he prayed to Kåñëa. Having walked respectfully around the bow three
times, he took it up in his right hand. In moments he had strung it and placed a
golden arrow on the string. A complete hush fell over the stadium as Arjuna
stood absolutely still with the bow drawn to a full circle. He knelt and aimed
upwards at the target. Suddenly he released the arrow and it shot up with
blinding speed. Passing cleanly through the hole it struck the target in its
center. As the target clattered to the ground with the arrow sticking from it,
the stadium erupted. The people rose to their feat and cheered, while
musicians played innumerable instruments. Drums, trumpets and conches
resounded and bards immediately composed poems glorifying Arjuna’s
achievement. The gods praised Arjuna and sent down showers of celestial
flowers. The Brahmins rose in a body, waving their garments and water pots
and leaping about in joy. But the kings and princes were seized with shame and
they uttered exclamations of grief and despair. Drupada, his eyes expanded in
happiness, gazed in wonder as the mysterious Brahmin walked toward the royal
94

dais. Who was he? Could it actually be Arjuna? The king noticed the other
monarchs becoming agitated. There was clearly going to be a fight. Drupada
turned to his chief minister and commanded that his army stand ready. He
then told Draupadé to accept the Brahmin as her husband.
The princess looked at Arjuna as he approached the dais. She was immediately
attracted by this god-like youth with the gentle demeanor. Maybe he was
Arjuna, as Yaja had promised. Even if he were not, there was certainly no
shame in marrying him. He was a Brahmin and Brahmins were always
considered superior to the ruling class, or kñatriyas. And, although he appeared
to be a Brahmin, he was especially powerful and obviously self-controlled. This
union was surely sanctified by the presence of Kåñëa, the all-powerful Lord of
the creation. Draupadé approached Kunté’s son and joyfully placed the garland
around his neck.
Seeing Draupadé actually accept the Brahmin further infuriated the kings.
Yudhiñöhira decided it was time to leave. He rose up with his brothers and
walked toward the stadium gates. Arjuna followed behind with Draupadé. The
Brahmins cheered and praised him as he walked past.
From amid the enraged kings, Duryodhana called out, “How does this Drupada
dare offend us in this way? He has passed over all the lords of the earth to
bestow his daughter upon a poor and unqualified Brahmin. Brahmins should
never be allowed to compete in a svayaàvara, which is meant only for the royal
order. It seems Drupada invited us here only to insult us.”
The kings roared in agreement. Some of them waved their weapons. Çiçupäla
then said, “The Païchäla king is so proud that he thinks none of us his equal.
He deserves to be punished at once. Let us act so that other svayaàvaras do not
end in a similar way.”
The kings stood up with their weapons at the ready. They glared at Drupada
and moved in a body toward him. Seeing the overwhelming odds, Drupada
backed away in fear.
Yudhiñöhira was observing the scene from the gate. Realizing that Drupada,
now his father-in-law, was in danger, he ordered Bhéma and Arjuna to assist
him. The brothers quickly ran up to the dais and placed themselves between
Drupada and the other kings. Arjuna still held the sacrificial bow. Bhéma tore
up a tree from the side of the arena and brandished it menacingly. The two
princes looked like Indra and Yamaräja standing against the massed force of
Daityas and Dänavas. The hundreds of kings stood back warily as they looked
95

at the two heroes facing them.
Kåñëa remained unmoved. Watching the two Päëòavas preparing to fight, He
turned to Balaräma and said quietly, “Any doubts there may have been about
the identity of these princes should now be gone. None but Bhéma could have
torn up that sal tree and who but Arjuna could have struck down the target? O
Saìkarñaëa, these are surely the Päëòavas.”
Balaräma looked at Bhéma and Arjuna as they prepared to ward off the
maddened kings. “This is certainly true,” He smiled. “It is fortunate indeed that
Our aunt and her young sons have escaped from the fire in Väraëävata.”
Many Brahmins ran forward to support the two Päëòavas. They waved their
water pots and deerskins, crying out, “Fear not! We shall fight these arrogant
monarchs.”
Arjuna smiled and gently restrained them. “Stand aside and watch,” he said.
“With my sharp arrows I shall stop them just as so many snakes are checked by
the power of mantras.”
Karëa advanced to the head of the kings. He shouted, “Although the royal
order should not attack Brahmins, it is permissible if those Brahmins stand
ready for battle.”
Karëa stopped at a distance from Arjuna and shot arrows at him. Arjuna, who
was supplied with a large number of shafts by Drupada’s soldiers, immediately
countered all of Karëa’s arrows with his own. King Çalya of Madras fought
with Bhéma and they appeared like two huge elephants colliding together.
Duryodhana and the other kings contended lightly with the other Brahmins
who still challenged them. They easily held off the ascetic sages, but did not
injure them.
Arjuna sent a number of swift arrows at Karëa. They pierced his limbs and
stunned him with their force. Karëa looked upon his opponent with surprise.
He had not expected such dexterity and martial power. Guarding himself more
carefully, he replied with hundreds of straight-flying shafts, but Arjuna again
knocked down all his arrows before they reached him. Seeing his expertise, the
other kings cheered him on. This infuriated Karëa. He released thousands of
arrows. They filled the air like a flock of golden birds. Still Arjuna countered
them, invoking celestial weapons and creating a mass of arrows that sped
toward Karëa.
The two combatants fought with astonishing skill. As they battled they called
out to one another in the language of heroes: “Behold the strength of my
96

arms!” “Guard yourself, if you can.” “See how I counter your moves!” “Stand
ready, for I shall release even more deadly weapons!”
The other kings stood by and watched open-mouthed, praising both warriors as
they displayed their skills.
Karëa soon realized he was not to gain the upper hand in the fight, so he
stopped his attack and addressed Arjuna in a loud voice. “O best of Brahmins, I
am pleased with your prowess. Are you the science of arms personified?
Perhaps you are Paraçuräma or Indra, or maybe even the infallible Lord Viñëu.
When I am angered there are none who can fight with me but these
personalities––or the son of Kunté, Arjuna.”
Arjuna smiled. “I am neither Indra nor Paraçuräma. Nor am I any god or divine
being. Know me to be a simple Brahmin who has become proficient in arms by
his guru’s grace. Having mastered both earthly and celestial weapons, I stand
here ready to vanquish you in battle.”
Karëa lowered his weapons and became pensive. This was no ordinary
Brahmin. It would be better to desist from the fight. A Brahmin’s spiritual
power was always greater than a kñatriya’s martial power. The great king
Viçvämitra, even though well-versed in every divine weapon, could not
overpower Vasiñöa Åñi, and the Brahmin Paraçuräma single-handedly defeated
all the kings of the earth. Karëa bowed to the mysterious Brahmin and turned
away from the battle.
Elsewhere, Bhéma and Çalya were still engaged in a fierce hand-to-hand
combat. Locked together, they stamped and rolled about the arena like a pair of
maddened elephants fighting for supremacy. Their roars and the sound of their
blows filled the stadium. Sometimes pushing, sometimes dragging and
sometimes throwing the other down, they fought with unflagging energy. They
struck each other with the force of thunderbolts, laughing loudly as they
fought. Suddenly Bhéma lifted Çalya high above his head and whirled him
around. He threw the king to a distance and left him lying stunned.
Remembering him to be the brother of Mädré, Bhéma did not continue his
attack upon Çalya.
The kings were amazed to see both Karëa and Çalya matched by the two
Brahmins. They looked in awe upon Bhéma and Arjuna, who stood together
ready for further assaults. “Surely these two are not Brahmins. Who could fight
with Karëa except Droëa or Arjuna? Who could throw down Çalya other than
the mighty Balaräma or Bhéma? None could face Duryodhana except the
97

unconquerable Kåñëa. Let us establish their lineage before we continue.”
The other kings agreed. It was not wise to fight with Brahmins, even if they
were offensive; but if these two proved to belong to another class, then the
fight could continue with full force.
Seeing the kings hesitating, Kåñëa came forward and spoke to them. “O
monarchs, the maiden has been fairly and wonderfully won by the Brahmin.
There is no need for further fighting. Let us not blight this sacred occasion by
unnecessary bloodshed, especially by assaulting the Brahmins.”
With gentle words and arguments Kåñëa succeeded in dissuading the kings
from further aggression. Gradually they put away their weapons and left the
arena. As they went out they talked together in amazement, wondering who
the two mighty-armed Brahmins might be.

Chapter 11
The Päëòavas Wed Draupadé
Bhéma and Arjuna, both bruised and bloody from the battle with the kings,
turned and walked toward the stadium’s southern gate. They were surrounded
by Brahmins, who praised them with great joy. With difficulty the two brothers
pushed their way through the crowd and out of the arena, appearing like the
sun and the moon emerging from behind clouds. Some way from the stadium
by the roadside the other Päëòavas and Draupadé were waiting for them.
Seeing them returning safely from the fight, they embraced the two heroes and
together proceeded to the potter’s house.
At the house Kunté, who had not accompanied her sons to the svayaàvara for
fear of discovery, was feeling great anxiety. It was past sunset and her sons had
still not returned. What could have delayed them? Perhaps the Kauravas had
recognized them and had them killed, or maybe the Räkñasas had come
together to avenge the killing of Hiòimba and Baka. Kunté remembered
Vyäsadeva’s assurances. Could the great sage have been wrong?
As Kunté sat in the still evening air lost in thoughts of affection for her
children, Arjuna suddenly entered the hut and called out, “O Mother, we have
returned bringing excellent alms. Just see the wonderful jewel we have
98

obtained today!”
Filled with relief and happiness to hear her son’s voice, Kunté called back,
“Share among yourselves whatever you have acquired.” She looked up and saw
Arjuna enter her room accompanied by Draupadé, who immediately bowed low
at her feet. The princess had discovered the identity of the brothers and was
joyful to know she had been won by Arjuna. She greeted the venerable Kuru
queen with appropriate words of respect.
When Kunté saw the white-robed princess bowing before her, she gasped in
horror. “What have I done! How can you all share this woman?” Kunté caught
the still smiling Draupadé by the hand and went out to see Yudhiñöhira. “My
words have never been false. Indeed, I cannot utter untruth. When Arjuna
said he had brought alms I had no idea he meant this princess and I thus said,
‘Share it among yourselves.’ It must therefore be so. What then should be
done?”
Kunté felt her religious principles threatened. She valued truth above all else.
Even in jest she never lied. Fearful that her virtue had suffered a diminution,
she looked anxiously at Yudhiñöhira. “Tell me, dear son, how my words may
prove true and at the same time this princess may not be touched by sin.” It
was virtually unheard of for a woman to marry more than one man. Marrying
five men was unthinkable.
Yudhiñöhira looked thoughtful. He consoled his mother and assured her that
neither she nor Draupadé would be touched by sin. He turned to Arjuna and
said, “Dear Phälguné, you have won this maiden. It is therefore proper that you
marry her with due ritual. Kindle the sacred fire and accept her hand with the
blessings of the Brahmins.”
Arjuna was surprised. “O King, do not hurl me onto the path of the wicked.
Your command is not consistent with virtue, in my view. How could I accept
this princess in your presence while you remain unmarried? Surely you should
accept her hand. Then, if you so command, Bhéma may marry her and only
then myself and the twins.”
Hearing Arjuna’s respectful words, the other Päëòavas glanced at Draupadé.
They had all expected that she would become Arjuna’s wife, but as they looked
at her, the Païchäla princess returned their glances. All the brothers felt their
hearts invaded by love. They had never seen such a maiden. It was as if she had
been personally fashioned by the Creator himself. She was as resplendent as
the Goddess Lakñmé, Viñëu’s eternal consort.
99

Yudhiñöhira could understand his brothers’ minds. He recalled Vyäsadeva’s
words. Even though he had advised Arjuna to try to win Draupadé’s hand, the
sage had seemed to intimate that Draupadé should become the wife of all of
them. Although rare, such an act need not be unrighteous if sanctioned by an
authority like Vyäsadeva, especially if it was performed in order to preserve
some other, higher religious purpose. If Draupadé became the wife of only one
of them, it would most certainly create rivalry and dissension among them.
And Kunté’s words would also become false. This seemed to be a divine
arrangement. Making up his mind, Yudhiñöhira said, “We shall all marry the
blessed Draupadé.”
Upon hearing Yudhiñöhira’s words, all the brothers became joyful. Yudhiñöhira
was equal to their father Päëòu. His authority was final, his word to them nondifferent from an order given by the Supreme Lord Himself. Draupadé must
surely become their wife. They all now glanced openly at her, and she looked
down shyly. As they pondered the import of Yudhiñöhira’s command, the
potter came to inform them that they had visitors: Kåñëa and Balaräma were at
the door.
The two Yädava heroes entered the room and saw Yudhiñöhira seated on the
floor surrounded by his brothers. With his powerful shoulders and welldeveloped arms, the handsome prince resembled Indra sitting amid the
principal gods. Kåñëa folded His palms and said, “I am Kåñëa and this is
Baladeva, My elder brother.” The Päëòavas were delighted to see their cousins.
They stood up at once and Kåñëa touched Yudhiñöhira’s feet in respect. He
embraced Bhéma and Arjuna and received the twins’ respect. Both Kåñëa and
Balaräma also touched Kunté’s feet as she shed tears of happiness upon seeing
Them.
After they had all exchanged appropriate greetings according to their status,
the Päëòavas gazed at Kåñëa. They marveled at how, although He was the
Supreme Lord of the entire creation, He had accepted the role of a human
being and was now their relative and friend. Kåñëa enquired after their
welfare. Yudhiñöhira replied, “We are all well, O Kåñëa, but tell me, how did
You manage to trace us?”
Kåñëa smiled, “Fire is always visible even when covered. Who but the Päëòavas
could have performed such feats at the svayaàvara? O conquerors of foes, by
sheer good fortune you have escaped from the fire. By the same good fortune
have Duryodhana’s sinful plans come to nothing. Be blessed. May you grow in
100

prosperity as a fire in a cave gradually grows and spreads itself around.”
Kåñëa then said He had best leave before He drew attention to the brothers
and gave away their disguise. He and Balaräma stood and left quietly. The
Päëòavas sat for some time thinking about Kåñëa. They were heartened by His
show of support and encouragement. They felt sure they would soon be
restored to their proper position in Hastinäpura.
Unknown to the brothers, Dåñöadyumna had also followed them back and was
now lying concealed near the hut. He watched in surprise as Kåñëa and
Balaräma came and went. Who were these Brahmins that the two all-powerful
Yädava heroes felt the need to visit? They must not be ordinary ascetics.
Dåñöadyumna cautiously moved closer and peered through the window. Kunté
was in the middle of instructing Draupadé how to prepare the Päëòavas’ meal.
She told the princess that after having offered the food to the Lord and giving
a portion to the Brahmins, she should divide what was left into two parts. She
should then give one-half to Bhéma and divide the rest between the other four
brothers and themselves.
Dåñöadyumna watched as his sister cheerfully did as she was instructed, giving
half of the food to the huge-bodied youth who had thrown Çalya down in the
arena, and distributing the remainder to the others. After they had all eaten
they lay down to sleep on beds of deerskins spread over soft grass, their heads
pointing toward the south. Kunté lay across the line of their heads and
Draupadé lay at their feet. Dåñöadyumna saw her smiling in great happiness as
she accepted her new, apparently humble, position. As they lay there the
brothers began to speak together. From his position at the window the prince
heard them talking about celestial weapons, chariots, elephants, bows, arrows
and swords. They discussed the battle with the kings in the stadium, laughing
as they described how Bhéma and Arjuna had routed the bellicose monarchs.
The prince had seen and heard enough. It was obvious that these men were
powerful warriors. Surely they were royalty in disguise. Dåñöadyumna quietly
left and went back to his capital to inform his father of everything he had
witnessed.
***
Back in Païchäla, King Drupada was anxious. His beloved daughter was gone
but he did not know who had taken her. He pondered on the day’s events.
Who was that man who had hit the target? Was he really a Brahmin? Maybe it
101

had been simply by luck that he had succeeded in the test. Perhaps he was a
vaiçyä or even a çüdra, casting Drupada’s noble line into disrepute. Or maybe
he was a great hero of the royal order. Then why would he have disguised
himself as a Brahmin? Perhaps he was actually Arjuna, somehow survived from
the terrible fire at Väraëävata. Surely that was too much to hope.
As the king sat absorbed in thought, his son entered his chamber. After
bowing at his father’s feet the prince described everything he had seen.
Dåñöadyumna was convinced it was the Päëòavas who had won Draupadé, and
he happily explained how he had followed them to a hut on the city’s outskirts,
how Kåñëa and Balaräma had visited, and how he had heard them speak the
language of warriors.
“The two Brahmins who fought in the hall left and joined three others. They
appear to be brothers. In their midst was a lady who shone like fire. I believe
she is their mother. They spoke together in voices as deep as black
thunderclouds. There is no doubt that these men are neither çüdras nor
vaiçyäs. They are certainly of the royal order. In my opinion they are the
Päëòavas, who are living in disguise since escaping Väraëävata.”
Drupada was extremely pleased by his son’s words. As soon as dawn broke, he
called for his priest and asked him to go to the potter’s hut to ascertain the
Brahmins’ identities. The priest left at once and, arriving at the hut, applauded
the Päëòavas for their prowess. Then he said, “O worshipable ones, the great
King Drupada desires to know your names. Please tell me your family name and
race. Are you by any chance the Päëòavas? It was ever the king’s wish that his
daughter be united with Arjuna. If this has transpired, then nothing could be
more conducive to our fame and virtue.”
Yudhiñöhira turned to his brothers and said, “Bring water and wash this
Brahmin’s feet. He is worthy of our worship. Because he is Drupada’s royal
priest, we should especially respect him.”
Bhéma immediately did as his elder brother had directed. He had the priest sit
comfortably, then offered him arghya. Yudhiñöhira then said, “O Brahmin, the
king fixed a certain price for gaining his daughter. She was not given freely.
Therefore he has nothing to say about the lineage of the man who has passed
his test. All his questions about our family and race have been answered by the
stringing of the bow and the striking down of the target.”
Yudhiñöhira smiled. He assured him that Drupada need have no regrets. His
long-cherished desire would soon be fulfilled. Draupadé was clearly endowed
102

with the auspicious marks of one who would be married to kings. The Päëòava
continued, “What man of low birth or one unaccomplished in arms could have
shot down the mark? It was done fairly and there is no one who can now undo
that act. The king should not grieve.”
As Yudhiñöhira spoke, another messenger arrived to tell them that a great feast
had been prepared in the city. He asked the Päëòavas to please come with him
to the king’s palace where the wedding ceremony could be properly performed.
Yudhiñöhira assented and the messenger showed the brothers to a couple of
golden chariots which Drupada had sent. After placing Kunté and Draupadé on
one of them, they mounted the other and all of them left for Kämpilya. The
white steeds drawing the chariots soon brought them to Drupada’s palace. As
the Päëòavas dismounted they were greeted by the king’s ministers, who led
them to the hall where the feast was waiting. Headed by Yudhiñöhira, the
brothers entered the vast chamber which was spread with costly rugs. Many
long tables lined the walls, which were studded with countless gems. On one
table the king had placed various items associated with Brahminical life––
sacrificial paraphernalia, holy books and garlands. On another were items used
by the vaiçyä class––farming implements, ropes, seeds and the like. On yet
another were weapons, armor, shields, rockets and other instruments of war,
and expensive cloths, gold ornaments and other fine things of different types.
Everyone gazed at the brothers as they strode into the hall. Seeing those
powerful men clad in black deerskins––each with the gait of a sportive lion,
broad shoulders, long and well-muscled arms resembling serpents, eyes like
furious bulls––the king and his relatives, ministers and attendants were
gladdened. Without hesitation the heroes, in order of age, fearlessly sat upon
seats of gold furnished with silk and provided with footstools. At once welldressed servants and maids fetched many kinds of delicious foods on gold and
silver plates. The brothers dined with pleasure on the rich preparations
brought before them––food worthy of kings.
When the meal was over they rose and went to the table containing the
weapons and royal items. They carefully examined all the pieces, discussing
them among themselves. To Drupada and his sons and counselors it was
obvious that the brothers belonged to the royal order.
Drupada approached Yudhiñöhira and said, “Sir, are we to know you as
Brahmins or kñatriyas of the royal order? Are you vaiçyäs? Or even çüdras?
Perhaps you are celestials who have assumed the disguise of Brahmins and are
103

roaming the earth. Please truly tell us. Truth becomes monarchs even more
than sacrifice or charity. Once we have ascertained the order to which you
belong, we can arrange an appropriate wedding ceremony.”
Yudhiñöhira looked at the king and smiled. He spoke in a voice as deep as the
rumbling of clouds. “O King, you may dispel your doubts and be cheerful.
There is no doubt that your desire has been fulfilled. We five are royalty, the
sons of the illustrious Päëòu. I am Yudhiñöhira. Your daughter was won by
Arjuna who, along with Bhéma, fought with the other kings. She is like a lotus
that has been transplanted from one clear lake to another. With Draupadé in
the ladies’ chamber is Kunté, our mother.”
Yudhiñöhira folded his palms and said that he had told the king everything that
needed to be told. Surrounded by his brothers, he added, “O King, you are our
revered elder and superior. We now take shelter of you. Tell us, what should be
done?”
Drupada was filled with delight. Tears flowed from his eyes and he was unable
to speak. He stood for some moments with all his limbs trembling. Finally he
managed with great effort to suppress his joy. He said, “O hero, I cannot
express my happiness in words. Today my birth stands fulfilled and my dreams
are realized. This is indeed an auspicious day. Tell me, how did you all escape
from the fire at Väraëävata?”
Drupada and his two sons, Dhåñöadyumna and Çikhaëòé, listened as
Yudhiñöhira narrated the story. When he had finished they censured
Duryodhana and his weak father. Drupada gave every assurance to
Yudhiñöhira, vowing that he would somehow restore him to his rightful
position as king in Hastinäpura. He gave the brothers accommodations in his
own palace and treated them with all respect.
The following day Drupada again spoke to Yudhiñöhira. “O mighty-armed one,
today is a day marked by favorable stars. Let Arjuna take my daughter’s hand
with all due rites.”
Yudhiñöhira replied, “O King, if my younger brother is to marry today, then I
shall also have to accept a bride, for that is the religious ordinance.”
Drupada nodded understandingly. “Then you must accept the hand of
Draupadé in the sacred marriage ceremony. Or give her to whichever of your
brothers as pleases you.”
Yudhiñöhira said, “The princess shall become the wife of us all. Our mother has
ordered this. It was Dhanaïjaya who won your jewel of a daughter, but the rule
104

among us is that we share equally any jewels we obtain. Therefore Draupadé
may accept each of us, one after another, according to age.”
Drupada stepped back, his eyes wide with surprise. “O mighty-armed hero, I
have heard that a man may accept many wives, but never that a woman may
accept more than one husband. You are famed for your virtue. How then can
you approve an act so contrary to tradition and indeed scriptural injunction?”
The king was surrounded by his sons and ministers and they all listened
carefully as the Päëòava prince replied. He told them that morality was subtle
and its application was dependent upon circumstances. One therefore had to
follow the authorities. His mother had ordered them all to marry the princess
and that order had found acceptance in Yudhiñöhira’s mind, which had never
entertained thought of sin in his life. The prince was certain there would be no
sin if Draupadé married all five brothers.
Drupada was still not convinced. He wanted more time to think. It was entirely
unprecedented that a woman could marry many men at the same time. He
asked Yudhiñöhira if they could discuss the matter further with Kunté,
Dhåñöadyumna and the learned Brahmins in his court. Yudhiñöhira agreed and
sat in the king’s council chamber for the discussion.
They had only been speaking a short while when the palace attendants
announced Vyäsadeva’s arrival. As the sage was shown in, everyone present
offered their respectful obeisances at his feet. Vyäsadeva greeted them in
return and offered blessings to Drupada and the Päëòavas. After they had
taken their seats, Drupada asked, “O illustrious one, is it possible for one
woman to marry many men without being defiled by sin? Please tell me truly.”
Vyäsadeva replied that such a practice was certainly opposed to both the
direction of the Vedas and tradition. Although practiced in former ages it had
long become obsolete. The sage looked at Drupada and Yudhiñöhira and asked
both of them for their opinions. Drupada revealed his doubts. He could not see
any way by which the five brothers could all become Draupadé’s husband. It
would mean that the elder brother would be approaching his junior’s wife.
According to scripture, that would be the same as approaching his daughter.
Yudhiñöhira replied that his heart, which could never turn to sin, felt no
misgivings about the proposed marriage. He cited a historical example of a
Brahmin girl named Jatila who had married seven åñis at once. There was also
the case of the famous ascetics known as the Pracetäs. They too, being
brothers, had accepted one woman as their shared wife. These examples were
105

found in the Vedas and were not considered sinful. In certain circumstances
even established rules may be broken in order to preserve a higher religious
principle.
Kunté agreed with her son and asked the sage how she could be saved from
untruth. Vyäsadeva replied, “O gentle lady, you shall certainly be saved from
sin. This is eternal virtue.”
The sage turned to Drupada and said, “I wish to speak with you in confidence,
O King.” Vyäsadeva rose and took hold of Drupada’s hand. They went into the
king’s chamber while everyone waited outside. When they were alone
Vyäsadeva explained to the king why the marriage conformed with virtue. The
ascetic told Drupada that Draupadé had been the daughter of a åñi in a previous
life. She had prayed to Çiva for a husband. In her prayer she asked the deity
five times for a powerful husband. Çiva had replied, “Since you have asked me
five times, in your next birth you shall have five husbands.” Çiva could not
possibly ordain a sinful act.
Vyäsadeva further explained that the princess was an expansion of the
Goddess Lakñmé. She had appeared from the sacrificial fire in order to become
the Päëòavas’ wife, who themselves had all been gods in their past lives. In
fact, the sage explained, all the brothers had been incarnations of Indra in
different millenniums.
Vyäsadeva bestowed upon the king the divine sight to see the Päëòavas as they
had been in previous lives. In his inner vision Drupada saw the blazing form of
Indra that each brother had possessed––their celestial bodies adorned with
golden crowns and garlands.
Struck with wonder, Drupada folded his palms and said to the sage, “O great
Åñi, there is nothing outside your knowledge or capabilities. My mind is now
satisfied. What has been ordained by the celestials must always come to pass.
We are all instruments in the hands of destiny. Let my daughter accept all five
brothers as her husbands.”
The king and the sage rejoined the others and informed them of Drupada’s
change of heart. Vyäsadeva said, “Today the moon has entered the auspicious
constellation of Puñyä. The first ceremony should be performed at once and
Yudhiñöhira can accept Draupadé’s hand.”
Drupada ordered his ministers and priests to make all the arrangements. A
sacred fire was lit in the vast inner courtyard of the king’s palace. Rows of
pennants bearing the emblems of the gods lined the sacrificial arena, which
106

was full of Brahmins chanting hymns. A beautiful altar was constructed from
coral and gold and bedecked with sparkling jewels. Fragrant garlands were
draped everywhere and the aroma of costly incenses wafted throughout the
courtyard.
The king with his relatives and friends took their places in the compound,
which lay next to a large lake of lotuses. Citizens of all classes assembled in the
courtyard to observe the ceremony––Brahmins with their heads covered by
simple cloths, wealthy merchants shielding themselves from the bright
sunshine with decorated parasols, and çüdras in their brightest clothes. All
watched as the five brothers, dressed in silk robes and adorned with shining
gold earrings, entered the compound like mighty bulls entering their pen.
Dhaumya walked at their head. His bodily luster was as brilliant as the sun. He
sat by the fire and offered libations of ghee. As the flames rose he chanted
mantras invoking the presence of Viñëu and the prinicipal deities. Then he
called Yudhiñöhira to come forward and accept Draupadé’s hand. The darkcomplexioned princess, clad in bright yellow silks and decorated with many
precious jewels, her long curling hair adorned with flowers, stood to receive
Yudhiñöhira. The bride and groom took each other’s hand and walked around
the sacred fire seven times, sealing their union.
On the days following Yudhiñöhira’s wedding, each of the brothers married the
Païchäla princess. Vyäsadeva informed the king that by the gods’
arrangement, his daughter regained her virginity each day after a marriage and
before the next marriage took place. When all five weddings had been
sanctified, Drupada sat before the sacred fire and gave the brothers charity. To
each of them he gifted one hundred golden chariots drawn by four excellent
steeds, one hundred mature elephants and one hundred maidservants adorned
with ornaments and flower garlands. He also gave them large amounts of gold,
various precious stones and many valuable robes. Like so many celestials the
brothers began passing their days in joy in Païchäla, the king’s capital. For his
part, having formed an alliance with the Päëòavas, Drupada did not fear even
the gods in heaven.
After arriving back at Mathurä, Kåñëa arranged for vast amounts of wealth to
be sent as a gift to the Päëòavas. Great heaps of unworked gold bricks and piles
of precious stones, including numbers of priceless vaidurya gems, soon arrived
at Kämpilya and were offered to the brothers. Costly carpets, robes, blankets
and skins were placed before them in piles. Kåñëa also sent them thousands of
107

maidservants––all young, beautiful and highly accomplished. Well-trained
elephants and horses, as well as hundreds of chariots, were also presented.
Out of love for Kåñëa, Yudhiñöhira graciously accepted the wealth and sent
back a message of gratitude. Secure in the knowledge of Kåñëa’s friendship and
blessings, all the brothers felt their good fortune assured in every way.

Chapter 12
Dhåtaräñöra Gives Half the Kingdom
As the kings left the svayaàvara for their respective countries, they marveled
at what they had seen. The illustrious Päëòavas were still alive! It was Arjuna
who had shot down the target and won the princess, and it was Bhéma who had
faced the kings with complete fearlessness and thrown down the mighty Çalya.
The kings censured Bhéñma and Dhåtaräñöra for having allowed the Päëòavas
to be persecuted and deprived of their rightful kingdom.
Duryodhana was depressed at this turn of events. As he made his way back to
Hastinäpura, he pondered on the situation. How had his cousins escaped the
fire? Now they were more powerful than ever. Allied with Drupada and Kåñëa,
they were a force to be reckoned with. And their own prowess was obviously
exceptional. Just two brothers had successfully taken Draupadé from the midst
of hundreds of kings. Even the invincible Karëa had been more than matched.
Hot tears ran down Duryodhana’s cheeks. By his side Dushashana said
consolingly, “Do not grieve, brother. It was only because the Päëòavas
disguised themselves that they managed to win Draupadé. They took us all by
surprise. Clearly destiny is supreme and human effort is useless. Despite our
exertions, the Päëòavas are alive and flourishing .”
Duryodhana frowned. “This is all the fault of the useless Purochana. He let us
down badly. At least he perished in the fire.”
The Kauravas entered their capital sorrowful and ashamed. They were also
anxious. Drupada was a powerful enemy. As Duryodhana entered his palace he
was met by Vidura. Hearing the news from Païchäla, Vidura’s face lit up with
delight. Despite Duryodhana’s machinations, the Päëòavas were thriving!
Surely the Lord was protecting those virtuous princes.
108

Vidura went at once to Dhåtaräñöra and said, “By good fortune the Kurus have
been successful and are prospering.”
The blind king replied joyfully, “What luck! What luck!” Not knowing that
Vidura was referring to the Päëòavas, he thought that perhaps Duryodhana
had won Draupadé. He immediately ordered ornaments to be made for
Draupadé and asked that she and Duryodhana be brought into the palace in
great pomp. Then Vidura informed him of the facts: Draupadé had chosen the
Päëòavas for her lords, and now the five heroes were strongly allied with
Drupada and his many relatives and friends. Dhåtaräñöra sat forward in
surprise. “This is wonderful news. Those boys are dearer to me than they were
to Päëòu. My affection for them is now greater than it ever was. Their success
and good fortune is mine also.”
Vidura smiled. “O King, may your present feelings remain for one hundred
summers.” He then left to give the good news to Bhéñma.
The king was left alone with Duryodhana and Karëa. Both had remained silent
as Vidura had spoken, but as soon as he left they jumped to their feet, loudly
criticizing him.
Clasping his sword in its ornate scabbard by his side, Duryodhana said, “O best
of men, how are you considering your good fortune to be our enemies’ success?
That is foolish. We need to weaken the Päëòavas and deprive them of their
fortune, not rejoice in it. Otherwise they will surely swallow us all with our
kinsmen, armies, friends and wealth.” Karëa growled in agreement and both he
and Duryodhana stood in front of the king, waiting for his reply.
Dhåtaräñöra was silent for some time. Finally, wringing his hands he said, “I
desire exactly as you desire. However, I did not want to reveal my feelings to
Vidura. He should not even be able to know what I am thinking by my
demeanor. Therefore I praised the Päëòavas in his presence.”
The king asked Duryodhana how he and Karëa planned to handle the
situation. The prince replied that they should employ every diplomatic and
devious means to bring about the Päëòavas’ downfall. He suggested that spies
be employed to create disunity between the five brothers, or that Drupada and
his ministers be swayed from supporting the Päëòavas by tempting them with
wealth. Perhaps Draupadé could be turned against them if beautiful women
were used to seduce the brothers. Or maybe Bhéma could be secretly killed; he
was the mainstay of the Päëòavas’ power and without him they could easily be
overpowered.
109

Duryodhana concluded, “O Father, use whatever means you deem best.
Somehow we must bring the Päëòavas under our control without delay. Their
strength increases with every passing day.”
The Kaurava prince turned to Karëa and asked him for his opinion. Karëa
raised a clenched fist. His voice boomed out in reply. “O Duryodhana, in my
view your suggestions are not well considered. I do not think that any intrigues
will succeed against the Päëòavas. You have already tried and failed in this way
on various occasions. It will surely fail again.”
Karëa pointed out that the Päëòavas had formerly been living near them in
Hastinäpura. They had been mere children, without allies or friends, and still
Duryodhana’s scheming had not been successful. Now the brothers were grown
up, had secured powerful allies, and most importantly, were on their guard
against the Kauravas. They would detect and thwart any plan Duryodhana set
in motion. Nor would the Kauravas be able to break Draupadé’s affection for
her husbands. She chose them when they appeared as poor Brahmins. How
would she reject them now that they were prosperous? Nor would the virtuous
Drupada abandon them for the sake of wealth––even if the Kauravas offered
him their entire kingdom.
Karëa’s eyes flashed as he spoke. His natural golden armor gleamed in the
shafts of sunlight that shone through the palace windows. He turned to the
king and continued, “O sire, here is what I think we should do. Before the
brothers are fully established let us strike them down on the battlefield. We
must challenge them before Drupada has time to assemble his allies to fight
alongside them, and before Kåñëa and Balaräma can bring the mighty Yädava
hosts from Mathurä.”
Karëa went on to praise strength and prowess as the cardinal virtues in
kñatriyas. He disliked Duryodhana and Çakuni’s treacherous methods and
would rather settle the issue in an honest trial of arms. That was the only noble
way to tackle the Päëòavas. The other three means of diplomacy––
conciliation, bribery or dissension––would all prove useless. The Kurus should
immediately gather an army and march on Drupada’s capital, crushing both
him and the Päëòavas at the same time. Then the world would be theirs to
command, freed of thorns.
Dhåtaräñöra praised Karëa for his courageous speech. Turning his blind eyes
toward the king of Aìga, he said, “Such words, full of heroism and power,
surely befit you, O heroic one, but let us consult Bhéñma, Droëa and Vidura
110

before taking any action. These men will always counsel what is in our best
interests.”
Dhåtaräñöra summoned his counselors. One by one Bhéñma, Droëa, Kåpa and
Vidura arrived and sat upon the golden seats around the king’s throne. When
they were all settled in their places, the king told them the views of both
Duryodhana and Karëa and asked for their opinions. Bhéñma spoke first. “O
Dhåtaräñöra, I can never consent to a quarrel with the Päëòavas. Päëòu’s sons
and your sons are equally dear to me. They deserve my protection equally. The
Päëòavas should be given half the kingdom. Of this there is no doubt. As much
as you feel this kingdom to be your property, so too do the Päëòavas feel it to
be theirs. If it is not their birthright, then how can it ever be yours? Indeed,
their claim comes before yours. Therefore conclude a treaty and hand over half
of this kingdom to them. Do this for your own good.”
Bhéñma then explained what would happen if they declined to make peace with
the Päëòavas. The Kauravas would be covered with dishonor. All virtuous men
would censure them. Having lost their reputation, their existence would
become useless. Bhéñma looked around the council chamber as he spoke. “It is
fortunate for us that Kunté’s sons still live. It is fortunate that Kunté herself
still lives. And it is fortunate that the sinful Purochana met his end. From the
day I heard that Kunté and her sons had perished in the fire, I could not face
any living creature.”
Bhéñma asked Dhåtaräñöra if he knew how the citizens felt. They had blamed
the Päëòavas’ death on the king. That the brothers had survived would repair
his reputation. Dhåtaräñöra should now take advantage of that good fortune
and make amends with the Päëòavas by awarding them their kingdom. They
were virtuous, united, and ever protected by the Supreme Lord. Even Indra
with all the gods could not deprive them of their rights. “If you desire justice,
the welfare of all, and my pleasure, then give half the kingdom to these boys.”
Bhéñma sat down, looking across at Duryodhana who breathed heavily and
ground his teeth. The prince stared at the floor as Droëa stood up to speak. “O
sire, it is said that counselors should always speak what is right, true and
conducive to the king’s welfare and fame. My opinion then is the same as
Bhéñma’s. Return the kingdom to the Päëòavas. Send a messenger skilled in
diplomacy to Drupada, along with many gifts, and tell him how the alliance of
his house with the house of Kuru has enhanced your power and dignity. O
King, this will undoubtedly be in your best interests.”
111

Droëa advised that Drupada be told how happy both Dhåtaräñöra and his son
have become by all that has happened. The Päëòavas should be brought back
in state to Hastinäpura. They should then be installed in their paternal
kingdom. This was the people’s desire. The Päëòavas are no less Dhåtaräñöra’s
sons than his own offspring. He should treat them equally.
When Droëa finished speaking Karëa sprang from his seat. He could take no
more. Breathing heavily, his brow furrowed, he thundered, “How surprising
that these two so-called ministers should tender such advice! Although you
have supported them, O King, they do not look to your good. While concealing
the wickedness in their hearts they speak words purporting to be in your
interests.”
Karëa fumed. Bhéñma and Droëa’s advice was useless. A man’s happiness and
distress depend upon destiny alone. Another person’s acts could in no way
affect anyone. Everything was fixed by fate. If in the course of destiny
Dhåtaräñöra had acquired the throne, then who could oppose that? Why should
they fear the Päëòavas? Dhåtaräñöra had become king by fate’s arrangement
and if fate decreed it, then he would remain in that position, no matter what
anyone said or did.
Karëa looked angrily at both Bhéñma and Droëa as he concluded his speech.
“These two have spoken out of fear of, or favoritism toward, the Päëòavas. O
King, judge for yourself the motives of your ministers, then do what you feel is
right.”
Dhåtaräñöra remained silent, but Droëa again spoke out. “Karëa, you have
spoken only out of envy of the Päëòavas. Due to your attachment for
Duryodhana you desire only to injure the Päëòavas. You should know that
what I have said is certainly for the benefit of this house. If we act otherwise,
then in my opinion the Kurus will be exterminated.”
Vidura had been observing the situation closely. Now it was his turn to speak.
He could see by Dhåtaräñöra’s demeanor and silence that he was uncertain. The
intelligent minister stood and addressed the king. “O sire, after careful
consideration I cannot think of anyone who are better friends to you than
Bhéñma and Droëa. They have spoken what is for your certain good, but you do
not accept their advice. The foolish Karëa may disagree with them, but their
words are meant only for your welfare. It has never been seen that they gave
you bad advice at any time. They are experienced, wise and learned in
scripture. Neither of them are in any way less than Räma, the great son of
112

Daçaratha. They regard your sons and the Päëòavas with equal eyes. Why then
do you disregard their counsel?”
Vidura then gave his own views of the situation. Dhåtaräñöra’s partiality
toward his own sons would lead to his downfall. The Päëòavas were powerful
and they were fixed in virtue. They could not be overcome by force. Indeed,
they were capable of withstanding even the gods in battle. Besides the mighty
Drupada, they had Kåñëa and Balaräma as allies. There was no doubt that
wherever there was Kåñëa there would be victory.
Standing before Dhåtaräñöra, Vidura spoke firmly. “Wash away, O King, the
stain of ill repute brought about by the incident at Väraëävata. Please the
citizens of this state. Do what is just and proper and give to the Päëòavas what
is rightfully theirs. If you listen to the sinful advice of Duryodhana, Çakuni and
Karëa, your kingdom and fortune will surely be annihilated.”
Dhåtaräñöra remained silent for some minutes. As much as he desired the
advancement of his own sons over that of the Päëòavas, he could not deny the
truth of Vidura’s words. Placing his hand upon his sceptre he said, “The
learned Bhéñma, the Åñi Droëa and your illustrious self, O Vidura, have all
spoken the truth about what is good for me. The Päëòavas are certainly my
sons and are entitled to this kingdom. Go, O Vidura, and bring them here
along with their mother. Bring too the celestial beauty, Draupadé. By good
fortune the Päëòavas live. By good fortune have they obtained Drupada’s
daughter as their wife. By good fortune our strength has now increased, and by
good fortune the wicked Purochana is dead.”
Dhåtaräñöra dismissed the assembly. Duryodhana and Karëa stormed out,
closely followed by Dushashana and the other Kaurava princes. Vidura left and
made preparations to go immediately to Kämpilya, while the blind king was led
back to his chambers by his servants.
***
Early the next morning Vidura departed for the Païchäla kingdom. He took
with him numerous jewels and various kinds of wealth for Drupada, the
Päëòavas and Draupadé. A large contingent from Dhåtaräñöra’s army
accompanied him as he made his way along the smooth forest roads. Vidura
had heard that Kåñëa had gone to Kämpilya to visit the Päëòavas, and he felt
excited at the prospect of seeing that all-powerful personality, as well as his
beloved nephews.
113

When he arrived at Kämpilya, Drupada received him with honor and the
Päëòavas were overjoyed to see him. They greeted him with tears in their eyes
and touched his feet. The old minister embraced each of the brothers warmly.
Kåñëa then came forward and bowed before Vidura, who embraced Him,
feeling a surge of ecstatic love. He gazed at Kåñëa for some moments and the
Yädava smiled affectionately at him. Vidura then offered Draupadé brilliant
golden ornaments studded with diamonds and rubies, and Drupada a heap of
shining gems.
When they were all seated in Drupada’s council chamber, Vidura said, “O
King, along with your sons and ministers please hear the message I bring from
Dhåtaräñöra. He and his sons and ministers have repeatedly asked after your
welfare. Your beloved friend Droëa has mentally embraced you and sent his
warmest greetings. All of the Kuru elders are overjoyed at our new alliance.
They feel as if they have acquired a new kingdom. Knowing all this, O sire,
please permit the Päëòavas to go to Hastinäpura. The Kurus long to see them
again.”
Vidura described how much the people in Hastinäpura were anxious to see the
brothers return with their new bride. He hoped the Päëòavas themselves were
desiring to again see their own home. Would Drupada allow them to enter
their own city in state?
Drupada smiled. “O wise Vidura, it is surely proper for these boys to return to
their ancestral kingdom, but it is not proper for me to tell them to leave. Let
them decide for themselves. Let us also consult Kåñëa, for He is always
interested in what is best for the Päëòavas.”
Yudhiñöhira stepped forward and said that he and his brothers were now
dependent upon Drupada. They would do whatever the king commanded.
Kåñëa said, “In my view the Päëòavas should go to Hastinäpura, but we should
all abide by Drupada’s opinion, for the king is learned in all aspects of virtue.”
Drupada agreed with Kåñëa. “These princes are now as dear to me as they are
to Väsudeva. No one is more their well-wisher than Kåñëa and He will only
counsel what is for their own good. Let them depart for Hastinäpura.”
Soon they were ready to leave. The Päëòavas made their fond farewells to
Drupada and his sons. The old king and his wife shed tears as their daughter
mounted the chariot with Kunté. They stood with the other Kuru elders
outside the palace as the Päëòavas proceeded slowly down the royal highway
toward the city gate. Kåñëa went with them on His own splendid golden
114

chariot, and with great pleasure they all journeyed together to Hastinäpura.
They entered the city like a line of celestials entering Amarävaté, Indra’s
splendid city.
The citizens thronged the streets. Everyone longed to see the Päëòavas again.
They crowded around the brothers as the procession moved slowly along the
main road toward Dhåtaräñöra’s palace. The Päëòavas could hear people’s
exclamations. “The best of men, Yudhiñöhira, has returned at last! That exalted
soul knows the precepts of virtue. He regards us as if we were his nearest
relatives. Today it seems that Päëòu himself, beloved of the people, has come
back from the forest. If we have ever given charity, if we have ever performed
sacrifice, if we have any ascetic merits––then let the Päëòavas live here for
one hundred years.”
The brothers smiled and raised their hands in blessings. Their eyes streamed
with tears as they again saw their city and its people. Soon they saw
Dhåtaräñöra and Bhéñma, who had come out on the road to meet them. The
king and his minister embraced the Päëòavas, who in turn greeted their elders
with due reverence, touching their feet and bowing before them with folded
hands. Yudhiñöhira then enquired after the welfare of the kingdom and its
people and was told that everything was flourishing . Gradually the party
moved into Dhåtaräñöra’s palace. Having been worshipped by the Kuru elders,
Kåñëa followed behind them.
Duryodhana’s wife, Dushala, met Draupadé and Kunté and accompanied them
into Gändhäré’s quarters. As Gändhäré embraced Draupadé she thought of the
prophetic voice that had spoken when Draupadé first stepped out of the fire. It
was said that she would be the death of the world’s kñatriyas. The blindfolded
queen had developed a powerful inner vision due to her austerities. She could
understand that Draupadé was destined to cause her sons’ destruction. Still,
Gändhäré felt no malice toward Draupadé. She had resigned herself to the
eventuality of fate. Duryodhana was wicked and selfish. His brothers followed
him blindly. Surely they shall reap their rightful reward. All-powerful
Providence controlled everything. Men were simply her instruments, driven by
desire and hate. The queen blessed Draupadé and then warmly greeted her old
friend Kunté.
In Dhåtaräñöra’s council chamber the king spoke before the Päëòavas in a
trembling voice. “It is with joy that I sit here today with Päëòu’s sons. The gods
have surely been merciful to the Kurus in that these five heroic brothers still
115

live. So that no futher disputes may arise between us, I want to give the
Päëòavas half the kingdom. O Yudhiñöhira my child, go to Khäëòavaprastha;
this shall be your half of the kingdom. Live there peacefully.”
Bhéñma and Vidura looked at one another but said nothing. Kåñëa, who was
sitting upon a splendid seat of gold and jewels, and who appeared like the sun
illuminating the assembly, smiled when He heard the king’s proposal. He knew
the region the king was so generously offering to the Päëòavas.
Khäëòavaprastha was a vast area, and it was certainly half the kingdom, but it
was nothing but jungle and desert. There were no cities, not even any
settlements. Although it had once been the site of the Kurus’ capital, a åñi had
long ago cursed that land when he felt offended by a Kuru king. It was now a
wasteland.
Yudhiñöhira looked respectfully at Dhåtaräñöra. He felt no anger or resentment
at the unfairness of the settlement. His elders represented the Supreme; their
orders should be followed without question. The prince looked across at Kåñëa,
who was still smiling. Yudhiñöhira was sure with His assistance they would be
able to make the Khäëòava region habitable land. With palms folded the
Päëòava acknowledged Dhåtaräñöra’s gift. “It shall be so, my lord.”
The next day the king arranged for Yudhiñöhira’s coronation. With all pomp
and ceremony the prince became king of Khäëòavaprastha, with Vyäsadeva
appearing in time to perform the rituals.
After the coronation the Päëòavas arranged to depart. Having worshipped the
gods and taken their leave from the Kuru elders, they left with Kåñëa at the
head of their procession. The sage Vyäsadeva also accompanied them as they
journeyed to the northern region of Khäëòava. With his assistance the
brothers selected an auspicious tract of land upon which to found a city. He
performed the appropriate Vedic rites to invoke the gods’ presence. Then
Kåñëa sat with the åñi and summoned Indra. The deity appeared, blazing like
fire. He bowed before Kåñëa and asked, “What shall I do for You at this time,
my lord?” Kåñëa asked him to arrange for a city to be constructed for the
Päëòavas. He told Indra to sprinkle his heavenly nectar across the land so that
it would again become rich and fertile. Saying, “So be it,” Indra called for
Viçvakarmä, the architect of the gods. After being instructed by Indra he
began work on the city.
All around the site granite walls rose to the skies. Viçvakarmä constructed
white palaces and mansions, whose windows looked like the divine eagle
116

Garuòa’s outstretched wings. The city was protected by massive dark gates that
resembled clouds. No weapon could assail them. Deadly darts and other missiles
were placed along the tops of the defensive ramparts. The turrets were filled
with powerful men, all highly trained in warfare and with all weapons at their
disposal. The city was then surrounded by delightful woods full of blossoming
and fragrant trees. Everywhere were lakes crowded with swans and lotus
flowers. The city streets were wide and well-designed, with pleasant groves and
gardens between them. Pleasure houses stood in the vast public concourses and
there were countless temples dedicated to Viñëu and the heavenly deities. The
Päëòavas’ own palace appeared like the heavenly Mount Meru. Full of every
opulence, it stood in the center of the city surrounded by garrisons of warriors.
Soon Brahmins began to be attracted to the city, which had become known as
Indraprastha. They opened institutions wherein they taught all the Vedic
sciences. Vaishyas also began to arrive, hoping to earn money by selling their
goods. Gradually craftsmen and artisans arrived and within a short time the
city was populated with pious citizens. It resembled Amarävaté in the heavens.
Being ruled with justice and compassion by Yudhiñöhira and his brothers,
Indraprastha’s people had everything they desired. They came to regard the
Päëòavas as affectionate fathers.
Out of friendship for the Päëòavas, Kåñëa remained in the city for some days.
Arjuna and Kåñëa were especially close and they spent much time together.
Draupadé would also take every opportunity to serve Kåñëa, and she became
very dear to Him.
***
A few days after Kåñëa’s departure the celestial seer Närada came to
Indraprastha. Seeing the well-known åñi, dressed in a black deerskin and with
his golden hair knotted on his head, Yudhiñöhira got off his throne and offered
his obeisances. He then presented Närada with a fine golden seat encrusted
with jewels and personally offered him the sacred arghya. King Yudhiñöhira
washed the åñi’s feet and welcomed him with gentle words. At Yudhiñöhira’s
command, Draupadé came before the sage and stood with folded palms. Närada
offered the beautiful queen blessings and then dismissed her.
When Draupadé had returned to her quarters, Närada said, “This illustrious
princess is the wedded wife of all of you. You must establish a rule so that no
dissension may arise between you over her. Listen as I tell you the ancient
117

history of two celebrated Asuras named Sunda and Upasunda.”
The two Asuras belonged to the powerful race of Dänavas, the celestial
demons. They were both sons of Nikumbha, a deadly enemy of the gods. The
brothers were like one person divided into two. They lived together, ate
together and moved about together. They always entertained the same purpose
and were always equal to one another in both happiness and distress. By virtue
of their long practice of rigid austerities, Sunda and Upasunda became
extremely powerful. Having received a boon from Brahmä that they could only
die at each other’s hands, they felt free to terrorize the universe. The gods
could not check them. Finally, Brahmä devised a way to destroy them. He
created a woman of indescribable beauty, whom he named Tilottamä. On
Brahmä’s order this Apsarä went before the two brothers one day when they
were intoxicated. Seeing her faultless form moving gracefully before them,
both brothers immediately desired her. They began to argue. “This woman
shall be my wife and your sister!” “No, brother, I saw her first. She is mine!”
The argument became heated and soon they fell upon one another with their
fierce weapons. At last they simultaneously smashed one another with their
huge clubs and both fell to the ground dead.
Närada concluded, “Thus those two Asuras, although ever united and inspired
with the same desires, killed one another for the sake of a woman. You should
make an agreement so that no such quarrel may arise among yourselves.”
The Päëòavas consulted one another in the åñi’s presence. Finally they agreed
that they would each spend a certain amount of time with Draupadé. If any of
them saw another when he was alone with her, there would be a severe
consequence; the offender would have to go to the forest for one year and have
no contact with Draupadé during that time.
After the Päëòavas had made this rule, Närada took his leave, disappearing
before their eyes. Carefully keeping their agreement, the brothers continued to
live peacefully at Indraprastha.

Chapter 13
Arjuna’s Pilgrimage

118

It was more than a year since Närada Åñi’s visit. The Päëòavas’ power and
influence had increased and they had brought many other kings under their
sway. They ruled with one aim: to keep the people on a path of piety and truth.
By their own example they showed how happiness follows a life of virtue. In
everything they did they accepted the guidance of spiritually advanced
Brahmins. Indraprastha flourished and became more than the equal of
Hastinäpura in the world’s eyes. Due to his unswerving adherence to virtue,
Yudhiñöhira became known as Dharmaräja, the king of religion.
Draupadé pleased her five husbands with her feminine graces and expert
attentions. According to their agreement, each of the brothers was allotted
time in which to be alone with her. One day it so happened that while
Draupadé was alone with Yudhiñöhira, a Brahmin came to the Päëòavas’ palace.
Standing by the gate, he cried out, “O King, a Brahmin’s wealth is being robbed
by wicked and despicable men. Alas, how can it be that in the kingdom of the
virtuous Päëòavas the Brahmins are not protected? A king who takes his taxes
but fails to protect the people is considered the most sinful of men. O heroes,
take me by the hand and deliver me from this burning anguish.”
In anger and grief the Brahmin repeatedly cried out. Arjuna heard his cries
and called down, “Do not fear.” He went quickly to fetch his weapons in order
to punish the thieves, but discovered that Yudhiñöhira was alone with Draupadé
in the room which held the weapons chest. Arjuna hesitated. How could he
intrude upon his elder brother, especially as they had made their agreement?
But here was an afflicted Brahmin. If he did not protect him, then
Yudhiñöhira’s fame would perish and he would be tainted by sin. Arjuna could
not stand by and watch his brother be accused of irreligion. He had to get the
weapons, even though it meant he would be exiled to the forest. He felt that
even if he died in the forest it would be preferable to being covered by sin.
Arjuna resolved to enter the chamber and gather his weapons. He knocked on
the door and walked in. Looking straight ahead of him, he strode quickly
toward the weapons. Yudhiñöhira smiled to see his younger brother. He knew
Arjuna must have an important reason for entering. Arjuna then explained
the situation, took his bow and rushed out of the palace. Taking the Brahmin
and mounting his chariot, he pursued the robbers. When he saw them in the
distance, Arjuna released infallible arrows, striking down the thieves as they
made off with the Brahmin’s cows. Having dealt swift justice to the robbers,
Arjuna restored the property to the grateful Brahmin and returned to the city.
119

Yudhiñöhira greeted his brother warmly as he entered the palace. Along with
his other brothers he applauded Arjuna for saving the Brahmin. Arjuna bowed
before Yudhiñöhira and said, “O lord, please give me permission to observe the
vow as we have agreed. I shall leave for the forest at once.”
Yudhiñöhira’s heart was pierced by grief when he heard Arjuna’s statement. He
immediately replied, “Why should you go? O sinless one, if I am your authority,
then heed my words now. I was not in the least disturbed by your entering the
room. There is no need for you to leave for the forest.”
Yudhiñöhira looked tearfully at his handsome, curly-haired brother. How could
he face separation from this virtuous and gentle soul? He explained to Arjuna
that the scripture sanctioned a younger brother entering a room where his
elder brother sat with his wife. It was only when the elder brother intruded
upon the younger that it was condemned. Arjuna had entered the room only in
pursuance of duty and in service to Yudhiñöhira.
But Arjuna was adamant. “My lord, I have heard from you that virtue must be
practiced without hesitation or quibble. I shall not waver from truth. Truth is
my weapon and virtue my strength. Grant me permission to leave and I shall
proceed to the forest today.”
Despite the other Päëòavas’ repeated pleas, Arjuna could not be swayed.
Finally Yudhiñöhira relented and gave his permission. Although it would be
painful to think of his younger brother in exile for so long, it must somehow be
the arrangement of Providence. Surely the Lord had some inscrutable purpose
which would ultimately prove to their benefit. He watched sadly as Arjuna left
the city accompanied by Brahmins chanting sacred hymns and by servants
carrying wealth for him to distribute as charity while he traveled.
The young prince went on foot toward the north. He had decided to first
follow the Ganges’ course toward the Himälayas, then proceed eastward to the
coast. Following the coastline in a great circle, he would finally return to
Indraprastha.
Arjuna traveled at a leisurely pace. He saw charming woodlands, lakes and
gardens. There were countless hermitages along the banks of the Ganges where
sages lived, and each evening Arjuna would stop and recite prayers in their
company. He would also listen as the sages narrated tales from the ancient
scriptures about the pastimes of the Supreme Lord in His many incarnations.
Arjuna often thought of his cousin and dear friend Kåñëa as he walked. He
hoped to visit Him toward the end of his exile. The Päëòava listened as the
120

sages described how Kåñëa was the unborn original Personality of Godhead,
appearing on earth to destroy demonic men and to establish the eternal
religion, pure love of God.
As he traveled Arjuna also performed fire sacrifices to please Viñëu and the
gods. One evening, just as the Brahmins were kindling the sacred fire, Arjuna
entered the Ganges in order to bathe. He was just about to then leave the river
when he suddenly felt himself being drawn underwater by an unseen force.
Despite his efforts to free himself, he was dragged deeply into the river. He
then found himself mystically transported to a celestial palace. Arjuna looked
around and saw a sacred fire burning in the room he had entered. The prince
immediately sat before the fire and offered libations of ghee into the flames,
fearlessly reciting the mantras.
Just as Arjuna was completing his evening rituals in that strange place, a
beautiful girl entered the room. She glanced coyly at Arjuna and smiled. He
recognized her at once to be a maiden belonging to the celestial Näga race.
Arjuna understood at once what had happened. The Nägas have the power to
transfer humans to their own heavenly dimension of existence. Obviously this
girl had become attracted to him and had drawn him down to her abode. He
smiled back and said, “O beautiful maiden, you have been bold indeed. Who
are you and where is this divine region?”
The girl replied that she was the daughter of a Näga king named Kauravya. Her
name was Ulüpé. “When you entered the river for your bath I was moving
through the waters in my ethereal form. I was struck by Cupid’s arrow as soon
as I saw your godlike form. O descendent of Kuru, I am yet unmarried.
Therefore accept me as your wife, give yourself up to me and gratify me today.”
Arjuna said that he was bound by a vow of celibacy for one year. He could not
therefore accept her as his wife. Still, as she was a Näga, he knew she must
have already known this by her celestial intelligence. She would not have
asked him to marry her if her request did not somehow conform to the codes of
virtue. Indeed, the scriptures enjoined that a kñatriya should never refuse a
maiden who supplicated herself to him.
Arjuna asked her how he could satisfy her desire while at the same time
maintain his truthfulness. Ulüpé replied, “I know of your vow, O hero. You and
your brothers made a rule in regard to Draupadé. This is well known to the
gods. But that rule pertained only to your wife. It is her with whom you must
not consort for the next year. There will be no sin in accepting another
121

woman.”
Filled with desire for the powerful Päëòava hero, Ulüpé beseeched him to
accept her. She explained that such an act would be his highest duty under the
present circumstances. The Näga princess knew that Arjuna would act only
when impelled by virtuous motives. She told him that if he did not take her as
his wife, she would destroy herself. Thus he would be saving her life by
accepting her. That was certainly a greater virtue than observing celibacy.
Even if his piety suffered a slight loss by his going with her, he would gain
greater merits by having saved the life of a helpless woman who had
approached him for shelter.
Arjuna thought carefully. He decided that the Näga maiden was speaking the
truth and that he would not be acting wrongly to accept her as his wife. He
smiled and nodded in assent. Ulüpé quickly fetched two celestial garlands
which she and Arjuna duly exchanged to signify their acceptance of one
another. Having sealed their union according to scriptural injunctions, Arjuna
then spent the night with her in Kauravya’s palace. Ulüpé waited upon him
and offered him every kind of celestial food and drink. They then lay together
on a golden bed in the heavenly mansion and conceived a child.
In the morning Arjuna rose just before sunrise. Ulüpé brought him back
through the Ganges to the place where he had bathed the night before. Before
leaving him, Ulüpé blessed Arjuna, “You shall be invincible in water. Every
aquatic creature will be vanquished by you in a fight.”
After telling Arjuna that she would return to him later when he was back in
his own kingdom, Ulüpé vanished into the Ganges waters, leaving Arjuna to be
greeted by his followers. The ascetic Brahmins had seen by their own divine
sight how the prince had been taken to the region of the Nägas. They met him
as he returned and offered him their blessings. Arjuna related to them
everything that had happened.
The party continued on to the Himälayas and soon arrived at the Bhågu
mountain where the famous Vasiñöa Åñi had once had his hermitage. Many
Brahmins lived on that hill and Arjuna distributed much charity to them.
After bathing in a sacred lake on the Bhågu mountain he walked on, visiting
numerous other holy sites. Arjuna went toward the east, gradually descending
from the Himälayan range. He reached the forest of Naimisharanya, said by
the sages to be the very hub of the universe. From there he crossed over the
rivers Nanda, Upananda and the famous Kauçika, where the great Åñi
122

Viçvämitra had performed asceticism for thousands of years in ancient days.
Desiring to increase his piety, Arjuna traveled from one pilgrimage site to
another along with his retinue. He performed many sacrificial ceremonies and
gave away much wealth. When he reached the border of the kingdom of
Kalinga on the eastern coast, he bade farewell to most of his followers and
entered the kingdom with only a few attendants. Arjuna journeyed through
forests, woodlands and numerous towns and villages. He passed the great
Mount Mahendra and arrived finally in Maëipur, where he visited King
Chitravahana in his city of Manalur. The king had an attractive daughter
named Citräìgadä. Arjuna saw her one day in the palace gardens and was
struck with desire. He approached the king and asked for his daughter’s hand
in marriage.
Chitravahana replied that he would be delighted to see his daughter wed an
illustrious heir of the Kuru race. Arjuna was famous throughout the world as a
hero without equal. But the king had one condition. Years ago his ancestors
had prayed to Çiva for a child. The deity had granted their request, saying,
“You shall have a child, and from now on all of your descendents will have a
child––but one child only––to continue your race.”
Chitravahana had only a daughter. If Arjuna begot a son with his daughter, he
must leave the boy to become the next king of Maëipur. Arjuna happily
accepted the condition and was married to the princess with all due ceremony.
He remained in the city for three months. When he saw that Citräìgadä had
conceived, he took his leave from her and the king, setting out again on his
travels. Before leaving he promised Citräìgadä that he would return and bring
her to his home in Indraprastha.
Arjuna then made his way south along the coast. When he reached the
southern coast he found a large community of åñis. He asked them to point out
the local pilgrimage sites, and the åñis informed him that there were five sacred
lakes in that region, which could not be approached because they were infested
with crocodiles. These lakes could confer great merits upon anyone who bathed
in them, but as soon as a man entered the water he would be carried away by
one of the powerful reptiles.
Arjuna saw an opportunity to serve the ascetics. He remembered his boon from
Ulüpé. Going to the lake named Agastya––after the famous åñi who had once
lived there––he dived into the water. Arjuna’s leg was immediately seized by a
great crocodile. Feeling the divine strength conferred by Ulüpé, he grasped
123

hold of the animal and pulled it out of the water. Arjuna dashed the creature
onto the shore. It suddenly became limp and a beautiful celestial maiden came
out of its body. Seeing the wonderful sight, Arjuna asked, “Who are you, O
beautiful one? Why have you committed such sins in this lake, carrying away
holy ascetics?”
The maiden stood before Arjuna with folded palms. “O mighty hero, I am the
Apsarä named Varga, ever beloved of Kuvera.”
Varga explained that she had once been going with four of her friends to see
Kuvera. As they traveled through a heavenly woodland region they saw a
Brahmin meditating in a lonely place. He was extremely handsome and he lit
up the woods with his bodily luster. The five Apsaräs playfully tried to disturb
his meditation. They danced and sang before him, trying to tempt him away
from his ascetic practices. Although unmoved by lust, the Brahmin was
angered by their behavior. He then cursed them, “As you attack me now
without compunction, you five shall become crocodiles, whose business is
attacking others.” The maidens at once came to their senses. Showing
contrition, they begged the Brahmin for mercy. He relented and told them that
they would soon be delivered from their crocodile bodies by a powerful man.
At that moment the great sage Närada Åñi arrived there and told them to enter
the five sacred lakes on Bharata’s south coast. Soon Arjuna would come and
release them from their bondage.
Varga bowed before the Päëòava and thanked him for delivering her. She then
asked him to save her four friends, who lived in each of the four other lakes.
Arjuna smiled and went quickly to each holy lake. He pulled out all the other
crocodiles and each time he watched as a maiden of shining beauty came out of
the fierce reptilian body. The five Apsaräs came together and, after offering
Arjuna their respects, rose up to the heavens. Having made the lakes safe
again, Arjuna took his leave from the åñis and proceeded on his journey.
***
Arjuna traveled up Bharata’s western coast until he arrived at Prabhäsa. In the
sea near Prabhäsa, Kåñëa had constructed a city called Dwärakä. Arjuna could
see the splendid fortress city from a distance, shining like the sun on the
horizon. It could only be reached by passing along a heavily guarded bridge.
When he reached the bridge Arjuna sent word of his arrival to Kåñëa, who
immediately came out of the city to see His dear friend. They embraced with
124

joy. News of Arjuna’s exile from Indraprastha had already reached Dwärakä
and Kåñëa had been expecting him to arrive before the year was up. He knew
that Arjuna was interested in gaining the hand of His sister Subhadrä. Arjuna
had heard much about the princess from Gada, Kåñëa’s cousin who had studied
under Droëa along with the Päëòavas. Gada had described her as being
incomparably beautiful and endowed with every womanly qualification. Just by
hearing the descriptions, Arjuna’s heart had become attracted. He had
resolved even then to somehow win her as his wife. And that would forge an
alliance between the Päëòavas and their beloved Lord, Kåñëa.
Arjuna told Kåñëa about his travels to the holy places and the Vrishni hero
replied, “This is all good. Your piety and virtue are ever increasing.”
The Päëòava prince turned quickly to the subject of Subhadrä. He asked Kåñëa
how she might be won. Kåñëa smiled. “This princess is worthy of you in every
way, O tiger among men, but who knows what would be her decision at a
svayaàvara? For a hero the surest way to win a maiden is to carry her away by
force. This is always the way of the powerful, and it is sanctioned by holy
scripture.”
Kåñëa added that His brother Balaräma was intent on seeing her married to
Duryodhana, even though no one else in Dwärakä was very keen on this
suggestion. Kåñëa especially did not like the idea. He would much prefer
Arjuna to take His sister’s hand. But Balaräma was the city father and Kåñëa’s
elder brother and Kåñëa did not want to go against His wishes. He told Arjuna
to be patient. They would devise a plan. In the meanwhile, they could spend
some time together. Arjuna still had four months remaining of his exile. He
could spend it at Dwärakä.
Kåñëa suggested that Arjuna keep his identity concealed. If he entered the city
openly, he would not get a chance to see Subhadrä. She lived in Balaräma’s
palace and was never seen in public. Her first appearance would be at her
marriage. If Arjuna went into the city dressed as a renunciant, however,
Balaräma would doubtlessly invite him for meals. Kåñëa knew that His elder
brother was fond of entertaining ascetics and sages, and also that He always
arranged for Subhadrä to serve them so that she might be blessed and increase
her virtue. Arjuna should therefore disguise himself as a renunciant, a member
of the sannyäsa order. No one would recognize him if he matted his hair and
kept his beard, especially when he was dressed in the saffron robes of a
sannyäsé. Then he could live in Dwärakä during the coming months, and await
125

an opportunity to win the beautiful Subhadrä. The rainy season was just upon
them and it was customary for wandering ascetics to stay in cities till the rains
had passed.
Kåñëa went back into His city and Arjuna waited for a few more days outside
before entering. Kåñëa’s plan had sounded good. The Päëòava wanted a chance
to see Subhadrä and also for her to see him. Pious, he did not want to steal her
against her desire. If she were not attracted to him, he would leave her in
peace. He tied his hair in a knot above his head and put on the dress of a
renunciant. Taking up the triple-rodded staff traditionally carried by Vaiñëava
sannyäsés, those worshippers of Viñëu in the renounced order, Arjuna entered
Dwärakä. The unsuspecting gatekeepers allowed the ascetic to pass, folding
their palms in respect as he walked by. Arjuna made his way along the huge
golden bridge that spanned the ocean to the city, and which was encrusted
with precious stones. At intervals the bridge opened out onto spacious
platforms where well-armed soldiers stood guard. None of them recognized
Arjuna as he passed.
When Arjuna reached the city he was stunned by its opulence. Symmetrically
arranged around the city center were sixteen thousand white palaces, one for
each of Kåñëa’s sixteen thousand queens. Each palace was bedecked with gold
and jewels and each rivalled the celestial Mount Meru in its size and opulence.
Magnificent temples rose up on all sides and the sounds of sacred chants could
be heard everywhere. Beautiful music filled the air and billows of fragrant
incense wafted on the breeze. Shining chariots and great elephants moved here
and there. Attractively dressed citizens strolled about the wide avenues, which
were inlaid with priceless emeralds and interspersed with gardens stocked with
celestial flowers. In the midst of the delightful gardens jeweled fountains stood
in lotus-filled lakes. Trees bearing blossoms of every color stood along the
roadsides. All around the city a massive fortified wall, a full one hundred miles
long, rose up from the sea. Arjuna gazed about in wonder as he made his way to
the Brahmins’ quarter of the city.
Kåñëa had arranged that His friend be given a large house for his residence. He
told him that he would inform Balaräma of the arrival of a Vaiñëava sannyäsé,
and that Arjuna could expect to soon be invited to Balaräma’s palace where he
would see Subhadrä. Arjuna felt as if he had ascended to Indra’s abode in the
heavenly planets. The gods were even seen frequenting Dwärakä and it seemed
as if its residents were celebrating a never-ending festival.
126

As Kåñëa had expected, Balaräma arranged for Arjuna to be brought to His
palace and offered varieties of delicious food. He had His sister Subhadrä serve
the sannyäsé so that she might receive his blessings. The princess stole Arjuna’s
mind away. She was everything he had heard she was. Subhadrä was as
beautiful as Viñëu’s divine consort Lakñmé. With her blue silk garments, gold
earrings and ornaments, and long curling black hair, she could capture the
hearts even of the celestials. She moved about with grace and poise as she
served the ascetic.
Arjuna tried not to stare at her as he accepted the golden dishes she placed
before him, but the princess caught his glance and saw the sparkle in his eyes.
She looked more carefully at the sannyäsé. He did not resemble the other
ascetics Balaräma had brought to the house. This ascetic looked more like a
prince. Beneath his thin cotton cloth Subhadrä could see his broad and
powerful shoulders. As he accepted the dishes she offered, she noticed his long,
well-muscled arms, which resembled a pair of five-hooded serpents. She could
see that behind his beard the young sannyäsé was extremely handsome. His
dark eyes pierced hers and she felt her heart move. It was obvious that he
desired her. Perhaps he was looking for a bride. She knew that Balaräma was
trying to arrange her marriage to Duryodhana, but the young sage seemed a
better prospect than that conceited Kuru prince. Subhadrä wondered who this
ascetic might be.
Over the coming weeks Balaräma invited Arjuna to his palace on numerous
occasions. Each time Subhadrä served him, and their attraction for one
another grew. One day in confidence Kåñëa spoke with his sister on the subject
of her marriage. She told him of her feelings for the strange sannyäsé and
Kåñëa smiled. He asked her how she felt about Duryodhana. The princess’s
features twisted disdainfully. Then Kåñëa mentioned Arjuna’s name, telling
her that the Päëòava was desirous of becoming her husband. Indeed, he had
come to Dwärakä to seek her hand. Subhadrä looked at him intently. Suddenly
she realized what He was saying. The handsome ascetic was Arjuna. Why had
she not guessed? The so-called sannyäsé, who walked like a powerful lion and
spoke with a voice resembling a thundercloud, could only be a great ruler.
Subhadrä was suddenly excited. If only she could become the wife of that
famous Kuru hero. But Kåñëa cautioned her to remain quiet about his identity.
If Balaräma learned the truth there would be trouble. She should be patient.
Arjuna would surely find a way to marry her.
127

It was almost the end of the monsoon season. Balaräma invited the sannyäsé to
his palace for a final visit. Again Subhadrä served him. By glances and smiles
she made her feelings clear to the Päëòava. Arjuna’s heart pounded. He could
hardly eat. He prayed that he would soon get a chance to take the princess as
his bride.
When the meal was over Balaräma gave gold and jewels to the sannyäsé and
sent him home. Arjuna left with his mind in turmoil. He had to somehow gain
Subhadrä’s hand. During the last weeks of the rainy season his mind remained
fixed on the princess. Finally the rains ended and it was time for Arjuna to
leave Dwärakä. Kåñëa came to see him and told him that there would be a
festival on the Raivataka hill, which skirted the mainland coastline around
Dwärakä. All of the Yadus would attend. The beautiful Subhadrä would also be
there. Kåñëa suggested that this might be the time for which Arjuna had been
waiting.
Arjuna’s eyes lit up as Kåñëa, sitting next to him on the couch, explained His
plan. “O best of men, I do not see any way you can obtain Subhadrä other than
by kidnapping her from the midst of her friends and relatives. The festival will
provide an opportunity for you, as the powerful heroes of the Yadu dynasty will
be at ease and not expecting trouble.”
The festival was to be held in a few days and Kåñëa arranged for swift
messengers to ride to nearby Indraprastha. Arjuna wanted to obtain
Yudhiñöhira’s permission before snatching away Subhadrä. Such an act would
likely arouse the anger of the mighty Balaräma, and might even precipitate a
fight between the Päëòavas and the Yadus, but Kåñëa told him not to fear. He
would pacify Balaräma when the time came. “I will convince My irascible
brother of the propriety and excellence of an alliance with your house, O
Pärtha. You need only take the maiden and make off with her with all speed.”
When Yudhiñöhira’s permission arrived, Arjuna prepared himself to kidnap the
princess. On the day of the festival, Subhadrä came out of the city surrounded
by her relatives. All the great personalities of Dwärakä were present––King
Ugrasena, Akrüra, Gada, Saraba, Babhru, Sätyaki, Uddhava and many others–
–and they resembled an assembly of the gods. The Gandharvas also appeared
and they played sweet celestial music as Apsaräs danced. Dwärakä’s citizens
came out on their golden chariots and on the backs of great elephants. Above
them hovered the aerial cars of the Siddhas and Cäraëas, uttering auspicious
Vedic hymns in praise of Kåñëa and Balaräma, who shone in the midst of the
128

assembly like the sun and the moon. From the sky the gods showered celestial
flowers and played their heavenly instruments.
As evening approached, Arjuna came unnoticed out of the city. He had
changed his dress and put on armor. His year of exile was over and he had cut
his hair and resumed his normal appearance. Kåñëa met him and gave him a
chariot drawn by Çaibya and Sugréva, two of Kåñëa’s celestial steeds. As the
Yadus sported and enjoyed themselves in the fragrant woodlands on the
Raivataka, Arjuna mounted his chariot. Then he saw Subhadrä surrounded by
her friends and maidservants standing near a temple of Viñëu. Without delay
Arjuna spurred the horses and rushed toward the princess.
Subhadrä looked up in surprise as she heard the clatter of the fast approaching
chariot. Holding the reins was Arjuna, with a great bow slung on his back and
a sword hanging from his belt. Subhadrä’s heart leapt. The prince was heading
straight for her. In less than a minute he had taken hold of her hand and
pulled her onto the chariot. Before anyone could react he raced away to the
north, back to Indraprastha.
As they realized what had happened the Yadus became incensed. How dare
anyone kidnap their princess before their eyes? Who could have been so bold?
Some of them said it was Arjuna from Indraprastha. The Yadu warriors ran
about in all directions, trying to find their weapons and chariots. In Dwärakä
the chief officer of the court stood in the central square of the city and blew
his golden trumpet. It was a call to arms. A council of war was hastily
assembled in the Yadu court. As the ministers and generals quickly took their
places in the Sudharmä assembly hall, Balaräma spoke. His angry voice echoed
around the hall. “Why has Arjuna insulted us in this way? Did he not consider
us worthy of a peaceful approach? He has stolen Subhadrä without even
speaking to any of us. Surely this means war!”
Balaräma glared around the assembly with eyes reddened with fury. The
thousands of Yadu warriors present rose like so many fires blazing up when fed
with oil. “Bring my armor!” “Fetch my weapons!” “Yoke my chariot and I shall
give chase to the insolent Päëòava!”
Amidst the uproar, only Kåñëa remained unmoved, seated upon His beautiful,
jewel-encrusted throne at the head of the assembly. Seeing this, Balaräma
again spoke. With His pure white complexion, blue robes and wildflower
garlands, He resembled a white mountain covered with blossoms. His voice
again echoed around the hall. “Stop! O senseless men, what are you doing
129

while Kåñëa remains silent? Cease your roaring and let us hear what is on His
mind before we act. His words are always our surest guide.”
Balaräma looked across at His brother. “O Janärdana, Arjuna is Your friend,
but it appears that he has insulted us. By snatching away My sister he has
placed his foot upon My head. O Govinda, how shall I bear it? I will rid the
earth of the Kurus by Myself today. I will never brook an insult from them
lightly!”
The whole assembly erupted again as Balaräma spoke, roaring in approval.
Kåñëa only smiled. As the sound died down He said, “I do not feel that Arjuna
has insulted us. Indeed, My feelings are that he has enhanced our glory. Pärtha
knows that we would not accept payment or gifts for our princess. What man
on earth would sell his child to another? Nor would Arjuna accept the maiden
as a gift, as if she were an animal. He has therefore selected the method always
favored by powerful heroes.”
The hall remained silent as Kåñëa continued to speak. He said He considered
an alliance with the Päëòavas, and especially with Arjuna, as proper. Arjuna
had been born in the noble Bharata race. He was the son of the illustrious
Kunté, from their own house. No man on earth was capable of vanquishing
Arjuna in battle. He was now proceeding on Kåñëa’s own chariot and would be
difficult to check. Subhadrä and Arjuna were a good match. Better that they
send swift messengers to bring him back in peace and arrange for a proper
wedding. That would avoid the disgrace of being defeated by Arjuna and would
enhance the alliance forged by the marriage. After all, there was now no
question of Subhadrä being accepted by another man.
Having concluded his speech, Kåñëa looked around the assembly. Some of the
the Yadus voiced doubts, but Kåñëa answered them all expertly. Gradually the
mood changed. The Yadu heroes looked at one another in affirmation of
Kåñëa’s words. His points were good. Arjuna was the world’s greatest warrior
and his dynasty were world emperors. His marriage to Subhadrä was the
arrangement of Providence for the good of the Yadus. They immediately sent
messengers after Arjuna. He was brought back and received with honor. The
city was decked out in flags and festoons and a great ceremony took place.
Arjuna accepted Subhadrä’s hand before the sacred fire with the blessings of
the åñis. Then he remained in the city for a few more days. Finally, taking
permission from Balaräma and Kåñëa, he returned home. After a year away
Arjuna longed to see his brothers again and introduce Subhadrä to them.
130

Chapter 14
Burning the Khäëòava Forest
The Yadus bestowed vast amounts of wealth on Arjuna, and he left Dwärakä
accompanied by a long train of chariots and elephants as well as hundreds of
thousands of cows decorated with silk and gold. Subhadrä rode with him on a
fine golden chariot drawn by tall white steeds. They soon arrived at
Indraprastha and Arjuna went straight to Yudhiñöhira. He clasped his feet and
then worshipped him according to the Vedic injunctions. Arjuna then
worshipped Dhaumya and the other åñis in the royal court. When the
ceremonies were complete his other brothers embraced him with tears in their
eyes and asked him to relate to them all his adventures.
After spending time with his brothers, Arjuna went to see Draupadé. As he
entered her chamber, she turned away from him and said, “O Arjuna, what
brings you here at this time? You should go and be with your new bride. That
daughter of the Satvata race must be missing you now.” Draupadé was annoyed.
Arjuna was her favorite among the Päëòavas and she feared he might come to
prefer Subhadrä. The Päëòava repeatedly begged her forgiveness and assured
her that his love for her was in no way diminished. Draupadé continued to sulk.
“A second tie always relaxes the first one, no matter how strong it may have
been.”
Arjuna tried to console the beautiful Draupadé, but she remained silent, always
looking away from him. Seeing that he could not win her over, he left her
chamber and went to Subhadrä. He asked her to dress herself as a cowherd girl.
He wanted to remind Draupadé that Subhadrä was the sister of Kåñëa,
Draupadé’s beloved Lord. Kåñëa had begun His life as a cowherd boy in a small
village. By having Subhadrä appear as a cowherd girl Arjuna hoped that
Draupadé’s natural affection for Kåñëa would be awakened and directed toward
His sister.
The Yadu princess was brought into Draupadé’s chamber attired in simple red
silk. The servant girls who showed her in said, “This maiden has asked if she
could become your servant.” Subhadrä immediately bowed before Draupadé
and said, “I am here to do your bidding.” Draupadé had never seen Subhadrä
131

and did not realize who she was, but seeing her humble demeanor and being
reminded of her Lord by Subhadrä’s rustic dress, Draupadé’s heart melted. She
raised her hands and blessed her, saying, “May you become the wife of a hero
and the mother of a hero. May you be without a rival.”
Subhadrä replied, “May it be so.” She then introduced herself. “I am Subhadrä,
Kåñëa’s sister.” Draupadé smiled and embraced her co-wife. Her jealousy and
anger were dissipated by Subhadrä’s gentleness. She asked Subhadrä to tell her
everything about Dwärakä and Kåñëa. They spoke together for hours. Then
Draupadé took Subhadrä by the hand and led her to meet Kunté. The two
Päëòava queens soon became close friends and would spend much time
together, discussing the activities of Kåñëa and His associates.
A few days after Arjuna’s return, Kåñëa and Balaräma came to Indraprastha.
Accompanied by His sons and ministers and riding at the head of a great army,
Kåñëa entered the Päëòavas’ city where He was greeted at the gates by Nakula
and Sahadeva. As they proceeded in state down the main highway, thousands
of citizens stood along the roadside. They cheered and worshipped Kåñëa and
His elder brother as they moved slowly toward Yudhiñöhira’s palace. The Yadus
gazed around them at the city. The roads were immaculately swept and
sprinkled with perfumed water. Fences draped with bright garlands ran down
the sides of the wide avenues. On the tops of tall white mansions flew countless
flags and standards. The sweet scent of burning aloes filled the air and the
sound of musical instruments could be heard.
Kåñëa and Balaräma entered the Päëòavas’ palace and went before Yudhiñöhira
and his brothers. Yudhiñöhira worshipped Balaräma with all due ceremony and
embraced Kåñëa with affection. Kåñëa offered His respects and worship to
Yudhiñöhira and Bhéma, then took His seat in the assembly hall. Many
important personalities from Dwärakä also took their places in the hall,
including Akrüra, Uddhava, Sätyaki, Kåtavarmä, Säraëa and Kåñëa’s sons
Pradyumna, Sämba and Aniruddha.
Kåñëa then gave Arjuna all the bridal gifts for Subhadrä that her relatives in
Dwärakä had sent. He gave heaps of gold bricks and precious gems to
Yudhiñöhira. Kåñëa also presented the king with one thousand chariots
adorned with rows of golden bells, each of them yoked to four steeds driven by
well-trained charioteers, ten thousand milk-bearing cows, one thousand
moonlike white horses with golden harnesses, and a thousand white mules with
black manes, which could run at the speed of the wind. As well as this,
132

Balaräma gave Arjuna as a wedding gift one thousand elephants, each
resembling a hill and decked with golden ornaments and bells. Innumerable
other items were offered to the Päëòavas, being brought before them by
Kåñëa’s servants. Placed outside the hall, the wealth given by the Yädavas
looked like a sea stretching in all directions.
Yudhiñöhira graciously accepted the gifts and then arranged for all the Yädavas
to be accommodated in his palace. They and the Päëòavas passed many days
together in happiness, and when it came time for them to leave, the Päëòavas
in turn presented them with brilliant gems as gifts. With Balaräma at their
head, the Yadus headed back to Dwärakä, but Kåñëa decided to remain behind
to spend some time alone with Arjuna.
One day Arjuna suggested, “O Kåñëa, the days are hot. Let us go for some time
to the banks of the Yamunä. We have constructed many fine pleasure houses
there.”
Kåñëa agreed to his proposal and they set off. They soon arrived at a charming
spot amid groves of tall trees. High white mansions stood along the river banks,
looking like a city of the gods. Kåñëa and Arjuna entered one of the houses
where they were served varieties of exquisitely flavoured food and drinks. They
lay down upon golden couches spread with silk covers. After relaxing for some
time they decided to go for a walk in the woods. The two heroes wandered
along the riverbank, discussing martial arts and past battles they had each
fought.
Having walked for a distance, they sat down upon an ivory bench that had
been placed near the edge of a dense forest. As they continued to talk a
Brahmin suddenly emerged from the woods. They looked at him in surprise. He
resembled an old sal tree with a complexion like molten gold. His beard and
hair were bright yellow and he shone like the morning sun. His two eyes were
like lotus leaves, and his body was well-formed and powerful. As the Brahmin
approached them, blazing like fire, Kåñëa and Arjuna stood up and awaited his
order.
In a resonant voice the Brahmin said, “I know you two to be the foremost of all
men. I myself am a voracious Brahmin who eats much. I have therefore
approached you in order to beg my food and to be gratified by you.”
Both Kåñëa and Arjuna folded their palms and asked the Brahmin what food
he would like. The Brahmin replied, “I do not eat ordinary food. Know me to
be Agni, the fire-god. Give me food that suits me. Please help me to devour this
133

Khäëòava forest.” He indicated the jungle by which they were standing.
Although he had already made many attempts to consume the forest, his
efforts had been repeatedly thwarted by Indra. This was because Indra’s friend,
the Näga Takñakaù, lived in the forest. Whenever Agni blazed up and began to
cover the forest, Indra would send torrents of rain to stop him. The fire-god
continued, “Both of you are experts in arms. By your prowess you will be able
to prevent Indra from stopping me. Thus I shall consume this great forest. O
heroes, this is the food I desire to have from you.”
Kåñëa and Arjuna looked at each other in surprise. They assured Agni that
they would do everything in their power to help him, but they were curious as
to why he wanted to consume this particular forest. The deity explained that
the Khäëòava forest contained numerous varieties of medicinal herbs. He
needed the herbs because he was suffering a malady due to having eaten
excessive amounts of ghee. There had been a great sacrifice performed by a
king named Swetaki in which so much ghee was offered into the fire that Agni
became ill. Brahmä then told him that he could be cured if he ate the herbs in
the Khäëòava forest. When Agni failed in his attempts to consume the forest,
Brahmä told him that he would succeed if he could gain the assistance of Kåñëa
and Arjuna.
Brahmä had said, “In a previous incarnation, these two men were in fact the
ancient and infallible deities Nara and Näräyaëa. They have appeared on the
earth to accomplish the celestials’ purpose. Therefore, ask for their help.”
Agni concluded, “I now depend upon you two. I must eat this forest. Brahmä
has also informed me that the living beings within the forest are sinful and
should be destroyed. Therefore do not harbor any doubts. This act is
sanctioned by authority.”
Arjuna replied, “I possess many celestial weapons, but I have no bow capable of
bearing their power. If I am to achieve the task you have set, I will require an
inexhaustible quiver of arrows and a chariot drawn by celestial steeds. If you
can provide all this, then we will surely accomplish your desire.”
Agni meditated upon Varuëa, god of the nether worlds, and the deity
immediately appeared and said, “What shall I do for you?”
Agni knew that Varuëa kept many celestial weapons in the depths of the
ocean. Therefore he asked him to present Arjuna with the celestial bow
Gäëòéva as well as two inexhaustible quivers of arrows. Agni also asked that
Varuëa bring forth a chariot belonging to Soma, the moon-god. Varuëa agreed
134

and caused all those things to appear at that spot.
Arjuna looked with wonder at the Gäëòéva bow. It appeared like a rainbow
embedded with celestial gems. As tall as a man, it was flawless. The Päëòava
took up the shining bow and forcefully twanged its string. A sound like the
crash of thunder resounded throughout the forest, terrifying all the creatures.
Holding the bow, the joyful Arjuna next approached the huge, golden chariot.
It was filled with varieties of celestial weapons as well as the two inexhaustible
quivers Agni had requested. The chariot was yoked with golden harnesses to
silvery steeds from the land of the Gandharvas. These horses were capable of
going anywhere within all the worlds and could move with the speed of the
wind or the mind. Above the chariot flew a banner bearing an image of
Hanumän, Räma’s great monkey servant. Hanumän seemed to be burning
everything that fell within his gaze. Other flags flew on the chariot bearing
images of fierce beasts. All the creatures roared terribly from their standards.
Arjuna circumambulated the chariot and then mounted it like a virtuous man
ascending to heaven. He put on the suit of celestial armor that lay there. As he
stood with the Gäëòéva in his hand, he resembled the sun shining from behind
an evening cloud. He then drove the chariot around, smiling as he heard the
loud rumble of its wheels.
Varuëa also gave Kåñëa a club called Kaumodaké, which roared loudly when
wheeled about and which could crush even Daityas and Dänavas. Kåñëa then
mounted Arjuna’s chariot, saying that he would become the driver.
Arjuna again addressed Agni, “O fire-god, we are now ready to satisfy your
request. Armed with the Gäëòéva and assisted by Kåñëa, I am able to withstand
the entire host of gods united with the Asuras––what then to speak of Indra!
Therefore, blaze up as much as you like and surround this forest.”
Agni immediately expanded himself around the forest and began to consume it
with his seven kinds of flames. He assumed the fearful appearance he assumes
at the end of an aeon which he uses to destroy all things. Kåñëa then began to
drive the chariot around the forest. It moved with such speed that it appeared
to be continuously present on every side of the forest. Whenever Arjuna saw a
creature trying to escape from the conflagration he immediately shot it down.
Being slain in the presence of Kåñëa, the Supreme Deity, all the creatures
dying in that forest assumed spiritual forms and ascended to the highest
regions of transcendence.
The roar of the fire could be heard for miles. Red, orange and blue flames shot
135

high into the sky. The lakes and ponds in the forest were boiled dry and the
rocks melted. No creature was able to escape from the blazing Khäëòava forest
and their screams mixed with the crackling of the fire. It blazed up to such an
extent that it caused fear even to the celestials, who went in a body to Indra
and said anxiously, “O lord of the immortals, why does Agni burn all creatures
below? Has the time come for the world’s destruction?”
Indra looked himself to see what was happening on the earth. Feeling concern
for his friend Takñakaù, he set out at once to stop the fire. He sent down
torrents of rain, which fell in columns as thick as tree trunks. But the rain was
turned to steam by the heat of the fire even before it reached the forest below.
Indra then became angry and amassed huge clouds over the forest which
doubled the volume of rain. With its flames and smoke rising up, and with
lightning and sheets of water falling from the sky, the forest became terrifying.
Arjuna saw Indra’s attempt to put out the fire and he sent hundreds of
thousands of arrows in a tight network over the forest. That net of arrows
acted as a vast umbrella and completely checked the falling rain.
The Näga king Takñakaù was not present in the Khäëòava, but both his wife
and son were caught in the blaze. They flew swiftly upwards and were seen by
Arjuna. He instantly fired an arrow which severed the snake lady’s head. He
then trained another arrow upon Takñakaù’s son, Açvasena. Seeing this, Indra
raised a violent wind around Arjuna which temporarily deprived him of his
senses. Açvasena escaped and disappeared into the sky.
As he regained his senses, Arjuna became angry with Indra. He shouted a
challenge to the god and covered the sky with his arrows. Indra too became
angry with Arjuna and released his tremendous thunderbolt weapon. Without
delay Arjuna invoked the Väyavya weapon which dispersed the huge black
clouds. That powerful wind weapon completely dispelled the energy of Indra’s
thunderbolts and lightning flashes. The sky became clear and a gentle breeze
began to blow. Agni blazed up even more, fanned by the breeze and fed with
the fat of bodies burning in the forest. He filled the sky with his roars.
Indra summoned many other celestials to fight with Arjuna. Hosts of powerful
heavenly fighters appeared and began to send their weapons at both him and
Kåñëa. Blazing iron balls, bullets, rocks and countless arrows shot toward them.
Arjuna countered all the missiles with his arrows––at the same time he cut
down his assailants, who fell screaming into the fire. Arjuna was
unconquerable as he stood on the battlefield releasing his deadly arrows, with
136

Kåñëa skillfully guiding the chariot.
Indra then mounted his celestial elephant, Airävata, and rushed down upon
Arjuna and Kåñëa, shouting, “These two are killed.” He raised his personal
weapon known as the Vajra and urged on his elephant. Seeing Indra advance
the other principal gods followed him. Yamaräja took up his death-dealing
club, Kuvera his mace and Varuëa his noose. The commander of the celestial
army, Skanda, raised his Çakti weapon, and Sürya came with his brilliant dart.
The other gods charged behind Indra with their own weapons raised. The
Viçvadevas, Sädhyas, Rudras, Vasus and Marutas all advanced in a body toward
Arjuna and Kåñëa, who stood fearlessly below.
Even though they exerted themselves with full force, however, the celestials
were unable to overpower Kåñëa and Arjuna. Struck by Arjuna’s mystical
arrows, the gods were forced to retreat. Indra smiled. He was pleased with
Arjuna who was, after all, his son, and he also understood Kåñëa’s position.
Indra knew that no one could overcome Kåñëa or anyone supported by Him.
Obviously Kåñëa desired that Agni consume the forest and, at the same time,
He was enhancing the fame and glory of His friend Arjuna.
Then, desiring to test Arjuna’s power further, Indra sent down a thick shower
of boulders. Arjuna quickly reduced the stones to dust with his swift arrows.
Indra then tore off the peak of a massive mountain and hurled it at Arjuna.
Not disturbed in the least, Arjuna cut the flying mountain peak into a
thousand pieces which rained down upon the forest below.
Indra was gladdened by Arjuna’s prowess. He ordered the celestials to
withdraw and, as he did so, an invisible voice was heard in the sky: “O Indra,
your friend Takñakaù is not in the forest at present. Nor will it be possible for
you to defeat in battle Arjuna and Kåñëa. These two are Nara and Näräyaëa,
the immortal and invincible åñis. They are worthy of even the gods’ worship.
Desist from the battle, for the burning of the Khäëòava has been ordained by
fate.”
Having heard that voice, which they knew belonged to the universal creator
Brahmä, the gods retired to their own abodes. For fifteen days Agni continued
to consume the forest along with its inhabitants. As the forest was destroyed,
hordes of Räkñasas, Dänavas and Nägas rushed out in fear. Arjuna cut them
down with volleys of arrows. None could even look at him as he stood releasing
his searing shafts. Gradually the forest was reduced to ashes and Agni was
gratified.
137

There was a leader of the Asura race named Maya, who had been dwelling in
the Khäëòava. Having hid himself underground, he now rushed out of the
forest and tried to escape. Agni chased the Asura and Kåñëa raised His discus
weapon, Sudarçana, ready to kill him. The intelligent Maya ran to Arjuna and
fell at his feet. “O Arjuna, I seek your protection. Save me! I supplicate myself
before you.”
Arjuna raised his hand and replied, “Do not fear.” He could not refuse to
protect anyone who sought his shelter. He turned toward Kåñëa and asked Him
to spare the Asura’s life. Kåñëa lowered His weapon and Agni also stood back.
As the flames in the forest died down, Indra again appeared before Arjuna and
Kåñëa. Agni stood next to him as he said, “O Pärtha, O Keçava, you have
achieved that which could not be achieved by any celestial. Please ask from me
any boon you desire. I am very much pleased.”
Arjuna asked Indra for all his celestial weapons. Indra smiled and replied that
he would indeed give him the weapons––but not yet. When Çiva would give
Arjuna his Päçupäta weapon, then Indra would bring him to heaven and give
him all the fire and wind weapons. That time would come in the future.
Kåñëa then asked that His friendship with Arjuna might last forever and Indra
said, “It shall be so.”
Finally, Agni said, “I also wish to give you a boon. Just as I pervade this
universe, so by my power will you be able to go anywhere you desire within the
universe.” The gods then returned to the heavens.
As Kåñëa and Arjuna made their way back to their mansion, Maya approached
them. He bowed at Arjuna’s feet and said, “O son of Kunté, you have saved me
from the angry Kåñëa and the hungry Agni. Tell me what I can do for you in
return.”
Arjuna replied, “I cannot take anything from you to repay me. This is my firm
principle. I act only out of duty. It was my duty to save you and therefore you
bear me no obligation. Go in peace.”
Maya praised Arjuna’s virtue, but he insisted upon doing something for the
Päëòava. “I simply wish to please you, O Pärtha. You need not see it as
repayment.”
Arjuna again said that he could not accept anything from Maya. “I do not want
to frustrate your desire. If you want to please me, then do something for Kåñëa.
That will be more pleasing to me than anything else.”
Maya turned and looked expectantly at Kåñëa who was smiling softly. After
138

reflecting for a moment he said, “You are the architect of the celestial demons.
If you wish to please Me, then build a splendid assembly hall for Yudhiñöhira.
The like of this hall should not be found anywhere in the world. It should
contain the features of celestial architecture and be impossible for anyone else
to emulate.”
The Asura’s skills were well known to Kåñëa. Maya had constructed many
wondrous edifices in the higher planets for the Daityas and Dänavas. Maya
then assented to Kåñëa’s request and accompanied Him and Arjuna back to
Indraprastha, where he was introduced to Yudhiñöhira. The eldest Päëòava
marveled as Arjuna narrated the story of how the Khäëòava forest was burnt.
He received Maya with honor and discussed the hall with him. After much
thought Maya drew up a design. He then began to consider where to find the
necessary materials for constructing the celestial hall. He told the Päëòavas
that he needed to go to the Himälayas. “I have left there a large quantity of
rough diamonds and other precious stones of every description, including those
not found on this earth. I shall go to fetch them.”
Maya explained that he had formerly been engaged by Våñaparvä, king of the
Dänavas, to construct sacrificial altars for the Asuras. He had gathered all
kinds of celestial materials which he had stored at Våñaparvä’s house high up
on the Mainäka mountain. There was also a great club with which Våñaparvä
had once withstood the gods in battle. Maya would bring that club, equal to
one hundred thousand ordinary clubs, and give it to Bhéma. He would also
fetch from the depths of a lake on Mainäka the large celestial conch shell
known as Devadatta for Arjuna. If Arjuna blew that conch on the battlefield, it
would shatter his opponents’ hearts.
Having gained Yudhiñöhira’s permission, the Asura left quickly for the north.
He found all his wealth guarded by Yakñas and Räkñasas, and with their
assistance he brought it back to Indraprastha. After presenting the club to
Bhéma and the conch shell to Arjuna, he commenced work.

Chapter 15
The Celestial Hall

139

Soon after Maya began his work on the hall, Kåñëa approached Yudhiñöhira
and asked his permission to return to Dwärakä. He had been away for months
and now desired to again see His relatives. Yudhiñöhira gave his permission
reluctantly, knowing he would miss his beloved friend. Kåñëa then said His
farewells, first going to Kunté and touching her feet in respect.
Shedding tears, Kunté embraced Kåñëa and said, “My dear Keçava, You are the
Supreme Soul of this universe. You are always kindly disposed toward everyone
but You especially protect Your devotees. From the day that Akrüra arrived in
Hastinäpura I knew You were thinking of the welfare of myself and my sons. I
am confident that whatever difficulties we may experience are arranged by
Providence for our ultimate good.”
Kåñëa smiled at Kunté and then left her, promising that He would return
before long. He then went to see His sister Subhadrä and bid her an
affectionate farewell. After that Kåñëa went to Draupadé, who cried at the
thought of His departure. Like her husbands and mother-in-law, Draupadé
thought constantly of Kåñëa. She bowed at His feet and worshipped Him,
praying that He might soon return.
After performing the due rites of departure, and after offering charity to the
Brahmins, Kåñëa mounted His chariot along with Sätyaki, who had remained
with Him in Indraprastha to learn archery from Arjuna. Surrounded by the
five Päëòavas, Kåñëa looked like Indra surrounded by the gods. He proceeded
slowly along the royal highway toward the city gate. Thousands of citizens
lined the streets shouting and waving as Kåñëa departed in His chariot, drawn
by Çaibya and Sugréva and bearing the sign of Garuòa. Yudhiñöhira mounted
the chariot and personally took the reins. Arjuna stood on the chariot fanning
Kåñëa with a golden handled chamara whisk. Bhéma held a white parasol over
Kåñëa’s head and Nakula and Sahadeva walked ahead on either side of His
chariot, clearing the way.
The Päëòavas accompanied Kåñëa out of the city for four miles. Kåñëa then
told them to return home. He bowed to Yudhiñöhira, who tearfully raised Him
and said with affection, “My dear Kåñëa, I do not know what kind of pious
activities we must have performed in previous lives so that You are now so
gracious toward us. Even highly renounced yogés and mystics attain a sight of
You only with great difficulty. Yet we are householders engaged in politics and
worldly affairs. I do not understand why You are so kind to us.”
Kåñëa smiled and asked Yudhiñöhira if He could leave for Dwärakä.
140

Yudhiñöhira assented and with great difficulty Kåñëa persuaded the Päëòavas
not to follow Him. He told them that He would always be ready to assist them
whenever they needed Him. They need only think of Him. Kåñëa then urged
His horses onwards and the five brothers stood together gazing at His chariot
as it disappeared into the distance. They then slowly returned to Indraprastha,
their minds absorbed in thoughts of their friend from Dwärakä.
***
A few days after Kåñëa left, Maya, having completed all his designs and plans,
began his actual construction. On an auspicious day marked by favorable stars
the Asura measured out a piece of land five thousand cubits square. Before
commencing work, he distributed charity to thousands of Brahmins. He
arranged for them to be fed with the finest of foods and gave them wealth,
invoking their blessings before he began.
Maya then erected thousands of golden pillars upon which he constructed a
splendorous assembly hall. After fourteen months the hall was completed. It
appeared like a mass of new clouds rising in the sky, and its celestial effulgence
seemed to darken the sun’s rays. It was spacious, cool, delightful and filled with
wealth. With its golden walls and archways inlaid with celestial gems, and its
crystal stairways worked with coral, the hall surpassed even the Yadus’
Sudharmä hall. In its center was a beautiful artificial pond filled with lotuses
and lilies whose stalks were made of brilliant gems, and with other flowers and
leaves made of gold and silver. On its clear waters there were also real lotuses
in full blossom. Swans, käraëòavas and chakravarkas swam about on its surface
and golden-colored turtles played on its bottom. The sides of the pond were set
with costly marble slabs studded with pearls, and all around it were celestial
flowers shivering in a gentle breeze. The hall was adorned with gardens full of
ever-blossoming trees, and the air was filled with a delicious fragrance that
mixed with the scent of the lotuses on the lake.
Maya arranged for eight thousand powerful Räkñasas, known as Kiìkaräs, to
guard that hall. Keeping themselves invisible, the well-armed Räkñasas, who
had massive bodies and fearful faces, arrow-shaped ears and blood-red eyes,
stationed themselves all around the hall, ever alert to danger. The Asura then
reported to Yudhiñöhira that the hall was ready for occupation.
Yudhiñöhira consulted with the Brahmins and selected an auspicious day to
enter the hall. He fed and gave charity to thousands of Brahmins and, along
141

with his brothers, worshipped Viñëu and the gods. A ceremony was arranged
and actors, bards, singers and wrestlers exhibited their skill for the Päëòavas’
pleasure. A feast was then distributed to all of Indraprastha’s citizens. Precisely
at noon the Päëòavas, followed by crowds of åñis, entered their hall through
the enormous golden doors at its eastern entrance. They took their places on
the jewel-encrusted thrones at the head of the main hall. Around them sat the
åñis and many kings who had been invited from other countries. In that
assembly were seen numerous famous åñis such as Asita, Devala, Vyäsadeva,
Maitreya, Parvata, Märkaëòeya, Jaimini, Bhågu and hundreds of others. All the
virtuous sages had their mind and senses under full control and they looked
like so many full moons shining amid the assembly.
The Päëòavas listened respectfully as the åñis recited Vedic histories to invoke
auspiciousness. The kings in attendance then stepped forward one by one to
make offerings to Yudhiñöhira and to worship him with all honor. Citrasena,
the Gandharva leader, arrived with the Apsaräs. Along with the Cäraëas
descended from the heavens, they entertained the assembly with celestial
music and dance. Worshipped and entertained by such beings, Yudhiñöhira
resembled Brahmä seated in his own hall on the highest planet in the universe.
Suddenly, the Päëòavas saw Närada Åñi appear by his mystical power. Dressed
in a black deerskin, with his golden hair knotted on top of his head, he seemed
like a brilliant sun rising in the hall. Yudhiñöhira and his brothers immediately
stood in respect. They bowed low to Närada, who was accompanied by Pärijäta,
Raivata and Sumukha, three other powerful sages. Yudhiñöhira offered all the
åñis seats and they sat peacefully as the Päëòavas worshipped them with sacred
offerings as well as with precious gems and jewels. Gratified, the sages were
joyous to behold the wonderful assembly hall.
Närada said, “O King, is your wealth being spent properly for the protection of
the people? Is your mind fixed in virtue? Are you enjoying the pleasures of life?
I trust that you do not sacrifice religion for the sake of profit, nor profit for the
sake of religion, nor indeed both religion and profit for the sake of pleasure,
which easily tempts men.”
Närada continued to question Yudhiñöhira on a variety of subjects, his
questions effectively constituting a number of instructions on the art of
kingship. Yudhiñöhira sat with folded palms and listened attentively. The
entire assembly remained silent as Närada, the foremost of the åñis, spoke. His
knowledge and wisdom were famed throughout the universe. Närada was fully
142

acquainted with every aspect of the Vedic teachings, and he was renowned as a
great devotee and servant of the Supreme Lord. He knew the Lord’s desire, and
his movements and actions were always arranged to assist the divine plan. The
Päëòavas were reverent as he instructed them. The whole aim of the monarch,
Närada explained, was to keep his people on the path of progressive spiritual
life, helping them advance toward life’s ultimate goal of emancipation, while
ensuring that they were protected and had all their material needs provided.
As Närada finished his instructions, Yudhiñöhira thanked him and said, “O
great sage, you have asked me if my study of scripture, my wealth and my
marriage are all successful. Please tell me how I can succeed in these things.”
Närada, who had ended his speech with those three questions, replied,
“Scriptural knowledge is successful when it results in humility and good
conduct, wealth is successful when it is both enjoyed and given away in
charity, and marriage is successful when the wife is enjoyed and bears
offspring.”
Concluding his instructions, the åñi said, “O great king, be sure that you are
always free of the five evils which assail men: excessive sleep, fear, anger,
weakness of mind and procrastination.”
Yudhiñöhira again bowed to Närada and took hold of his feet, saying, “I shall
surely do all that you have said. My knowledge has been increased by your wise
words.”
Yudhiñöhira replied in detail to all of Närada’s questions. When he finished the
sage blessed him by saying, “That king who properly performs his duties will
pass his days in happiness and at the end of his life he surely ascends to the
regions of heavenly happiness.”
Yudhiñöhira became curious to learn from Närada about the assembly halls
possessed by the gods. He wondered if there were any equal to the one Maya
had built for him. In the presence of the many kings and sages in his hall
Yudhiñöhira asked, “O great åñi, you can travel with the speed of the mind and
go anywhere within the universe. Please tell me of all the assembly halls you
have seen. Do any of them equal mine?”
The Päëòava asked Närada to describe in detail the other halls as well as who
was to be found in them. Who waited upon Indra in his hall and who upon
Yamaräja? Which fortunate souls attended Brahmä in his hall? Yudhiñöhira’s
enquiry was pointed. He wanted to know where his ancestors, the great kings
of the past, had gone. He was especially eager to hear of his father, Päëòu. Had
143

Päëòu attained the highest heaven? Yudhiñöhira waited expectantly for Närada
to reply.
Närada described the great halls belonging to all the principal gods, beginning
with that of Indra. Indra’s hall is one hundred and fifty yojanas long, more
than a thousand miles, and a hundred yojanas wide, and it shines with the
splendor of the sun. It is capable of dispelling grief, fatigue, fear and weakness.
Indra sits there in a magnificent, ethereal form adorned with a brilliant crown
and bracelets, and wearing effulgent white robes. He is decorated with celestial
garlands of many hues. By his side sits personified Beauty, Fame and Glory.
Närada named all the åñis and other personalities who wait upon the king of
the gods. Faith, Intelligence and Learning are all present in his court, as are
Sacrifice, Charity, Religion, Profit and Pleasure. But there was only one
earthly king from the past, the royal sage Hariçcandra.
Närada went on to describe Yamaräja’s hall. His hall is a full hundred yojanas
square and is delightful in every way. No pain of any kind exists within that
hall and it contains every object of desire, both celestial and human. It could
travel anywhere in the universe according to its owner’s will. Time and Death
personified sit on either side of Yamaräja, and countless åñis surround him.
Gandharvas and Apsaräs entertain the occupants of the hall with music and
dance. The scent of divine perfumes fills the air. Närada named the
personalities who wait upon Yamaräja, which included all the monarchs in
Yudhiñöhira’s line, ending with Päëòu.
Närada then described Varuëa’s hall, and then that of Kuvera, the lord of
wealth. Both those halls were opulent beyond imagination, being filled with
gold and gems, and inhabited by numerous gods and åñis and their shining
consorts. Närada told Yudhiñöhira about Brahmä’s hall. The actual form of that
mystical hall cannot be ascertained as it can assume various indescribable
forms from moment to moment. The hall is made of celestial gems which
constantly change hue, and it appears to be suspended in the firmament by its
own power. The self-effulgent hall knows no deterioration and it continuously
increases the happiness of its occupants. Brahmä sits there surrounded by the
personified forms of Mind, Space, Knowledge, Sound, Touch, Form, Taste,
Scent, Nature, all the elements and the Prime Causes of the universe. Present
also are the Sun, Moon, all the stars and constellations, Joy, Aversion,
Asceticism, Understanding, Patience, Wisdom, Forgiveness, Fortune and all
the Vedas.
144

Yudhiñöhira and his brothers sat in rapt attention as Närada spoke about the
immeasurable splendor and opulence of Brahmä’s hall. He named all the chief
progenitors and all the principal gods and goddesses who waited upon Brahmä.
When Närada stopped speaking, Yudhiñöhira began to question him further.
He wanted to know why only Hariçcandra, out of all the great kings of the past,
had attained to Indra’s abode. He also wanted Närada to tell him about his
meeting with Päëòu. What did Päëòu say to the sage? How was he faring now
in Yamaräja’s assembly?
Närada explained that Hariçcandra had reached Indra’s planet because he had
performed the great Räjasüya sacrifice. That sacrifice involved subjugating all
other kings and distributing charity to hundreds of thousands of Brahmins, and
it had set Hariçcandra apart from the other kings. Närada then told
Yudhiñöhira that Päëòu had given him a message for his son. If Yudhiñöhira
could also perform the Räjasüya, then both he and Päëòu could reach Indra’s
kingdom. Päëòu felt that his sons were now capable of performing such an
incomparable sacrifice. If they were successful, then father and sons would be
reunited in heaven.
Both Närada and Päëòu understood that the gods had their own purposes to
fulfill through Yudhiñöhira’s performance of the Räjasüya. It was part of a
divine plan meant to free the world of demonic influences. There were
presently many evil kings and kñatriyas inhabiting the earth. Before beginning
the sacrifice, Yudhiñöhira would need to overpower them. Only then would he
be able to perform the Räjasüya, and only then would he be able to establish
piety and virtue throughout the world. Närada looked around at the five
brothers who sat humbly before him. He knew they were dear to Kåñëa, who
wanted to use them as instruments to fulfill His own desire to reestablish
religion upon the earth.
Närada concluded, “Therefore, O King, you should perform the Räjasüya
sacrifice. The celestials have ordained it. I shall return when the sacrifice
begins. Now I am going to Dwärakä, for I desire to see Kåñëa, under whose will
this entire universe is moving.”
Närada stood up to leave and Yudhiñöhira requested him to ask Kåñëa to again
visit Indraprastha. Närada agreed and the Päëòavas bowed before him and his
companions. The åñis then disappeared into the sky by their mystic power.
***
145

After Närada’s departure, the Päëòavas continued to live peacefully at
Indraprastha, but Yudhiñöhira was contemplating how he might perform the
Räjasüya sacrifice. He knew that it required vast wealth. It also necessitated his
being able to establish his indisputable power over all other kings. How would
it ever be possible? There were certain kings who would never accept him as
their emperor––the mighty Jaräsandha of Magadha, for example. Jaräsandha
was wicked, and he had already conquered all the districts surrounding his
kingdom. Yudhiñöhira had even heard that Jaräsandha imprisoned the kings he
defeated, with the intention to sacrifice them to Çiva. Jaräsandha was
ambitious. He already had designs on the emperor’s seat, and he was not an
easy opponent to defeat. Yudhiñöhira realized that he would only be able to
perform the Räjasüya with Kåñëa’s help.
Yudhiñöhira’s kingdom was flourishing under his leadership, and his citizens
were devoted to piety. They had everything they desired. The Päëòavas saw
the citizens as family. Yudhiñöhira was more than a father to them, and no one
in the kingdom entertained any hostile feelings toward him. Gradually he
became known as Ajätaçatru, “one without an enemy.” And due to his religious
leadership the gods were also pleased, and thus the kingdom was not afflicted
by fire, disease or other natural disturbances.
Still thinking about the sacrifice, Yudhiñöhira called an assembly of ministers
and advisors. When they were all seated in the great council chamber of the
Päëòavas’ hall, which was called the Mayasabha, Yudhiñöhira began to address
them, his voice resounding like a bass drum. “I wish to perform the Räjasüya.
Having been asked to do so by the great sage Närada, I can understand that the
gods must surely desire it. I do not want dominion over this earth for myself,
but I wish to fulfill the gods’ purpose, and especially that of the Supreme Lord.”
Yudhiñöhira also considered that if he invited Kåñëa to the sacrifice, he could
arrange that He be honored as the chief person present. That would establish
the Lord’s fame and position all over the world. Kåñëa was superior to even the
greatest gods, such as Brahmä and Çiva. Yudhiñöhira expected those gods to
attend his sacrifice, so if people saw them worshipping Kåñëa as supreme, then
His position above those deities would be established.
Then Dhaumya spoke. “O King, you are worthy to become the emperor of this
world. Therefore perform this sacrifice and establish yourself as such. We shall
light the six fires and chant the sacred mantras. But first you must gain the
acquiescence of the worlds’ monarchs. After that you will surely become the
146

undisputed king of this wide earth.”
Having gained the permission of his priest and counselors, Yudhiñöhira
discussed the means by which he might proceed. They all agreed that he should
immediately consult Kåñëa. Kåñëa would certainly provide infallible advice.
Yudhiñöhira then thought of Kåñëa all the more intensely, praying that He
might soon come to his assistance.

Chapter 16
Mighty Jaräsandha
After leaving Indraprastha, Kåñëa had traveled quickly back to Dwärakä. As
He entered the city He was greeted by His relatives, friends, and countless
citizens. After approaching King Ugrasena to offer respects, Kåñëa saluted
Balaräma and then went to see His wives and sons. Finally He entered the
palace of His principal queen, Rukméëé, to rest.
During the coming months He heard about the Päëòavas’ incomparable
assembly hall. He also heard that Subhadrä’s first son had been born, and that
they had named him Abhimanyu. Kåñëa was joyful to hear that the Päëòavas
were flourishing and He began to desire to see them again.
Each day Kåñëa went to the Sudharmä assembly hall to meet with the citizens.
Viçvakarmä, the architect of the gods, had constructed this hall, and it had the
special quality of freeing those who entered it from the six kinds of material
sufferings: hunger, thirst, lamentation, illusion, old age and death. When
Kåñëa entered the hall, He would bow before King Ugrasena, then take His
seat on a bejeweled golden throne. Although not Dwärakä’s king, Kåñëa was
nevertheless respected as the most important person present. The city’s
inhabitants understood His divine status. They regarded Him as their natural
leader, especially after He had personally deposed the previous king, Kaàsa,
Ugrasena’s cruel son, and freed them from his reign of terror.
Once everyone was settled in the hall, jesters, dancers and musicians were
called out to entertain the Yädavas. Brahmins recited Vedic texts or chanted
hymns and prayers, and one could hear the sounds of mådaìga drums, flutes
and bells around the hall, as well as blasts from numerous conch shells. Kåñëa
147

and Balaräma enjoyed the various performances, and they resembled the sun
and moon amid so many shining planets.
One day, soon after Kåñëa had received news of the opening of the Mayasabha,
a stranger arrived at the Sudharmä hall. Kåñëa gave him permission to enter
and he stepped forward with folded palms. The man introduced himself as a
king from a distant territory––one that Jaräsandha had conquered. He
explained how the Magadha king had become more and more aggressive, how
he imprisoned the thousands of kings he conquered, and how he kept them in
a wretched condition until he was ready to kill them. He had managed to
escape and had come as a messenger on the other kings’ behalf.
“O Kåñëa, O unlimited one. We beg You to deliver us from our miserable
condition. Jaräsandha is as powerful as ten thousand elephants. He has
therefore been able to imprison us just as a lion captures a flock of sheep. You
are the most powerful person and are always kindly disposed to those who seek
Your shelter. Therefore, please act for our good fortune.”
It was well known that Kåñëa had fought and defeated Jaräsandha many times,
but the evil monarch had somehow escaped with his life. Jaräsandha hated
Kåñëa for his killing of Kaàsa, who was both Jaräsandha’s friend and his sonin-law. In an attempt to avenge Kaàsa, Jaräsandha had marched against the
Yadus again and again at the front of a vast army, but each time his army had
been destroyed and he had returned in shame to his kingdom to rebuild his
forces, still burning with hatred for Kåñëa.
Kåñëa looked compassionately at the messenger. As He was about to reply,
Närada Åñi suddenly entered the hall. The sage came before Kåñëa, who
immediately rose with His ministers to offer His heartfelt obeisances.
Kåñëa offered the sage a seat and personally worshipped him with arghya. He
then said, “O sage among the gods, it is fortunate indeed that we see you here
today. You are able to travel freely throughout the worlds and therefore you
know everything. Please tell us how the Päëòavas are faring at present and
what are Yudhiñöhira’s plans?”
Kåñëa’s question was significant. By His mystic power He understood that
Yudhiñöhira was desiring to perform the Räjasüya sacrifice, which would entail
his having to conquer Jaräsandha.
Närada replied, “My dear Lord, I know that nothing is beyond Your knowledge,
yet still You act like an ordinary man and question me. I can therefore tell You
that Yudhiñöhira is as well established in his kingdom as Indra is in Amarävaté.
148

He now desires to perform the great Räjasüya sacrifice, and he is making the
necessary preparations. Even now he is praying that You will go to
Indraprastha and assist him. Indeed, he has asked me to come and invite You.”
Kåñëa thanked Närada for the information and turned to His chief advisor
Uddhava. “What should be done?”
Uddhava replied, “It seems that You can achieve two things at once. By going
to Indraprastha You will both enable Your cousin to perform the sacrifice and
bring about Jaräsandha’s destruction. Jaräsandha has now amassed such a large
army that the only way we can defeat him is in a one-on-one encounter. Only
one person is capable of facing him in hand-to-hand combat: Bhéma. If Bhéma
approaches Jaräsandha disguised as a Brahmin, then he can beg from him a
fight. Jaräsandha is famous for never refusing a Brahmin’s request. My dear
Kåñëa, You should accompany Bhéma to Magadha. He will certainly be
successful in the fight if You are there to guide him.”
The assembly voiced their approval. The Yadus had already been planning how
to kill the belligerent Jaräsandha. This seemed like a good solution. Thus Kåñëa
agreed to go to Indraprastha. Reassuring the imprisoned kings’ messenger, He
took permission from King Ugrasena and His father Vasudeva to depart, then
rose and left the assembly.
Kåñëa decided to travel in state with all His family members to Indraprastha, so
He had arranged the Yadus in a long procession around Him. Amid the sounds
of bugles, drums, trumpets and conch shells, the party left Dwärakä on
thousands of golden chariots adorned with jewels, silks and flags. Soldiers
armed with swords and lances and mounted upon great black horses protected
them on all sides. The noble ladies proceeded in their palanquins; behind
them, bulls, mules and asses carried supplies and paraphernalia for the long
journey. Kåñëa and Rukméëé traveled in the center of the procession on a
chariot driven by Däruka and Jaitra, His two personal servants.
The party passed through the provinces of Anartha, Sauvéra and Kurukñetra.
They crossed the rivers Drishadvati and Sarasvaté and then passed through the
districts of Païchäla and Matsya. Finally they arrived at the outskirts of
Indraprastha and sent an advance party to inform the Päëòavas that they
would soon arrive.
When Yudhiñöhira heard that Kåñëa had arrived, he cried out in joy. Along
with his brothers he immediately ran out of the city to greet Him. He ordered
the royal musicians to play and learned Brahmins to recite sacred hymns from
149

the Vedas. The Päëòavas then embraced Kåñëa with affection and led Him
into Indraprastha. Kåñëa saw that the city was festively decorated with
festoons, streamers and colorful garlands. Thousands of citizens crowded in the
streets as He passed by with the Päëòavas on His way to their palace. The
procession of Yädavas following Him moved with difficulty through the thick
crowds. They were all led to the royal quarters by Indraprastha’s chief citizens
and leaders.
After Kåñëa had rested and refreshed Himself, and His family had been settled,
Yudhiñöhira approached Him to discuss the Räjasüya. “My dear Kåñëa, I desire
to perform this sacrifice but I wonder if I shall be successful. Please tell me
what is best for me. I know You will never speak out of any motive other than
for my welfare. Therefore I shall depend entirely upon Your words in deciding
my course of action.”
Yudhiñöhira sat in his hall surrounded by his brothers. An iridescent glow from
the thousands of celestial gems set in the walls lit up their faces as they looked
at Kåñëa, awaiting His advice. In the expectant silence of the hall the soft
murmur of Brahmins chanting hymns could be heard drifting in from nearby
temples.
Kåñëa sat peacefully with His hands in His lap. Maidservants adorned with
bright gold ornaments fanned Him gently with cämaras and fans made of
peacock feathers. Turning to Yudhiñöhira, He said, “You are fit in every way to
perform the Räjasüya sacrifice and become the world emperor, but You will
first have to overthrow the powerful Jaräsandha, who has formed a near
invincible alliance with numerous other monarchs. He has extended his
influence and control throughout the middle portion of the earth and has
designs on the rest. He is the biggest stumbling block to your plans.”
Kåñëa then listed the names of the many kings subservient to Jaräsandha. All
were Kåñëa’s enemies, and many of them had been defeated by Him and
Balaräma in various battles over the years. Now they had come together under
Jaräsandha’s leadership. With these kings united, their armies would be
impossible to defeat. “What then do you think should be done, O descendent
of Kuru? How will you overpower Jaräsandha?”
Bhéma leapt to his feet. “It would not be wise to send out an army to oppose
Jaräsandha in his own province. We should challenge him to single combat. I
have the strength to defeat him, and You, Kåñëa, are expert in policy. Arjuna
always brings victory. Therefore let us three go to Magadha and challenge him.
150

I am confident of success.”
Kåñëa replied, “This is My thought also. Indeed, the wise Uddhava advised Me
in the same way. I for one am prepared to accompany Bhéma and Arjuna to
Magadha to bring about the sinful Jaräsandha’s death.”
Yudhiñöhira was uncertain. He moved uneasily on his throne. “How can I allow
You to go on my behalf?” he asked. “How too can I risk the lives of Bhéma and
Arjuna? They are my eyes and You are my mind, O Kåñëa. Bereft of any of you
I could not possibly continue to live. Do not go. I think that even Yamaräja
would not be able to face Jaräsandha. Pray desist from this determination to
fight with him. I shall give up my desire to perform the Räjasüya. It seems an
impossible goal.”
Yudhiñöhira’s voice was pleading. His love for Kåñëa overpowered any thought
of Kåñëa’s divinity and unassailable position.
Arjuna then spoke. “We are born in a race famous for its valor and prowess.
How can we, like weak men, shrink back in fear of an enemy? We are kñatriyas.
Our duty is to fight and––if necessary––lay down our lives in battle. There
can be no higher act for us than to fight Jaräsandha and try to rescue the
imprisoned kings. If we do not go, men shall revile us as worthless. Such
dishonor would be worse than death.”
Kåñëa agreed. “Arjuna has shown the mood of one born in the Bharata race.
We do not know when death will overtake us, nor have we heard that
immortality has been obtained by desisting from battle. The wise have decreed
that one should, by taking recourse in strength and policy, confront his
enemies. Let us therefore encounter Jaräsandha. Either we shall kill him or,
being ourselves killed, ascend to heaven.”
Yudhiñöhira then became curious to know more of Jaräsandha’s history. Kåñëa
explained that he been born to King Båhadratha, a powerful ruler of Magadha,
when a åñi had blessed the king to attain a son. The åñi had given Båhadratha a
charmed mango to give to his senior queen, but the king divided it into two so
that both his queens might conceive. Both wives then gave birth to only half a
child. The sorrowing queens threw the two halves into the forest, where a
Räkñasa woman named Jara had picked them up. She put them together and
the child suddenly came to life with a roar. Jara returned the baby to the king,
who named him Jaräsandha, or “one who was joined by Jara.”
Kåñëa added, “The time has now come to destroy this Jaräsandha. Without a
doubt Bhéma will defeat him in single combat. Jaräsandha will not refuse to
151

fight. Therefore, O King, grant us your permission to depart.”
Yudhiñöhira assented to Kåñëa’s desire. “Seeing Your mind set upon this
purpose, O Keçava, I consider Jaräsandha already killed and all the imprisoned
kings released. You will certainly lead Bhéma and Arjuna to victory over that
evil monarch. O Kåñëa, what cannot be accomplished by one who has You as
his guide?”
The three heroes decided to set off immediately. They dressed themselves as
snatakas, students just finishing their education and seeking charity. Leaving
Indraprastha they resembled the sun, the moon and the fire-god joined
together. Their wrath toward Jaräsandha inflamed, their bodies appeared to
blaze. When the people saw the three of them resolutely heading out, they
considered Jaräsandha already killed.
They traveled east for many days. At last they came to the Goratha hill, from
where they could see Jaräsandha’s capital, Girivraja. Sitting amid forest land,
the city was beautiful with its lakes and grazing cattle. Fine mansions and
palaces shone from the city center, and five large hills covered with blossoming
trees surrounded it. Kåñëa told the two Päëòavas that this region had long ago
been developed by Manu himself, the father of mankind.
The largest of the five hills, Chaityaka, protected the city’s main gate. The
three heroes ascended this hill and began to tear down its peak with their bare
hands. They hurled boulders and created a landslide. At the foot of the hill was
a massive drum made from the skin of a Räkñasa that Jaräsandha had slain.
Having been struck once, the drum would vibrate for a full month, and
Jaräsandha had it continually sounded to warn anyone who even thought of
attacking the city. Arjuna and Kåñëa smashed the drum to pieces.
Climbing down the hill they clambered over the wall surrounding the city to
gain entrance. The guards stood back in surprise as the three apparent
Brahmins made their unusual entrance. Bhéma led them along the streets
toward the king’s palace. They saw numerous, attractive well-stocked shops. As
they walked past the flower vendors, they snatched garlands and put them on.
They strode into Jaräsandha’s palace and made their way to the central
courtyard, where the king was performing a sacrifice.
Girivraja’s learned Brahmins had been witnessing fearful omens portending
calamity. Thus they had advised the king to fast and to perform sacrifice to
ward off evil. As Jaräsandha sat before the blazing fire, he saw three powerful
men, dressed as snatakas and adorned with garlands, approaching him.
152

Accepting them as Brahmins he immediately rose to greet them, saying, “You
are welcome.”
Kåñëa told the king that His two friends were observing a vow and would not
speak until midnight. At that time, they would tell him the purpose of their
visit. Kåñëa knew that the king had himself made a vow that he would give to
any Brahmin whatever he asked, even if he came at midnight. Jaräsandha had
them quartered in his palace and said he would visit them at midnight.
That night, Jaräsandha entered their room and worshipped his three guests
with proper ceremonies, offering them gifts of milk-bearing cows.
But his guests refused his worship and gifts. Kåñëa said, “O King, we have come
seeking a special kind of charity from you, who are famous for giving the
Brahmins whatever they want. For a great man there is no charity that cannot
be given. Even the body may be sacrificed for a proper cause. Therefore, please
grant us our request.”
Jaräsandha looked at them closely. With their colorful robes and bright
garlands they did not look like any Brahmins he had ever seen. But as they had
come to him in that guise and were asking charity he could not refuse. He said,
“I will give you whatever you may ask. However, you three do not appear to be
Brahmins, dressed as you are and decorated with flowers. Your long arms,
smeared with fragrant sandal paste, resemble tree trunks. Your hands carry
scars from a bowstring. You tore down the peak of the Chaityaka hill and
entered the city as enemies do, avoding the gate. You have also refused my
worship. Such behavior befits an enemy. I think you are kñatriyas. Tell me
honestly, for truth is the ornament even of kings.”
Kåñëa returned the king’s icy stare with a smile. “Your observations are
accurate. We are not Brahmins. The snataka vow may be followed by kñatriyas
as well as Brahmins. And you have surmised correctly that we are enemies.
Thus we have entered your city violently and declined your worship. We have
come to beg from you a duel.”
Jaräsandha was surprised. “I do not recall ever having done you any harm.
Indeed, I am innocent of any crime. One who assails an innocent man receives
sinful reactions which will send him to hell. I always observe the duties of my
order, protecting the people and rendering them no harm. Why then do you
see me as an enemy?”
Angry, Kåñëa replied, “O King, we represent one who desires to uphold the
dignity of a royal line and establish religion throughout the world. How do you
153

consider yourself religious when you have imprisoned so many kings? You even
intend to offer them as human sacrifices to Rudra. To treat these kings as if
they were beasts––who could do such a thing except someone as sinful as
yourself? You will certainly reap the results of your sinful acts, for the law of
karma is infallible. Although you consider yourself without an equal, we will
soon crush your pride. We wish to free the captive kings. Know Me to be Kåñëa
and these two to be Bhéma and Arjuna. Follow now your kñatriya duty and
fight with us today. Either free the kings or go to Yamaräja’s abode.”
Jaräsandha laughed. “I should have guessed. My old enemy Kåñëa, come in
disguise to try to kill me after failing so many times. What sin have I
committed by capturing kings for Çiva’s pleasure? I defeated all of them fairly
in battle. Therefore it is my prerogative to do with them whatever I please. I
will not release them out of fear of You or these other two. I will fight, either
by placing my troops in battle array, or by standing alone against the three of
you. Or, if you prefer, I will fight whichever one of you most desires death at
my hands.”
Kåñëa looked at his two friends. “It is your choice, Jaräsandha. Select any one
of us for single combat and let that settle our dispute.”
Jaräsandha preferred to fight with Bhéma. He considered Kåñëa and Arjuna no
match for his strength. Only Bhéma seemed powerful enough.
Bhéma smiled grimly and clenched his fists. He furrowed his brows and glared
at Jaräsandha. They agreed to meet at sunrise and the king left to make
preparations for the fight.
Jaräsandha had Brahmins utter auspicious Vedic hymns over him, and he
smeared his body with sacred unguents that had been offered to the gods. He
then placed his son upon the throne and bound his hair in a tight knot.
Removing his royal robes, he donned only a loin cloth. As the sun rose he went
out of the city along with Bhéma, for whom Kåñëa had performed the
propitiatory ceremonies to invoke the gods. The king had two massive clubs
fetched from his armory. The two fighters took hold of the clubs and entered a
large roped-off arena just outside the city gates. They appeared like two mighty
lions staring at each other in fury. At a signal given by a Brahmin, they rushed
at each other, shaking the earth with their steps.
The two powerful heroes roared as they came together. They each swung huge
blows, creating fearful sounds and a shower of sparks as their maces met.
Wheeling and dodging, they resembled two dancers on a stage. Onlookers were
154

dazzled by their expertise with the club. They smashed one another with all
their strength but neither gave way. Each was as powerful as ten thousand
elephants and they merely laughed as the mace struck them. Soon both clubs
were shattered and they threw them aside, continuing the fight with their bare
hands.
They seized each other’s necks and dragged one another around the arena.
Each looked for an opportunity to throw his opponent down. Bhéma grabbed
his enemy and tried to crush him with his arms. Jaräsandha broke free and
swung out his leg, trying to unbalance Bhéma. Sometimes they raised their
arms, sometimes dropped them and sometimes held them close. Lifting their
fists they aimed blows at particular parts of their opponent’s body, and then
suddenly brought them down somewhere else. The arena resounded with their
shouts and the sounds of their slaps and punches. Both were expert wrestlers,
and again they exhibited many wonderful movements. They clasped each
other’s arms and waists and pressed with great force. Roaring like clouds they
fought relentlessly like a pair of maddened elephants.
By now a large crowd had formed around the arena. Citizens of every class
came to see the fight, and they gasped in astonishment as the two men
grappled. The sound coming from the arena resembled claps of thunder or a
falling cliff. The earth shook violently as they rolled about, locked together.
Neither showed any sign of fatigue as the fight continued throughout the day
and up until sunset. As darkness fell, the fight was stopped until the next
morning. Jaräsandha invited Bhéma and his two friends back to his palace and
entertained them as honored guests. Even though they were enemies,
Jaräsandha felt duty bound to respect them.
The next morning the fight resumed. Again it continued for the entire day
without either fighter gaining an advantage. And as evening fell they again
returned to the king’s palace.
The fight went on for twenty-eight days. Bhéma began to feel it would never
end. There seemed to be no way to overpower Jaräsandha. The king too felt
respect for his opponent. Jaräsandha had never before been equalled in single
combat, but it appeared that the Päëòava was invincible. On the twentyeighth day, Kåñëa considered how Bhéma might end the fight. Since
Jaräsandha had been joined at birth by the Räkñasé, Kåñëa knew that he would
be weak along that join. Bhéma should tear him in two. When Bhéma was able
to see him, Kåñëa picked up a twig and split it right down the middle. Bhéma
155

took the hint. Finding an opportunity, he threw Jaräsandha to the ground and
stood on one his legs. He then took hold of the other leg and pushed it forward.
With a tremendous roar, he tore Jaräsandha in two from the anus to the head.
The king died with a scream that echoed throughout his entire city. The
citizens were shocked by the cry and they rushed to see what had happened.
They found Bhéma standing over the two halves of the slain monarch. As all
the citizens cried out “Alas!” Kåñëa and Arjuna came forward to embrace
Bhéma. The three of them then went back to the city and ordered Jaräsandha’s
son, Jayatsena, to release the imprisoned kings from the mountain fortress
where they were held. The kings came down to the city and offered their
respects and worship to Kåñëa.
As Kåñëa and the two Päëòavas sat within Jaräsandha’s palace, all of the many
thousands of captive kings bowed before them. On behalf of all of them one
king addressed Kåñëa, “My Lord, we can understand that our sufferings at
Jaräsandha’s hands is the result of our own past sinful activities. We can now
realize that Jaräsandha’s humiliation of us was actually providential, for it has
forced us to give up our false prestige. We were proud of our strength and
positions, and we simply engaged in fighting other kings for supremacy and
wealth, thereby causing the death of so many people. Now we are in a helpless
and wretched condition and can only depend upon You. This is our great
fortune.”
Kåñëa accepted their worship and arranged for them to be given food and
clothing. He then told them to return to their kingdoms and accept
Yudhiñöhira as the world’s emperor. Soon the Päëòavas would perform the
Räjasüya sacrifice, and they should all attend.
Jayatsena also agreed to accept Yudhiñöhira’s authority, and after being
properly installed by Kåñëa as the king of Magadha, he arranged transport back
to Indraprastha for Kåñëa and the Päëòavas. Upon their arrival, Kåñëa went to
Yudhiñöhira and said, “O best of kings, by good fortune Jaräsandha has been
killed and the imprisoned kings freed. Both Bhéma and Arjuna are unharmed.”
Yudhiñöhira joyfully embraced his two younger brothers and Kåñëa. “By Your
grace, dear Kåñëa, anything can be achieved,” he said. “Indeed, it is only by
Your power that anyone else can exhibit power. We are kings and rulers only
as long as You permit; yet although You are the unlimited Supreme, devoid of
mundane desire and hatred, You still appear as an ordinary human being.”
Kåñëa smiled and asked Yudhiñöhira for permission to depart. Yudhiñöhira then
156

set a date to begin the Räjasüya and Kåñëa agreed to return at that time. First,
however, the Päëòavas would have to subjugate the other monarchs of the
earth. Having bade farewell to Kunté and Draupadé, Kåñëa mounted His
chariot and headed back to Dwärakä.
After Kåñëa had departed, Arjuna said to Yudhiñöhira, “O King, I possess the
Gäëòéva bow and inexhaustible quivers of arrows, as well as the prowess to use
them in your service. I would like to go out and make the kings of the world
pay you tribute. Allow me to go north and conquer all those kingdoms.”
Yudhiñöhira replied, “You have my permission, O Dhanaïjaya. Leave on an
auspicious day after gaining the Brahmins’ blessings. You will doubtlessly gain
victory over all.”
Arjuna gathered a large number of troops and soon left for the north. Bhéma,
surrounded by a similar number of men, went east, while Sahadeva went south
and Nakula west.
Yudhiñöhira was thrilled at the prospect of soon being able to perform the
Räjasüya. So many things would thus be achieved. His noble father would be
raised to the highest heaven, the world would be placed firmly on the path of
religion and, most of all, Kåñëa would be honored above all others as the
Supreme Person. Soon the king was consulting with Dhaumya and the other
exalted Brahmins in his kingdom as to the preparations for the sacrifice, and
Vyäsadeva arrived to further advise the king.

Chapter 17
The Räjasüya Sacrifice
Arjuna was becoming successful in his conquests. He first overpowered the
king of the Kulindas, then the Anastas, then the Kalkuttas. He defeated the
many kings on the island continent of Sakala, then encountered King
Bhagadatta, a powerful warrior. The battle with Bhagadatta lasted eight days,
but finally when the king found himself overpowered, he agreed to accept
Yudhiñöhira’s rule.
Arjuna continued toward the north. He reached the mountains and
vanquished the many barbarian tribes. Arriving in Kashmir, he subdued the
157

region’s kñatriyas, then passed over the Himälayas. To the north of the
mountains lay the land inhabited by the Kimpuruñas, semi-celestial beings born
of Yakña women. Incensed at the approach of a human army, they fought a
fierce battle, but finally Arjuna subdued them. The Päëòava then conquered
the land of the Guhakas, another tribe of celestial fighters, followed by a
region inhabited by Gandharvas.
Finally Arjuna arrived in Harivarña, the land where the Northern Kurus dwelt.
At the border, a number of powerful, large-bodied guards stopped him. They
said, “O Arjuna, this land cannot be entered by humans. If you try you will
perish along with your army. Indeed, even if you were able to enter, you would
not see anything, because human eyes cannot see this land or its residents. Go
back. There is nothing to be conquered here. Your conquests are already
sufficient. We are pleased with you and will happily offer you a gift. What
would you like?”
Arjuna bowed respectfully to the divine beings and said, “I desire Yudhiñöhira’s
imperial dignity. If you accept him as the emperor of this wide earth, then
please give something as a tribute.”
The Northern Kurus immediately offered Arjuna a large number of celestial
clothes and ornaments, saying, “We know you and your brothers to be great
servants of the Supreme Lord. Go now with our blessings. May you always gain
victory.”
Taking all the wealth he had won, Arjuna returned to Indraprastha and
reported his success to Yudhiñöhira.
Bhéma had in the meanwhile marched to the east with a powerful army. He
first encountered the Païchälas who happily accepted Yudhiñöhira’s rule. Then
he overcame in battle the Gandakas, Videhas and Dasharnas. One by one
Bhéma subdued the many kings in the east. When he reached Chedi he was
received graciously by its king, Çiçupäla, who enquired, “My dear Päëòava,
what are you bent upon doing?”
Bhéma told him about the Räjasüya and Çiçupäla smiled. He agreed to attend
and offer tribute to Yudhiñöhira. Although he had an old enmity with Kåñëa,
he respected the Päëòavas as righteous and powerful rulers. The king offered
Bhéma his hospitality for some days, then the Päëòava continued on his way.
Bhéma overpowered the kingdoms of Kumära, Koçala and Ayodhya. He
reached the wetlands at the foot of the Himälayas and subjugated all the kings
in that area. Moving on from there, Bhéma encountered the mighty races of
158

the Matsyas and the Malavas. Such noble kñatriyas had never known defeat,
and out of pride in their strength and reputation, they felt obliged to resist
Bhéma’s request that they surrender to Yudhiñöhira, although they bore the
Päëòavas no enmity. Eventually, however, Bhéma vanquished them in battle.
Either by diplomacy or force, Bhéma subjugated dozens of kings. Many of them
then joined him as he marched on, bringing tribute to offer to Yudhiñöhira in
Indraprastha. Those kings who did not surrender were slain by the Päëòava.
Others gave him profuse wealth. Bhéma amassed enormous quantities of gold,
silver, gems, valuable cloth, sandalwood, blankets, carpets, coral and ivory, all
of which he packed on the backs of a long train of elephants and asses. Bhéma
even subjugated the powerful Karëa, ruler of Aìga, as well as all the other
kings in the region who were loyal to him and Duryodhana. After conquering
many barbarian tribes he finally returned to Indraprastha and offered
everything he had acquired to Yudhiñöhira.
On his expeditions to the south Sahadeva had defeated many kings: Surasena,
Ädiräja, Dantavakra. He reached Kuntébhoja’s kingdom and his grandfather
received him with great affection. From there he went on to conquer the
kingdoms of Jambaka, Sheka and Avanté. After crossing the Narmadä River he
arrived at Bhojakota where he fought a long battle with King Bhéñmaka.
Although Bhéñmaka was favorable to the Päëòavas and had been happy to see
his daughter Rukméëé become Kåñëa’s principal queen, he wanted to test the
Päëòavas’ power. After two days fighting, he admitted defeat at Sahadeva’s
hands.
Like his other brothers, Sahadeva subdued numerous kingdoms by both
diplomacy and force. When he came to Mähiñmaté, he encountered King Néla,
who was a friend of the fire-god Agni. As Sahadeva stood in battle against the
king, it appeared as if he and his entire army were on fire. Flames sprang from
the earth and surrounded them on all sides. Thousands of soldiers and chariots
were reduced to ashes. Sahadeva saw even his own life threatened as the fire
swept toward him. He could understand that Agni was assailing him. The
Päëòava quickly dismounted from his chariot and knelt in prayer to the firegod. “O exalted one, you are the mouth of the gods into which all oblations are
placed. You sanctify everything, from you the Vedas have sprung and you are
sacrifice itself. O greatest of gods, please endow me with your energy. O bearer
of all sacrificial offerings, do not place obstacles before Yudhiñöhira’s sacrifice.”
As Sahadeva prayed, the flames gradually died down. Agni then appeared in
159

person before him and said, “O descendent of Kuru, rise up. I was only trying
you. I understand your purposes and those of your brother, Dharmaräja. I
always protect this city, but I shall help you to accomplish your aims.”
Agni then went to King Néla and told him to receive Sahadeva with honor and
offer Yudhiñöhira tribute. The king explained how his beautiful daughter had
won Agni’s heart, and now they were married. Thus he protected the city. On
his order, however, the king would gladly accept Yudhiñöhira’s rule.
Sahadeva moved on to conquer various cannibal races, including one powerful
tribe known as the Kalamukhas. They were a cross between Räkñasas and
humans. He also fought a long battle with the Vanaras at Kiñkindhyä, headed
by Mainda and Dvivida, until they finally agreed to accept Yudhiñöhira’s
righteous rule. The tribes of Niñadhas, Yavanas, Pandyas, Dravidas, Andhas,
Talavanas and many others were all subjugated. At last, he returned to
Indraprastha with vast amounts of wealth.
In the west Nakula conquered the hilly countries, followed by the deserts. The
Mattamayurakas, Sivis, Trigartas, Amvashtas and Karëatas were all subdued.
He reached Madras where his uncle Çalya received him affectionately and gave
him great wealth for the sacrifice. Then he went on to conquer the mleccha
and Yavana tribes on the west coast. Having fully established Yudhiñöhira’s
supremacy in that direction, he too returned to Indraprastha.
Yudhiñöhira joyfully received all his brothers back from their expeditions.
None now stood in opposition to his authority. His treasury was also so full
that it could not be emptied even in a hundred years.
***
It was almost time for the Räjasüya. Kåñëa, as promised, returned to
Indraprastha accompanied by His wives and relatives. The great Yadu and
Vrishni army also arrived with Him, and as they entered the city they filled it
with the rattle of chariot wheels and the blast of conchshells. The already
inexhaustible ocean of gems the Päëòavas possessed was filled to overflowing
when Kåñëa presented His gifts.
When Kåñëa and His relatives had all been properly received, Yudhiñöhira sat
with Him in his assembly hall and said, “O Kåñëa, it is for You alone that this
vast earth has been brought under my sway. Indeed, only by Your grace has this
been possible. I wish now to devote all my wealth to the Brahmins and to Agni,
the carrier of sacrificial offerings. Please grant me permission to perform the
160

Räjasüya sacrifice.”
Kåñëa praised Yudhiñöhira’s many virtues. “You deserve the imperial dignity
without any doubt. Perform the sacrifice. If it is successful, I shall consider it
My own success. I am always seeking your good and will do whatever I can to
assist. Appoint Me in some office and I shall obey your commands.”
Yudhiñöhira asked Vyäsadeva to take charge of the sacrifice. Thus Vyäsadeva
himself became the chief priest. Then he appointed Yäjïavalkya, Soshama,
Paila and Dhaumya Åñis as his assistants. Together they constructed the six
sacrificial altars in the vast compound marked out at a sacred place near the
city.
Yudhiñöhira had arranged for the construction of mansions to house the
thousands of kings in attendance, as well as quarters for the other classes of
men. Innumerable Brahmins were streaming into Indraprastha, and each was
received with gifts of wealth and offered comfortable accommodation.
When the party from Hastinäpura, headed by Dhåtaräñöra and Bhéñma, arrived,
Yudhiñöhira personally received them with love. He bowed at his elders’ feet
and said, “All my wealth and my dominions are yours. Please command me as
you desire.”
Bhéñma, Droëa and Kåpa lifted Yudhiñöhira from his obeisance and embraced
him. They shed tears of happiness to see his opulence and success. From their
first hearing that Yudhiñöhira was planning the sacrifice they had been
overjoyed. Even Dhåtaräñöra was happy, sending word of his approval to
Yudhiñöhira. After all, the Päëòavas were enhancing the glory of their dynasty,
firmly establishing the Kurus’ position as world emperors––a position which
had been lost since Päëòu’s demise.
Holding Yudhiñöhira by his shoulders, Bhéñma said, “It is fortunate indeed that
we see you today ready to perform the great Räjasüya sacrifice. Surely this is by
the Supreme Lord’s grace. You are a fit person to acquire the imperial dignity.
Please allow us to be your servants and give to us some post in the sacrifice.”
After consulting with Vyäsadeva, Yudhiñöhira asked Bhéñma and Droëa to
oversee the organization for the sacrifice. Dushashana was put in charge of
food distribution, while Açvatthämä was solicited to look after the Brahmins.
Duryodhana was appointed to receive all the gifts that were brought for
Yudhiñöhira, and Vidura became the master of the treasury. Kåñëa, with a
desire to gain their blessings, personally undertook the task of washing the
Brahmins’ feet as they arrived.
161

The sacrificial arena was soon crowded with effulgent åñis chanting hymns
from the Säma Veda. Among the sages assisting the sacrifice were Bharadväja,
Gautama, Asita, Vasiñöha, Viçvämitra, Paraçuräma, Kaçyapa and many others
who had descended from the higher regions of the universe. The celestials,
seated upon their shining chariots, came in person as the offerings of ghee
were poured into the fires with utensils made entirely of gold. Before
everyone’s eyes, the gods, headed by Brahmä, Çiva and Indra, took their places
in the arena. The gold platforms around the sacrificial arena, being crowded
with celestials and åñis, looked as beautiful as the sky studded with innumerable
stars.
Närada Åñi attended the sacrifice and he gazed in wonder at all the
personalities in attendance. Amid the thousands of kings he saw Kåñëa shining
like the brilliant sun. Närada marvelled at how the original Supreme Person
was present on earth in human form. The åñi knew that Kåñëa must be working
out some divine plan.
After many days, Yudhiñöhira was crowned as emperor. On the final day of the
sacrifice, the Brahmins prepared the juice of the soma plant to offer to the
great personalities in attendance. First they would be worshipped with due
ritual, then invited to partake of the divine beverage. Bhéñma said to
Yudhiñöhira, “You should now select the most important person at this
assembly and worship him with arghya. The guru, the priest, the relative, the
snataka, the friend and the king––these six all deserve this worship. Therefore
worship all these kings and Brahmins, starting with he whom you consider
foremost.”
Yudhiñöhira asked his counselors who they felt was fit to receive the worship.
There was some uncertainty. Some suggested Brahmä, while others Çiva and
some Vyäsadeva. Yudhiñöhira then asked Bhéñma, “O Kuru chief, who do you
consider to be the best of all those present here today? Who should receive the
first worship, the agra-püjä?”
Bhéñma replied, “As the sun shines among all luminous objects, so Kåñëa shines
among all kings. He is without doubt the most worthy of the first offering.”
Yudhiñöhira agreed fully, as did Sahadeva, who, on Bhéñma’s command, stood
up and announced to the assembly, “Emperor Yudhiñöhira would like to offer
the agra-püjä to Kåñëa. Even though the principal gods are present, they are all
subordinate to Kåñëa. He is the ultimate goal of all yogés and ascetics who aim
for self-realization. But what need is there for me to speak of His glories? All
162

you exalted personalities are well aware of Kåñëa’s position. Indeed, Kåñëa is
the Supersoul of all. Therefore, by satisfying Him we will satisfy all created
beings.”
Sahadeva continued to glorify Kåñëa for several more minutes. When he
stopped speaking, the åñis, celestials and assembled kings resoundingly
approved.
Seeing his decision confirmed by the Brahmins and gods, Yudhiñöhira began to
worship Kåñëa with tears in his eyes. Showers of flowers fell from the sky as he
offered Him the arghya and the soma-rasa. Everyone cheered and stood in
respect as Kåñëa was worshipped.
But a few monarchs had not agreed. Çiçupäla in particular was outraged, and he
remained seated while the offering was made to Kåñëa. He was seething. Kåñëa
was his enemy. Çiçupäla had once been about to marry the beautiful Rukméëé,
but Kåñëa had kidnapped her on her wedding day and married her Himself.
From that day forward, his enmity toward Kåñëa had only increased. This
offering of honor was too much to tolerate! He suddenly leapt to his feet and
began to roar angrily. “Surely destiny is supreme. Otherwise how could this
injustice have occurred? How could those present have been influenced by the
words of a foolish boy? I cannot agree with Sahadeva’s statements. There are
many personalities here much more worthy of the worship than Kåñëa. The
great åñis, the gods and all the earth’s kings are present. Kåñëa is not even a
king. He is nothing but the son of a cowherd man. We cannot even ascertain
His caste or social position. He seems to care nothing for Vedic injunctions
and principles. How then can he be worshipped in this assembly?”
Çiçupäla frowned. His coppery eyes challenged those in the assembly. “Kåñëa is
neither the eldest, the wisest nor the most powerful person present. There are
many others present who are more qualified than Kåñëa in every way.
Yudhiñöhira could have worshipped any one of them before selecting Kåñëa.”
Placing his hand on the long sword hanging from his belt, the Chedi king
furiously concluded, “We have paid tribute to Yudhiñöhira thinking him to be
virtuous. That was clearly a mistake. He has insulted us today by worshipping
Kåñëa, who most unrighteously had Jaräsandha killed. Now we can see what
sort of men are Yudhiñöhira and his brothers, as well as Bhéñma, who has
approved of this madness.”
Çiçupäla turned to address Kåñëa. “As for You, Kåñëa, why have You allowed
Yourself to be worshipped like this? You are exactly like a dog that has stolen
163

the offerings of ghee meant for a sacrifice and is licking them up in solitude. As
a wife is to an impotent man, or a beautiful sight to a blind man, so is this
worship to You, who are not even a king.”
Çiçupäla strode toward the gate of the arena, followed by several other kings
who were in agreement. Other kings rose in anger upon hearing Çiçupäla’s
words. Some left the assembly censuring the Chedi king, while others took up
their swords and shields in order to fight with him.
Bhéñma at once stood up and justified the selection of Kåñëa. He spoke
fearlessly, checking Çiçupäla as he walked away. “He who does not approve of
the worship of Kåñëa, who is the oldest person in the universe, deserves no
respect at all. O King of Chedi, we do not worship Kåñëa out of material
motivations. Many times I have heard from those very advanced in knowledge
that Kåñëa is the Supreme Person, in whom the universe itself is established.
Foolish men like you can never understand this.”
Bhéñma gave numerous reasons why Kåñëa should be worshipped. He described
the many wonderful feats Kåñëa had achieved. Even as a child He had slain the
many powerful demons Kaàsa had sent to kill Him. In the end He had even
killed Kaàsa himself. Once Kåñëa had lifted a great hill with one hand and
held it for a full week. Bhéñma challenged any king to match Kåñëa’s prowess in
battle, or any wealthy man to display more riches. No one could show more
knowledge or wisdom than Kåñëa. In every way Kåñëa was possessed of
superlative opulences.
When Bhéñma stopped speaking Sahadeva rose and lifted his left foot. He was
angry, and his voice boomed, “If there is any man here who feels Kåñëa should
not be worshipped, then let him step forward. I shall place my left foot on his
head. Who will give me a reply?”
As Sahadeva spoke the sky reverberated with voices crying, “Excellent! Well
spoken!” and showers of flowers fell on his head.
Närada then spoke. “Those men who will not worship Kåñëa should be
considered dead even though breathing. They should not even be gazed upon.”
Çiçupäla became even angrier. He turned toward his supporters and shouted,
“Here I am ready to lead you. What needs to be considered? Let us stand in
battle against the Yadus and the Päëòavas.”
Many kings had been agitated by Çiçupäla’s speech. They now gathered around
the Chedi king. Weapons clashed as they were drawn and armor clanked as it
was donned. Çiçupäla continued to stir his supporters, “Let us act quickly so
164

that this sacrifice may not be concluded successfully. Everyone should know
that we did not agree to Kåñëa being worshipped.”
Yudhiñöhira’s supporters also prepared themselves for battle. The assembly of
monarchs looked like the ocean rising at the full moon. Yudhiñöhira was
alarmed to see his sacrifice about to be spoiled, even as it had almost reached
its conclusion. He turned anxiously to Bhéñma and said, “O grandsire, these
kings are seized by wrath and seem bent upon battle. What should I do to avoid
my sacrifice being spoiled and my subjects being harmed?”
Bhéñma laughed and replied in a voice which Çiçupäla could hear clearly. “O
best of Kurus, have no fear that Çiçupäla can create any disturbance in Kåñëa’s
presence. He and his supporters are like a pack of dogs barking at a sleeping
lion. Only as long as Mädhava does not act can they exhibit their valor. He is
the creator and destroyer of all beings in the universe. Çiçupäla has very little
intelligence. He will surely take all these kings with him to Death’s abode. It
seems that Kåñëa now desires to take back to Himself the power He gave to
Çiçupäla. That is why the Chedi king’s intelligence has become so perverse.”
Çiçupäla could not tolerate Bhéñma’s words and he screamed in response, “O
most infamous wretch of your race, are you not afraid to speak such words in
front of all these kings? With you as their leader the Kurus are like blind men
being led by another blind man. You have simply given us pain by describing
the deeds of the powerless cowherd Kåñëa. Arrogant and foolish as you are, it is
a wonder that your tongue does not split into a hundred parts.”
Çiçupäla railed on, insulting both Bishma and Kåñëa. In his opinion, the socalled wonderful deeds Bhéñma had described were nothing. Anyone could
have done them. What was so amazing about lifting a small hill for a few days,
or killing a few inferior demons. “O wretch, although you pose as virtuous and
learned, we can see your real nature. You are sinful and ignorant. Only because
you are impotent have you taken your famous vow of celibacy. You deserve to
die at the hands of these kings.”
Hearing his noble grandfather insulted so grievously, Bhéma became enraged.
His large eyes, resembling lotus petals, expanded even further in anger, and
they turned coppery-red. His brow wrinkled into three lines and he ground his
teeth. He stood up, appearing like Death preparing to swallow every creature at
the end of the yuga. But Bhéñma caught him by the hand and restrained him.
He appeased Bhéma with gentle counsel. Like the ocean unable to transgress its
shores, Bhéma felt unable to disobey the Kuru elder. He sat down again, glaring
165

at Çiçupäla.
Çiçupäla laughed. “Release him, Bhéñma. Let all these kings see him burnt down
by my prowess as an insect is destroyed by fire.”
Bhéma again started up, but Bhéñma stopped him with a glance. Fixing Çiçupäla
with his angry eyes, he then began to narrate the Chedi monarch’s history.
Çiçupäla had been born with three eyes and four arms. As soon as he took birth
he screamed and brayed like an ass. An invisible voice from the heavens
prophesied that he would grow up powerful and fearless, but that one day he
would be killed by a great hero. When Çiçupäla’s mother had asked the voice
who that hero would be, the voice replied that the child’s extra arms and third
eye would disappear when he was placed upon the lap of the person who would
one day kill him. This came to pass when young Çiçupäla was placed upon
Kåñëa’s lap.
Horrified when she realized that Kåñëa would kill her son, Çiçupäla’s mother
had begged, “Please grant me a boon, O Kåñëa. Pardon my son for the offenses
he may commit against You. I desire his welfare and long life.”
Kåñëa replied, “O blessed lady, even when Çiçupäla deserves to be killed I will
forgive him. Indeed, I shall tolerate one hundred offenses from him.”
Bhéñma concluded, “This wretch is thus destined to be killed by Kåñëa. His time
has come. Therefore he roars like this, caring nothing for ourselves or the
infallible and unknowable Kåñëa. A man on the verge of death loses his senses
and will say anything.”
Çiçupäla again attacked Bhéñma, delivering another harsh speech. Bhéñma
waited for him to finish and replied calmly, “O Chedi King, cease your
rantings. There will never be an end to arguments, for words may always be
answered with words. Here is Govinda. Let anyone who opposes Him stand
now before Him in battle. Thus you will attain liberation, your soul entering
His transcendental body.”
Çiçupäla roared like an enraged lion. Then Kåñëa spoke so that everyone could
hear. “This cruel-hearted man is My aunt’s son, yet he always wishes Me and
My relatives ill. Once when I was away from Dwärakä he came and set fire to
My city. He killed many citizens and took away many more in chains. This
wretch even stole saintly Akrüra’s wife.
“On another occasion, cunningly disguising himself, he ravished the princess
of Viçäla, who was the intended bride of the Kurusha king. Obviously desiring
a speedy death, he even tried to possess the chaste Rukméëé. I have tolerated
166

these and numerous other insults at his hands, only because I made a promise
to My aunt. But I promised to bear only one hundred insults. That number has
now become full. I shall therefore slay Çiçupäla now in your presence.”
Having heard Kåñëa’s words, the kings reproached Çiçupäla, but he merely
laughed and said, “O Kåñëa, how do You speak of Rukméëé, who was intended
for me but whom You stole by slyness and deceit? You cannot call Yourself a
man. Do whatever You will! Whether You are angry or friendly, what harm
can You do me?”
As Çiçupäla spoke, Kåñëa thought of His discus weapon, the Sudarçana chakra.
It immediately appeared in His hand and Kåñëa raised it above His head.
Releasing the chakra He said, “I have kept My promise to My aunt. Çiçupäla’s
offenses have now exceeded the number specified and now I will kill him.”
The chakra left Kåñëa’s hand and streaked toward Çiçupäla even as he
continued his tirade. The king tried desperately to draw his sword to fend off
the chakra, but the powerful disc weapon was too swift. It caught him on the
neck and immediately severed his head from his body. The mighty king fell like
a cliff struck by a thunderbolt. As he dropped to the ground, a fearful
effulgence was seen to leave his body and enter into Kåñëa. Rain fell from a
cloudless, thundering sky, and the earth trembled. No one spoke. Çiçupäla’s
supporters were angry, but dared say nothing.
The åñis, however, were pleased by Kåñëa’s act and praised him for it. Gradually
the assembly became peaceful again. Yudhiñöhira ordered his brothers to
perform Çiçupäla’s funeral ceremony without delay. He then installed
Çiçupäla’s son as king of Chedi and the last ceremonies were performed to
complete the Räjasüya. Along with Draupadé, Yudhiñöhira took the final
ritualistic bath in the sacred Yamunä and the sacrifice was over.
After some days the kings departed for their own kingdoms. The Päëòavas
accompanied them to the outskirts of Indraprastha, then bid them farewell.
Yudhiñöhira begged Kåñëa to stay longer, however, and He consented, although
He sent His party back to Dwärakä, while He and His queens remained behind.
During His stay in Indraprastha, Kåñëa was personally served by Draupadé and
He developed much affection for the Päëòava queen. One day when she had
served Him some fruits, He began paring them with a knife. Suddenly the knife
slipped and He nicked His finger. Blood flowed from the cut and seeing this,
Draupadé immediately tore a piece from her fine sari and handed it to Him to
bandage His finger. Taking the cloth Kåñëa smiled and said, “O gentle lady, I
167

will surely repay this gift of your sari.” Draupadé looked down modestly and
thanked Kåñëa, who wrapped His finger with the strip of silk. He then stood up
and left the room.

Chapter 18
Duryodhana’s Envy
Duryodhana had also decided to stay on for a while in Indraprastha with
Çakuni. The prince burned from envy of the Päëòavas’ success. They had far
exceeded him in their power and influence. Duryodhana could not stand the
fact that Yudhiñöhira was now the emperor of the world, a position he felt
should belong to him. He gazed with astonishment at the unlimited wealth
piled in Yudhiñöhira’s treasury. The Kaurava had never seen such opulence.
Duryodhana was especially intrigued by the Mayasabha, and he wanted to take
a closer look. Thus he and Çakuni examined the hall. The Kaurava saw
celestial designs which he had never seen before anywhere else. He was amazed
by the workmanship and splendor of the palace. It was as if he had gone to the
heavenly planets. Bright gems sparkled on all sides of the spacious hall, and
Duryodhana could feel a cool breeze which carried a mixture of celestial
fragrances. Ivory and gold seats stood by the side of lotus-filled lakes. The walls
were inlaid with exquisite carvings depicting the gods and their consorts.
Duryodhana slowly made his way through the hall, his many golden ornaments
jangling together as he walked. As he saw Maya’s intricate and wonderful
workmanship he became even more jealous. He snapped angrily at the palace
servants walking in front of him. With his golden-helmeted head held high, he
walked casually, trying not to show any signs of being impressed.
Gradually he came to the large crystal pond at the center of the palace. The
water was perfectly clear and still. At first glance it appeared to be a
continuation of the marble floor leading up to it, and Duryodhana made that
mistake. Fully clothed and with his eyes wide open he fell straight into the
water. The Päëòavas were standing on a golden balcony above the pond.
Seeing Duryodhana falling in with his arms and legs akimbo, Bhéma laughed
aloud. Many of Kåñëa’s queens were also present and they too laughed.
168

The Kaurava prince hauled himself out of the lake, helped by Çakuni. He did
not even look at the Päëòavas or Kåñëa and His queens. Their laughter was
unbearable. Yudhiñöhira saw Duryodhana’s embarrassment and told his
brothers not to laugh. Kåñëa smiled but said nothing as Yudhiñöhira arranged
for dry clothes to be brought and offered to the angry prince. Duryodhana
quickly put them on and continued his tour, trying hard to conceal his feelings.
Everything was intolerable to him––the magnificence of the palace, the
incomparable beauty of the queens who moved about within it, and
particularly Draupadé. Duryodhana was still burning from his failure to win the
Païchäla princess. She was a jewel among women. She too had laughed when
he had fallen into the lake. This was agony. Suddenly he again found himself a
victim of the deceptive designs of the palace; he walked into an apparently
open door, then avoided another because he thought it was closed when it was
actually open. The palace attendants were struggling to restrain their laughter.
Humiliated and angry, the prince stormed out.
Yudhiñöhira felt sorry to see Duryodhana’s pain. He tried to console him in
various ways, but Duryodhana just laughed. He bade the Päëòavas farewell and
left for Hastinäpura followed by his large retinue, his mind bent upon revenge.
Then Kåñëa also decided to return home. As He was departing He spoke
affectionately to Yudhiñöhira. “O King, cherish all your subjects with ceaseless
vigilance and patience. As the cloud is to all creatures, or the large tree to the
birds, so should you become the refuge to your dependents.”
After Kåñëa’s departure the Päëòavas approached Vyäsadeva, who had not yet
left. Yudhiñöhira asked him if the sacrifice had been successful. The åñi replied,
“O Kuru child, this sacrifice will yield great results for thirteen years. You shall
be the undisputed emperor of this wide earth, but at the end of that period you
will be the cause of a war which will rid the world of kñatriyas.”
Yudhiñöhira was alarmed. Seeing his expression, Vyäsadeva said, “Do not be
aggrieved. No one can overcome the influence of time. Everything is arranged
by the Supreme for the ultimate good of all. This war will be Duryodhana’s
fault, not yours. I shall now go to the mountains, but you will see me again in
times of need.”
The åñi then stood up and left, surrounded by all the other sages. When they
were gone Yudhiñöhira spoke to his brothers. “The sage’s words cannot prove
false, but I do not wish to be the cause of suffering in the world. From this day
on I shall not speak a harsh word to anyone. I shall always practice virtue and
169

shall see no difference between my own sons and those of others, and I shall
follow my elders’ commands without the least hesitation. In this way I shall
avoid disagreements, for they are the cause of war.”
Yudhiñöhira continued to think about Vyäsadeva’s words. It seemed that the
Lord’s plan was unfolding. Although the Päëòavas had asserted their rulership
over the world, it was still a fact that many impious kings were exploiting the
earth’s resources. Yudhiñöhira saw at the sacrifice that many had supported
Çiçupäla against Kåñëa, although they were afraid to oppose Him openly. Who
knew what evil schemes Duryodhana and his brothers would dream up? All of
this was no doubt Kåñëa’s arrangement to rid the world of ungodly elements.
Yudhiñöhira remained immersed in thought of Kåñëa and His mysterious plans.
***
As he made his way back to Hastinäpura, Duryodhana sat brooding and
miserable in his chariot. Çakuni asked, “What ails you, O King? Why are your
sighing again and again?”
The prince looked distractedly at Çakuni. “O Uncle, I am filled with jealousy to
see the world under the Päëòavas’ sway. Having witnessed their astounding
sacrifice and seeing them shining like gods in heaven, my heart burns day and
night. Indeed I am drying up like a shallow pool in the summer sun.”
Duryodhana gazed out of his chariot at the rolling countryside with its welltilled fields and blossoming orchards. Groups of villagers stood and watched as
the royal procession moved along the road. The prince continued, “When
Kåñëa killed Çiçupäla no kings dared to speak. They were all awed by the
Päëòavas’ might, or else how could they have tolerated such an injustice?”
Duryodhana wrung his hands. “I cannot tolerate it. I shall therefore enter fire,
drown myself or swallow poison. What man who possesses any prowess at all
can bear to see his enemies prosper? How can I ever equal their power and
opulence? Who can help me achieve such influence? Fate is supreme and men’s
exertions useless. All my efforts to destroy the Päëòavas have failed. Instead,
they flourish like lotuses in a lake. Therefore I should die! Know that I am in
the grip of grief, O Uncle, and please inform my father.”
Çakuni moved closer to his nephew. “O Duryodhana, do not envy the
Päëòavas. They are receiving what is rightfully theirs, due to their own deeds.
They have their half of the kingdom, and with Kåñëa’s help and Drupada’s
alliance they have grown rich. What is there to be sorry about?”
170

The Gandhara ruler smiled as he spoke. His eyes narrowed slightly and he
fingered his jeweled rings. “Your cousins have conquered the world and now
possess limitless wealth. Why do you grieve? This wealth can now become
yours. You said there are none to help you, but I do not agree. You have one
hundred brothers, the greatly powerful Droëa, Karëa and the invincible
chariot-warrior, Kåpa. And my brothers, along with the mighty Somadatta,
stand ready at your command. Take the earth and rule it without a rival.”
Duryodhana’s eyes widened. He sat up straight on the leather upholstered seat.
Perhaps his uncle was right. The Kauravas’ strength was hard to rival. Droëa,
Bhéñma, Kåpa, Karëa––who could face these men when they stood together in
battle? Duryodhana spoke eagerly, “O King, if you think it wise, then I shall
conquer the Päëòavas. This whole world shall be mine, along with the
magnificent Mayasabha.”
Çakuni slowly shook his head. He played with the set of dice he carried with
him everywhere. “Do not be rash, O King. There are many ways to overcome
an enemy apart from battle. We cannot conquer in battle the Päëòavas,
especially when they are united with Kåñëa. Not even Indra with all the
celestials could overpower them. I was thinking of another way by which they
can be defeated.”
Çakuni suggested that they challenge Yudhiñöhira to a game of dice. He knew
Yudhiñöhira was fond of playing, and also that he was not expert. At dice
Çakuni had no equal anywhere in the world. “Without a doubt Yudhiñöhira will
accept your challenge,” Çakuni continued, his arm resting on Duryodhana’s
shoulder. “He cannot resist the game, and with a little encouragement, he will
surely gamble away all his possessions. Thus I will win for you his entire
kingdom and wealth.”
As they entered Hastinäpura, Duryodhana suggested that they go at once to
Dhåtaräñöra and get his permission for the plan. Arriving before the blind king,
Çakuni said, “O great monarch, here is your son Duryodhana. He is pale and
emaciated with grief. You should ask him the cause and try to find a remedy.”
Dhåtaräñöra was surprised. “Why are you sad, my son? You have at your disposal
everything enjoyable, no less than the gods. Vast wealth, the best of clothes,
the finest food, beautiful women––all these await your pleasure. How then
have you become depressed?”
Duryodhana at once admitted that he was consumed by jealousy of the
Päëòavas. Even though he had wealth, their wealth––his enemy’s wealth––
171

was superior. The Kaurava then described to his father what he had seen in
Indraprastha. “During the sacrifice, Yudhiñöhira was given so much tribute that
it became necessary to turn some of it away. He had been offered millions of
elephants, horses, cows and camels. Heaps of gems and golden ornaments were
stacked up like mountains. The Päëòava provided thirty servant maids for
each of 88,000 snataka Brahmins. He arranged to feed one hundred thousand
Brahmins at a time during the sacrifice and when they were fed conches were
blown. O Father, I heard those conches sounding all through the sacrifice.”
Duryodhana told the king how he had even seen the gods at the Räjasüya.
Samudra, the ocean deity, had personally offered Yudhiñöhira celestial
ambrosia drawn from the depths of the sea. This beverage is superior even to
the soma-rasa that Indra enjoys. It was impossible for Duryodhana to describe
to his blind father all that he had seen. As he remembered it, however,
Duryodhana’s heart burned with the fire of envy.
Dhåtaräñöra remained silent. Then Çakuni spoke: “O King, I know a means by
which your son may win all this wealth for himself. I propose that you invite
Yudhiñöhira to a game of dice. No one can defeat me at dice. I will win easily.
In this way we shall acquire all that Yudhiñöhira possesses.”
“Father, please grant us your permission to carry this out. Let us conquer our
enemies and enjoy this earth.”
Dhåtaräñöra was uncertain. “Let me consult the wise Vidura. He will only
advise us for our own good.”
“Vidura will certainly block our plan,” Duryodhana replied. “And if he does,
then I shall take my own life. Then you and Vidura may live here happily.
What need do you have for me anyway?”
Dhåtaräñöra was pained. Duryodhana was his most dear son. How could he ever
refuse his requests? The king decided he would talk with Vidura and convince
him. He then ordered that a palatial hall be constructed for the match. It
should have a thousand pillars and a thousand gates. Covering two square miles
it should be set with countless gems. When it was complete they could invite
the Päëòavas for the game.
Dhåtaräñöra was still uneasy. He knew the evils of gambling. He called for
Vidura and said, “I have decided to invite the Päëòavas for a friendly game of
dice with my sons. They can gamble a little and thus sport together. I am
building a fine hall for their pleasure.”
Vidura frowned. “I do not approve of this, O King. Gambling always brings
172

with it dispute and fighting. You should be careful that no dissension arises
between your sons and the Päëòavas, for that may cause destruction.”
Dhåtaräñöra tried to reassure his brother. “When you, me, Bhéñma and Droëa
are here, what evil can befall us? In any event, destiny is supreme. Whatever
has been ordained by the supreme power will come to pass. What can our
efforts do to avert it? I have already arranged for this gambling match for my
son’s pleasure. Please do not try to change my mind.”
Vidura sighed. “Fate is surely all-powerful, O King, but we nevertheless receive
the results of our own acts. We have free will. The supreme power simply
reciprocates with our desires. It is the consequences of our acts which are
inevitable, not the acts themselves. O lord, consider carefully your motivation
in allowing this gambling match.”
Dhåtaräñöra remained silent and Vidura slowly left his chamber with a heavy
heart. He could understand that Kali-yuga, the dark age of quarrel and
suffering, was beginning. The gambling match would certainly set in motion
the events that would lead to the annihilation of the world’s rulers. Vidura
remembered the Räjasüya and the kings who had supported Çiçupäla against
Kåñëa. He was apprehensive, but he felt helpless. Although the king was not a
fool, he was controlled by his covetous and mean-minded son. Vidura’s counsel,
although aimed at the good of all, was falling on deaf ears.
***
During the coming weeks, as the hall was being built, Dhåtaräñöra reflected on
Vidura’s words. He disliked countermanding his brother’s advice, because he
knew Vidura never gave faulty counsel. The impending dice match was
undoubtedly fraught with danger. If it led to a battle between the Kauravas and
the Päëòavas, that would be a disaster.
The king decided to try once more to change his son’s mind. Sitting alone with
him in his chamber, he said, “O son of Gändhäré, there is no need to gamble
with your cousins. Vidura does not approve of it and I do not like it either.
Gambling inevitably leads to dissension. Everything we now have could be
ruined. If you desire wealth equal to that of the Päëòavas, then let us perform a
sacrifice similar to theirs. Then the world’s kings will bring you tribute as they
did Yudhiñöhira. Why must you take Yudhiñöhira’s wealth from him?
Yudhiñöhira is gentle. He will never attack you or cause you pain. Give up your
envy and do not grieve. Enjoy life with all the good things you already possess.”
173

Duryodhana would not accept his father’s advice. He told him about the
incidents in the Mayasabha––how the Päëòavas, and especially Draupadé, had
laughed at him. As he remembered it again his anger was inflamed. In a choked
voice he described the incidents to his father. “Seeing what I thought to be a
door, but which was really a solid piece of crystal, I walked straight into it and
smashed my head. As I stood with my brains swimming, the twins came up and
supported me. Sahadeva led me by the hand, smiling and saying repeatedly,
‘This is the door, O King.’ I felt like dying then and there.”
The Kaurava prince also gave more details about the Päëòavas’ wealth. The
Kauravas could never equal that wealth even if they performed one hundred
sacrifices. Duryodhana had never even heard of many of the shining gems he
had seen at Yudhiñöhira’s palace. For weeks an endless line of kings and
chieftains arrived at Indraprastha, each bringing huge amounts of tribute in an
attempt to excel the others in charity. Seeing all the gold, gems, weapons,
animals, clothes, rugs, silks, skins, serving maids, perfumes and incenses,
Duryodhana was shocked. When he saw Samudra fetch Varuëa’s massive
golden conch, which Kåñëa then used to bathe Yudhiñöhira in the final
sacrificial ablution, the Kaurava prince all but lost his senses.
Dhåtaräñöra listened in silence as his son continued. “O Father, the Päëòavas
have even spread their dominion to the far northern regions of Harivarña
where no man can go. The residents of that land gave them hundreds of
celestial conches, and I heard them being blown during the sacrifice. The
tremendous sound made my hair stand erect. Weaker kings fainted upon
hearing the noise.”
Duryodhana’s voice became increasingly urgent as he pleaded with his father.
“I cannot live as long as the Päëòavas possess such incomparable opulence. If
they are allowed to flourish it will only be a matter of time until they
overpower the Kauravas. They are our enemies. It is only right that we should
attack them and take their wealth. This is the kñatriya code. Either I will gain
control of the earth or I will die. This gambling match is the safest and surest
way to achieve my ends.”
Dhåtaräñöra thought for some moments, then replied, “O son, I hate such
enmity, especially when you bear it towards those who are powerful. Such
hostility brings about a change of feelings and is thus itself a painful weapon,
although not made of steel. Do you realize that what you are suggesting will
certainly cause a fearful war?”
174

Duryodhana paced impatiently in front of his blind father. “What violence is
there in a simple dice game? If Yudhiñöhira chooses to gamble and lose his
wealth, then how can anyone blame us? We have nothing to lose. Çakuni will
win every game. O Father, please grant me permission to invite the Päëòavas
for this match.”
The king rose from his seat and called for his servants. As they led him away
he said, “Your words do not find favor with me, O prince, but do what you will.
You will surely repent your rashness later, for deeds fraught with impiety never
bring prosperity. I shall ask Vidura to invite the Päëòavas.”
A few days later the king heard that the hall had been completed. He called for
Vidura and said, “Please leave at once for Indraprastha and bring Yudhiñöhira
and his brothers. Invite them for a friendly game of dice with their cousins in
our new hall.”
Vidura tried one last time to dissuade the king. “This match will bring about
the destruction of our race. Clearly your son wants only the Päëòavas’ wealth
and has contrived this means to take it. Dissension among our family members
will cause our ruin. O King, stop it now while you have the chance.”
But Dhåtaräñöra had already made up his mind. “O brother, everything lies in
the hands of destiny. If destiny so wills it, then we will not be harmed; and if by
the course of fate we are to suffer, then what can be done? Everything happens
according to Providence. Therefore please go to Indraprastha and return with
Kunté’s invincible sons.”
Vidura looked despairingly at the blind monarch. It was hopeless to try to
change his mind. His attachment for Duryodhana was too strong. Even though
he could obviously see the results of acquiescing to his son, Dhåtaräñöra still did
not refuse him. Fearing the worst, Vidura left the palace and prepared for his
journey.

Chapter 19
The Dice Game
After the Räjasüya, Indraprastha had become unlimitedly opulent. The roads,
streets and lanes were sprinkled daily with perfumed water. Huge white
175

mansions stood along the sides of the wide avenues. Jeweled gates and arches,
golden waterpots at their sides, stood at the city’s crossroads. All the citizens
were dressed in colorful silks and adorned with garlands and gold ornaments,
and they felt secure under the Päëòavas’ rule. Every day, more and more kings
were arriving in Indraprastha from other countries, coming to pay tribute.
Yudhiñöhira sat in the Mayasabha with his brothers. When they were not
engaged in affairs of state, they enjoyed hearing spiritual instructions from the
Brahmins. As they were seated one day listening to the åñis recounting ancient
Vedic histories, a guard arrived to announce Vidura’s arrival. Yudhiñöhira
immediately stood up to receive him. He loved Vidura, who had always shown
them so much care from childhood. With tears in his eyes Yudhiñöhira bowed
at his uncle’s feet. As he rose he saw Vidura’s expression and said, “O Khattwa,
your mind seems disturbed. Do you come in peace? Is the king well? Are his
sons obedient to their old father and the people obedient to his rule?”
Taking his seat close to the Päëòavas, Vidura replied, “The illustrious monarch
and his relatives are well. Surrounded by his sons and ministers he reigns like
Indra. But he is bent upon his own aggrandizement. The king ordered me to
first enquire after your welfare and then to inform you that he has constructed
a hall equal to yours. He wishes you to come and see it and to enjoy a game of
dice with your cousins.”
Yudhiñöhira glanced across at his brothers and then back to Vidura. He was
immediately apprehensive. “O Khattwa, if we gamble, we shall probably fight.
How can I possibly consent to the king’s proposal? What do you think I should
do?”
“Gambling is the root of all misery,” Vidura said. “I tried to dissuade
Dhåtaräñöra, but he could not hear my advice. Thus he has sent me here to
bring you to Hastinäpura. It seems that Duryodhana desires a game in which
Çakuni will match his skills with yours. The blind king has granted his
permission and he now wishes you to come at once.”
Knowing that it was Dhåtaräñöra who had sent the invitation, Yudhiñöhira felt
obliged to go. He had vowed never to refuse his elders’ orders. Even though he
was now emperor of the world, Dhåtaräñöra was a respectable superior. He said,
“I have no desire to gamble, but if I am challenged I will not be able to refuse,
because the kñatriya code is to always accept a challenge. Surely this world
moves according to the will of supreme Providence. All-powerful fate deprives
us of our reason and we move according to its dictates as if bound by a rope. I
176

will come to Hastinäpura on King Dhåtaräñöra’s command.”
Yudhiñöhira knew that Çakuni was a gifted dice player. The Gandhara
monarch was familiar with every secret of the game. But Yudhiñöhira also knew
that he could only win if the Lord ordained it. No one moved independently of
the Lord’s desire. If the Lord desired that Yudhiñöhira lose his wealth, then
what could he do? He simply had to accept it as part of a divine scheme meant
ultimately for his own good. He ordered his brothers to make themselves ready
to travel.
***
The party left the following day. With the Brahmins walking before him,
Yudhiñöhira proceeded on a golden chariot, followed by his brothers. Attired in
royal robes and golden ornaments, they entered Dhåtaräñöra’s palace, where
they were greeted by the king and his sons, along with Bhéñma, Droëa, Karëa,
Kåpa and the other kings whom Dhåtaräñöra had invited. They were then
shown to beautifully furnished rooms where they settled for the evening. After
going through their daily physical exercises and their religious rites, they were
offered the best of food. Dancers and singers entertained them as they ate.
Then, after Brahmins had blessed them, they retired for the night.
The women from Indraprastha entered the ladies’ quarters. All of Dhåtaräñöra’s
daughters-in-law were filled with envy to see their beauty and prosperity. After
exchanging greetings with the Kaurava women, Draupadé and the other
Päëòava queens rested for the night on ivory beds covered with soft mattresses
and spread with pure white silk.
In the morning the Päëòavas were brought to the new assembly hall. Amid the
sound of drums and other instruments, they took their places on jeweled seats
covered with costly rugs. The hall was crowded with kings from many
provinces, with Dhåtaräñöra sitting at their head. Duryodhana and Çakuni sat
opposite the Päëòavas, both smiling. When Yudhiñöhira was settled, the
assembly became silent and Çakuni said, “We have all been waiting for you, O
King. The hall is full and we are eager to play dice.”
Yudhiñöhira answered, “O King, there is no prowess to be found in deceitful
dice playing. Indeed, it is bereft of morality. Why then do you wish us to play?”
Çakuni raised his eyebrows. “We do not wish to be deceitful, O Yudhiñöhira. It
is simply a friendly match. We can fix the stakes so that no one is injured.”
“The great Åñi Devala has intructed me that one should not engage in playing
177

with a professional gamester,” Yudhiñöhira replied. “O Çakuni, do not try to
take from me the wealth with which I wish to serve the Brahmins. Even
enemies should not be vanquished by desperate stakes in deceitful play. And I
have no desire to win more wealth by gambling, so why should I play with you?”
Çakuni laughed. “O King, obviously one plays at dice to win something. If you
are afraid of me, or if you feel I have dishonest motives, then do not play.”
Yudhiñöhira looked up at the Kuru elders. They were all sitting silently. Both
Bhéñma and Vidura sat with their heads down. After Vidura, Bhéñma had also
tried unsuccessfully to dissuade the king from allowing the match, and he had
attended it reluctantly. Dhåtaräñöra sat on his splendid throne, listening
carefully to the discussion.
Yudhiñöhira said, “O Çakuni, when challenged I never refuse. This is my vow.
Fate is all-powerful. We are all under the sway of destiny, and whatever is
ordained will surely come to pass. With whom can I play in this assembly? Who
can stake equally with me?”
Yudhiñöhira knew that Çakuni, although more skilled at the game, could not
match his wealth and was thus not a suitable opponent for him. But
Duryodhana said quickly, “I shall supply gems, gold and other wealth, O King.
Let Çakuni cast the dice on my behalf.”
Yudhiñöhira raised his eyebrows. It was exactly as he had feared. Obviously this
was no friendly match. He raised his objections in a firm voice. “I have never
heard that one man plays while another stakes, O Duryodhana. This is not
within the rules of the game.”
Yudhiñöhira again looked at the elders, but none of them spoke. Duryodhana
laughed and repeated that if Yudhiñöhira was afraid then he need not play.
Çakuni smiled and rolled the dice in his hands. The sound of the ivory dice
striking together rose above the silence in the hall. Seeing Dhåtaräñöra’s
complicity, Yudhiñöhira said, “If it is your desire, Duryodhana, then let the play
begin.”
The Päëòava took a priceless string of pearls from his neck. “Here is my stake,
O King. With what shall you wager against me?”
Duryodhana replied, “I have wealth counted in the millions and tens of
millions but I am not proud of it. I shall equal all that you stake. Throw the
dice, Çakuni, and let us see who wins.”
Çakuni called out a number and threw the dice. As the dice came to a stop on
the number he had called, he cried out, “See, I have won!”
178

Yudhiñöhira said, “In a game contrived only for my defeat you have won by
unfair means, O King. Do you feel happy? Let the game continue. I have many
beautiful jars each filled with a thousand gold coins. These shall be my next
stake.” Yudhiñöhira cast the dice and called his number, but they fell
differently. Çakuni again took up the dice. He closed his eyes and held them
tight, then called for an eight. The dice rolled across the polished wooden
board and came to a stop on eight.
Çakuni pointed to the dice like an excited child. “See, I have won again.” His
laughing voice echoed round the hall.
Yudhiñöhira remained impassive. He had little chance of defeating Çakuni at
the game. The Gandhara king had practically made dice his life and soul. He
played always with experts. Backed by Duryodhana’s resources he would also be
impossible to overcome at staking. Yudhiñöhira said, “I shall stake my sacred,
victorious and splendid chariot, equal to one thousand other chariots. It is
made of refined gold and covered with tiger skins. Its wheels resound like
thunder when it is driven, it is adorned with a thousand bells, and it is drawn
by eight steeds as white as moonbeams and swifter than the wind itself.”
It was Çakuni’s turn to cast first again. He called out his number and the dice
fell as if at his command. “I win!” His voice mixed with the laughter of
Duryodhana and his brothers. They taunted Yudhiñöhira, “What will you stake
next, O Emperor?”
Yudhiñöhira sat surrounded by his brothers. All of them glared at Duryodhana.
Arjuna reached over and touched Yudhiñöhira’s shoulder. He shook his head
slightly as his elder brother turned toward him, but Yudhiñöhira said, “I have
one hundred thousand serving girls who are all young and richly adorned with
costly garments and gold ornaments, and who are all skilled in the sixty-four
arts of service, especially dancing and singing. At my command, they wait
upon celestials, Brahmins and kings. These shall be my next stake.”
“Consider it matched,” said Duryodhana with a smile. Once again Yudhiñöhira
failed to throw the number he called, but Çakuni rolled the dice with
consummate skill and won the throw. “Ha, I win again!”
On the royal podium Dhåtaräñöra leaned forward and eagerly asked Vidura,
“What was the stake? What has been won?” Vidura moved uneasily. He could
not tolerate seeing the Päëòavas being robbed by such deceitful means. He
watched in pain as Yudhiñöhira lost throw after throw. The Päëòava staked
thousands of elephants, chariots, celestial horses and countless other draught
179

animals. He put up hundreds of thousands of soldiers with all their weapons
and armory. Precious stones, gold and other valuable metals were staked by
Yudhiñöhira as he became gripped by the fever of the game. All that could be
heard was Yudhiñöhira calling out the stake, Çakuni crying out, “I have won!”
and then the Kauravas’ loud laughter.
Bhéma was seething with anger. From the time that Duryodhana had tried to
poison him, he had longed to face the Kaurava prince in an open and fair fight.
This kind of devious and cowardly antagonism was unbearable. Without
Yudhiñöhira’s order, however, he could say or do nothing. Arjuna also longed to
string his bow and challenge his guileful cousins to open combat, but he too
felt constrained by Yudhiñöhira. He could only watch in agony as they were
humiliated by the sneering Duryodhana and his brothers.
Vidura could tolerate no more. He stood up suddenly and, within everyone’s
hearing, said to Dhåtaräñöra, “O King, listen carefully. I shall say something
which will be disagreeable to you as medicine is to a dying man. When the
sinful wretch Duryodhana was born and he cried like a jackal, I told you then
to reject him. You did not accept my advice, although it was clear he would
cause the destruction of our house. Can you not now see that prophesy coming
to pass?”
The game stopped. All the kings stared at Vidura. Duryodhana scowled, but his
father remained silent. Vidura continued, “Hear the ancient advice of Sukra,
the celestial åñi. Those who seek to collect honey from a high place become so
absorbed in their aim that they do not see the drop that awaits them.
Ascending to dangerous heights they fall and perish. Your son, maddened by
gambling, is the collector of honey. Creating hostilities with the powerful
Päëòavas, he does not see the fall which awaits him.”
Vidura looked straight at the blind king as he spoke. He reminded him of how
the evil king Kaàsa had been rejected and slain by his own people in order to
save their dynasty. Similarly, the Kauravas should reject Duryodhana. The
king should order Arjuna to kill him at once. “In this way, O King, purchase
these peacocks, the Päëòavas, at the cost of this crow. Do not sink into an
ocean of grief for the sake of one crooked family member. There was once a
bird that vomited gold. A foolish king obtained this bird and out of greed killed
it in order to enjoy the gold more quickly. Thus he destroyed both his present
and future happiness. O Dhåtaräñöra, do not imitate that king by persecuting
the Päëòavas for the sake of their wealth. Instead, be like the flower-seller who
180

cherishes his trees with affection and thus picks flowers from them
continuously.”
Vidura warned the king of the consequences of forming an enmity with the
Päëòavas. Not even the celestials could face them in battle. “If the gambling
continues there will be war wherein the Kauravas and all their allies will be
destroyed. You will be the cause of this war, O King, because you alone have
the power to stop your son. Still you remain silent. I can see that you are
enjoying your son’s success. A man who follows another’s heart even against
his own better judgment sinks into affliction, like a man going to sea in a boat
guided by a child. Do not, O King, follow a wretch into the terrible fire that
has blazed forth. When Ajätaçatru and his brothers are robbed of their
kingdom and become angry, who will be your refuge in that hour of confusion?
Why do you seek the Päëòavas’ wealth? You can earn as much as you like
without gambling. Win instead these tigers among men who are worth more
than any amount of wealth! Send Çakuni back to Gandhara. Do not wage a
war that will destroy you to your roots.”
Duryodhana could take no more. He leapt to his feet. Seeing that his father
remained silent, he rebuked Vidura harshly. “Now we can see your true nature.
Rejecting those who maintain you, you side with the enemy. O Khattwa, there
is no greater sin than injuring one’s supporter. How do you not fear this sin?
You are shameless, ungrateful and disobedient to your elders. Why do you
accuse me? Where is my fault? As water flows downwards, so I act how my
nature dictates. I have received my nature from the Supreme. He controls all
men’s actions. You may go wherever you please. We cannot shelter enemies or
those who are envious of their own protectors. An unchaste wife, however well
treated, always forsakes her husband.”
Vidura shook his head in despair. He again addressed Dhåtaräñöra. “O King, tell
me honestly what you think of those who reject the advice I have given? Surely
a king’s heart is unsteady. They grant protection one moment, then strike with
weapons the next.”
Vidura turned toward Duryodhana. “O prince, you consider me foolish, but
consider instead him to be a fool who ignores a well-wisher’s advice. There are
plenty of sinful men in this world who will speak agreeable words, but one who
speaks what is disagreeable but beneficial is rare. Such a man is a king’s true
friend who, without considering what is agreeable or not, speaks and acts only
according to virtue.”
181

Duryodhana laughed derisively. “Fie on old Khattwa! What good can he do for
us?”
Ignoring Duryodhana’s rebuke, Vidura pointed to the Päëòavas. “Here are five
enraged serpents with venom in their eyes. Do not rouse them further. O great
King, drink that which is drunk by the honest and shunned by the dishonest:
humility. Humility is a bitter, pungent, burning, unintoxicating and revolting
medicine, but drink it deeply and regain your sobriety. I bow to you and wish
you well. Act swiftly to avert the calamity that has arrived at our door.”
Vidura took his seat near Dhåtaräñöra, but still the blind king remained silent.
Duryodhana laughed and turned back to the game. He told Çakuni to continue
and the Gandhara king asked Yudhiñöhira, “O King, you have lost much
wealth. Tell me, do you still have more which you can stake?”
Yudhiñöhira replied, “O son of Suvala, I have gold counted in tens of
thousands, millions, tens of millions, billions, hundreds of billions and even
more. All of this I shall stake here now. Throw again.”
Çakuni smiled and cast the dice. As if charmed, they fell upon whatever
number he called. Again and again his voice rose above the silence in the hall.
“I have won!” Yudhiñöhira played like a man possessed. He seemed intent on
losing everything. He staked all of his innumerable cows, horses, goats, sheep
and other animals. Having lost his entire wealth, he then staked his kingdom
itself. That too was lost and Çakuni said, “It appears that you have lost
everything, O King.”
Yudhiñöhira’s head hung down and sweat covered his face. Surely it was time to
end the game, but something within him impelled him to continue. He thought
of Kåñëa. If only He was present, He would certainly save the situation. But
Kåñëa was the supreme controller of everything. Perhaps He may still arrange
for him to get back all that he had lost. Yet what was there left to stake?
Yudhiñöhira looked at his brothers.
The hall remained silent as Yudhiñöhira replied to Çakuni, “Here is the
youthful and fair-complexioned Nakula, adorned with gold and jewels and
shining like a celestial. This mighty-armed prince shall be my next stake.”
Moments later Çakuni’s voice was heard again, “Lo, I have won him.”
Yudhiñöhira breathed heavily. By his side Bhéma and Arjuna both clenched
their fists in silent fury as Yudhiñöhira turned toward Sahadeva. “This
handsome prince Sahadeva administers justice exactly like Yamaräja and has
acquired a reputation for learning in this world. Although he does not deserve
182

to be staked, still I shall play with such a dear object as my stake.”
The dice were rolled and the monotonous voice rang out again, “See, I have
won him also.”
Çakuni looked at Yudhiñöhira with cunning in his eyes. “It seems that Bhéma
and Arjuna are more dear to you than Mädré’s sons, for they have not yet been
staked.”
Yudhiñöhira’s eyes turned red with anger. “Fool! Disregarding morality you
sinfully try to create disunion among us who are all of one heart.”
Çakuni, not wanting the game to end, replied hastily, “O King, in the
excitement of play a gambler may say things which he would never otherwise
utter. I bow to you. You are senior to me in every way. Let us now continue.”
Yudhiñöhira looked at Arjuna. Surely Kåñëa would not allow His own dear
friend to be lost. “He who takes us like a boat to the other shore of battle, who
is ever victorious over foes and who is the greatest hero in this world––with
that prince as my stake do I now play.”
Duryodhana leaned forward eagerly as Çakuni threw the dice. Karëa sat
silently next to him. He was happy to see his friend winning the game, but he
would have preferred a fair fight with the Päëòavas on the battlefield.
Dushashana and the other brothers of Duryodhana rubbed their hands in glee
as the dice stopped and Çakuni cried, “I have won!”
Çakuni gathered up the dice and looked at Yudhiñöhira, who sat downcast and
shocked. “We have now won this foremost of bowmen, O King. Stake the
powerful Bhéma, the only wealth you have left.”
Yudhiñöhira shook his head. There was no turning back. Slowly he replied,
“Although he does not deserve to be staked, I now play with this prince, who is
our leader, who fights like the thunder-wielder Indra. This illustrious hero with
the lion-like neck, arched eyebrows and expansive eyes, who cannot tolerate
an insult, whose prowess is unmatched in this world, and who grinds all foes––
he is now staked. Roll the dice.”
Bhéma looked at Duryodhana with narrowed eyes. He longed to grasp the
sneering prince by the neck, but without Yudhiñöhira’s permission he remained
still. The dice rolled inexorably onto the number called by Çakuni. Bhéma was
lost.
Laughing again, Çakuni said, “O King, you have lost your gold, your jewels,
your animals, your kingdom and even your brothers. Is there anything still
remaining that you can stake?”
183

Yudhiñöhira looked up at Çakuni. “I alone am left, the eldest of my brothers and
beloved by them all. If you win me, then I shall do whatever a slave is obliged
to do.”
Çakuni released the dice and called out, “You are won!” He turned to all the
kings in the assembly and proudly boasted how he had won the Päëòavas one
by one. Then he smiled at Yudhiñöhira and said, “You have lost even yourself,
O King, an act worthy of a sinful man. When you still have wealth, you should
not stake yourself. You still have one stake dear to you. Bet Draupadé, the
princess of Païchäla, and with her win yourself back.”
Yudhiñöhira ground his teeth in silent anguish. His thoughts were in turmoil.
How could he stake Draupadé? But there was nothing else left. His kingdom
was gone and he had cast his brothers and even himself into slavery. That had
been a terrible mistake. How had he let himself get so carried away? Now
Draupadé was his only chance to turn things round. He had to bet her. What
else could he do? What shelter did she now have anyway? All her husbands
were lost. Confused and praying fervently to Kåñëa, the Päëòava looked up at
the laughing Çakuni.
“I shall now stake she who is neither short nor tall, neither lean nor corpulent,
who has bluish-black curly hair and whose eyes resemble the leaves of an
autumn lotus. That princess whose fragrance is like a lily and who is as
beautiful as the goddess Lakñmé, who possesses every accomplishment, who is
the last to take rest and the first to rise due to caring for us all, and who is such
that anyone would desire her––she shall be my final stake.”
When Yudhiñöhira said this his brothers were horrified. The Kuru elders loudly
called out, “Fie! Fie!” The whole assembly became agitated and the pious kings
present there began to grieve with tears flowing from their eyes. Bhéñma,
Droëa and Kåpa were all covered in perspiration. Vidura sat sighing like a
snake. But Dhåtaräñöra, glad at heart, was unable to conceal his emotions and
he asked repeatedly, “Is the stake won?”
Çakuni’s face was flushed with excitement. Once more the dice obeyed his
command and he shouted, “She is won! She is won!” Duryodhana and Karëa
laughed and slapped their hands together. Mocking the anguished Yudhiñöhira,
Çakuni jeeringly repeated again and again, “You still have one stake dear to
you. Bet her, O Yudhiñöhira,” rolling the dice as he spoke.
Duryodhana turned to Vidura. “Come, O Khattwa. Bring Draupadé, the
Päëòavas’ dear wife. Let her be forced to sweep the chambers. Let the
184

unfortunate woman now live with the serving maids.”
Vidura retorted, “O wicked man, you do not see that by such words you are
tying a noose around your neck. Do you not realize that being but a deer, you
are provoking the anger of so many tigers? You have placed on your head five
venomous snakes. Do not agitate them further or you will soon go to
Yamaräja’s abode.”
Vidura looked around the assembly as he continued. “Draupadé cannot be
considered a slave because Yudhiñöhira lost her after losing himself. He was
therefore not in a position to stake the princess. Like the bamboo which bears
fruit on the point of death, the foolish Duryodhana wins treasures at dice.
Completely intoxicated, he does not see the terrors that this game will bring.”
Vidura went before Dhåtaräñöra. “You should check your son now, O King.
Only low-class men utter painful words which offend others. Kunté’s sons
never use the kind of harsh speech in which Duryodhana indulges. His
behavior is condemned by those who are learned. Stones may float and boats
may sink, but this foolish prince will never heed good advice. He does not see
that dishonesty is one of the fearful gates to hell through which he is leading
his brothers and the entire Kuru race. He will certainly be the cause of our
destruction.”
Duryodhana laughed. “Fie on Khattwa,” he sneered. Looking around he saw
the chief servant of the palace and he called out to him, “Pratikamin, bring
Draupadé here. You have nothing to fear from the Päëòavas. It is only Vidura
who raves in fear.”
The Päëòavas sat with their heads bowed. In the presence of Dhåtaräñöra,
Bhéñma and Droëa, Yudhiñöhira remained silent, as they had done. He was
stupefied with sorrow. His attachment for gambling had brought about utter
ruination. Now, before everyone’s eyes, the chaste Draupadé was about to be
humiliated. Yet what could he do? With the sole exception of Vidura, his elders
were saying nothing. If they, and especially Dhåtaräñöra, approved of
Duryodhana’s acts, then he was helpless. He had never transgressed their
orders. To him, his superiors were as good as God. He accepted their commands
as coming directly from the Supreme Lord. The terrible events unfolding must
somehow be the Lord’s arrangement. Seeing Yudhiñöhira sitting silently, his
brothers also remained passive, although they yearned to stop Duryodhana
from his intention to insult Draupadé.

185

Chapter 20
Draupadé Dragged to the Assembly
The pratikamin went quickly to the ladies’ chambers. Standing before
Draupadé, he said in a trembling voice, “O Queen, mad- dened by dice, your
husband has lost you to Duryodhana. Therefore come with me to Dhåtaräñöra’s
assembly, where you will be engaged in some menial work.”
Draupadé stood up swiftly and dismissed the maid who had been tending her
hair. Surprised, she said, “O pratikamin, how can this be true? Who would stake
his own wife in a gambling match? Surely the king was intoxicated. Could he
find nothing else to stake?”
“When he had already lost all his wealth, including his brothers and even
himself, he staked you, O blessed princess.”
Draupadé became angry. “Go back to the hall, pratikamin, and ask that gambler
who has lost even himself if he was still my lord when I was staked. When I
know the answer to this, I shall go with a sorrowful heart.”
The servant assented to Draupadé’s request and returned to the hall. Seeing
him return alone, Duryodhana yelled, “Where now is the Païchäla princess,
foolish man?”
“She has sent me back with a question, O King,” the pratikamin replied.
“Draupadé has asked whose lord Yudhiñöhira was when he staked her in the
game? Did he lose himself first or her?”
Yudhiñöhira said nothing. He shook his head from side to side, seeming as if
demented or deprived of his reason.
Duryodhana smiled slightly. “Let Draupadé come here and ask her question
directly to Yudhiñöhira. We shall all hear his reply.”
The pratikamin again left the hall. Tears fell from his eyes as he approached
Draupadé’s room for the second time. He stood before the queen unable to
speak. She asked him what Yudhiñöhira had said in reply. With difficulty the
servant said, “O princess, the assembly is summoning you. It seems the
destruction of the Kurus is close at hand. When the weak-brained Duryodhana
wishes to take you before the assembly, he will surely no longer be able to
protect his prosperity.”
186

Draupadé looked with compassion upon the distressed servant. “He who is the
great ordainer of the world has ordained this without doubt. Happiness and
misery come in turn to both the wise and the unwise. Morality is said, however,
to be the highest object in this world. If we preserve morality, it will pour
blessings upon us. Let not that morality now abandon the Kurus. Go back, O
suta, and speak these words to the virtuous Kuru elders. I am ready to obey
whatever command those moral-minded men may give, for they are conversant
with all the precepts of virtue.”
The servant folded his palms and bowed his head. He turned and left the
queen’s chamber and went again to the hall. Standing before Dhåtaräñöra, he
repeated Draupadé’s words. No one replied. Seeing now Duryodhana’s
eagerness and Dhåtaräñöra’s complicity, they all sat with downcast faces.
Yudhiñöhira then said to the servant, “Go to the bitterly weeping Päïcälé and
tell her that she should appear here, even though she is in seclusion and attired
in only a single cloth. This is Duryodhana’s command.”
The Päëòavas looked up at the Kuru elders who, even after hearing
Yudhiñöhira’s words, all remained silent. The brothers could not determine
what to do. They were ready to challenge Duryodhana and his one hundred
brothers to a fight, but seeing Yudhiñöhira still silent, they did not move.
Bhéma, however, could barely contain himself, and Arjuna, breathing like a
serpent, seemed to be on fire.
Duryodhana laughed, enjoying every moment of his victory. He again
addressed the pratikamin. “Go, O suta, and fetch the princess. She now has
Yudhiñöhira’s order.”
The servant looked perplexed. He was always obedient to Duryodhana but he
feared Draupadé’s anger. He spoke hesitantly, “What shall I say to the queen
for a third time?”
Duryodhana snorted angrily. He turned to Dushashana. “O brother, this
foolish servant is afraid of Bhéma. Go and bring Draupadé here. What can the
Päëòavas do now that they have become dependent on our will?”
Dushashana immediately rose and went straight to Draupadé like a dog
entering a lion’s den. He said, “Come, O princess, we have won you honestly.
Cast aside your modesty and go before your new master Duryodhana. O
beautiful lady, now you must accept the Kauravas as your lords.”
Draupadé stood up, weeping loudly. She covered her pale face with her hands
and ran toward Gändhäré’s chambers. Dushashana roared in anger and ran
187

after her. He grabbed hold of her long, wavy hair and forcibly pulled her along
with him. As he dragged Draupadé by her bluish locks, the shameless prince
recalled how that same hair had been sprinkled with the sanctified water of the
Räjasüya. Ignoring her plaintive cries, he pulled her out into the palace
passageways. Draupadé spoke to him in a low voice. “O rude one, O wretch, you
should not take me before the assembly. How can I appear there in my present
condition, dressed only in a single cloth.”
Dushashana laughed. “It does not matter, O Päïcälé, whether you are attired in
one cloth or naked. We have won you and you must now live among our
servant women as best you can.”
The Kaurava then dragged the wailing Draupadé into the assembly hall. She
prayed piteously to Kåñëa and Arjuna. Dushashana threw her before
Duryodhana, where she fell with her cloth in disarray and her hair dishevelled.
The Kuru elders could hardly look at her. Bhéñma, Droëa and Vidura were
unable to maintain their composure and they wept openly. Dhåtaräñöra asked,
“What is happening now? Is the Païchäla princess here?”
Then Draupadé rose up like a flame and addressed the assembly in an angry
voice. “All the persons in this assembly are learned in the scriptures and
devoted to sacrifice. Some are my elders and gurus. How can I stand before
them in this state? The high-souled son of Dharma is bound by the subtle rules
of morality. Only those with clear vision can understand those rules. I am
therefore unable to admit even an atom of fault in my husband.”
Draupadé looked toward Dhåtaräñöra, her eyes filled with tears. By his side she
saw Bhéñma, Droëa and Vidura, their faces torn by anguish. Everyone
remained silent as she continued to reprimand them. “How do you all say
nothing as this wretch drags me into the hall? Surely then you are all of the
same mind. Shame on you! The Kurus’ high morality has been destroyed by
this act. Droëa, Bhéñma, Khattwa and the king have lost their greatness, for
none of them condemn this most vile deed.”
Draupadé fell to the floor of the hall, crying in helplessness and distress. The
slender-waisted princess glanced at her enraged husbands. They were incensed
to see her in such a state, and her glance inflamed them even more. Even the
loss of their kingdom and wealth did not pain them as much as Draupadé’s
glance, which was full of modesty and anger.
When Dushashana saw Draupadé look at her husbands, however, he again
dragged her toward the Kurus. “Slave, slave,” he shouted. Duryodhana, Karëa
188

and Çakuni all applauded Dushashana and laughed along with him. Apart from
those three, everyone else in the hall was afflicted with sorrow to see the
princess treated in this way.
Shaking his head, Bhéñma fought back tears and said to Draupadé, “O blessed
lady, knowing that one who has no wealth of his own cannot stake that
belonging to others, but knowing also that wives are always at the command of
their husbands, I am unable to answer the point you raised. The ways of
morality are subtle. Yudhiñöhira can abandon the whole world full of wealth,
but he will never sacrifice morality. The Päëòava played with Çakuni even
though he knew that no one could defeat him at dice. He has staked and lost
both himself and you, O princess. Therefore I am confused upon this matter.”
Bhéñma looked up at Dhåtaräñöra, but the king remained ever silent. Draupadé
spoke again, “Yudhiñöhira was summoned to this assembly by the king, and
although he does not possess skill at dice, he was made to play with a skillful,
wicked and deceitful gambler. How then can he be said to have staked
anything voluntarily? He has been deprived of his senses by the contrivances
of sinful men acting together. This act lacks all propriety and will be
condemned by all wise men. Here in this hall are many leaders of the Bharata
race. Let them reflect on my words and answer my question.”
Dushashana began to harshly insult Draupadé. She wept grievously and looked
toward her helpless husbands. Bhéma was afflicted beyond all endurance.
Finally, giving vent to his anger, he said to Yudhiñöhira, “Gamblers have in
their houses many loose women but they never stake even those women at
dice. They always remain kind toward them. You have staked and lost all of our
gems, jewels, gold, armors, animals, weapons and whatever other wealth we
possessed, including our very selves. Even at this my anger was not excited. But
I consider your gambling with Draupadé abominable. Having obtained us as her
husbands, this innocent girl does not deserve to suffer in this way. Only
because of you is she now being persecuted by these low, despicable, cruel and
mean-minded Kurus. Although you are my lord, I can hardly control my anger
toward you.”
Bhéma turned his massive shoulders toward the twins. “I shall burn
Yudhiñöhira’s hands. Sahadeva, bring fire.”
Arjuna quickly caught hold of his brother. “O Bhéma, do not speak in this way.
You have never uttered such words before. Your morality has certainly been
destroyed by these cruel foes. Do not fulfill our enemies’ wishes. Practice the
189

highest virtue and remain obedient to your elder brother. Remembering a
kñatriya’s duties, he has played today only on the king’s command and against
his own desire. Such an act will surely make him famous.”
Bhéma calmed himself. Checked by Arjuna’s reproach, he felt ashamed. “You
are right, O Dhanaïjaya. Our brother has surely acted in accordance with
duty. Had I not known this, I would long ago have snatched his arms and burnt
them in a blazing fire.” Both brothers looked at Yudhiñöhira in his distress.
They knew he felt obliged by the presence of Dhåtaräñöra and Bhéñma. If those
two elders did not speak out against what was happening, then Yudhiñöhira
would not object to the proceedings.
Duryodhana’s hearty laughter rang out again. He was relishing his cousins’
discomfort. He was especially enjoying Draupadé’s distress, remembering how
she had laughed at him in the Mayasabha.
Draupadé buried her head in her hands and wept. Her husbands glared
furiously at the insolent Duryodhana, but still the Kuru elders remained silent.
Finally, Dhåtaräñöra’s son, Vikarëa, spoke out. “O kings, answer Draupadé’s
question. If we do not decide a matter referred to us in the royal assembly, then
we shall descend into hell. Dhåtaräñöra, Bhéñma, Vidura––you are the eldest of
the Kurus, yet you do not say anything. Why are Droëa and Kåpa silent? Let
the kings who have assembled here from all directions leave aside their anger
and give Draupadé a reply.”
Vikarëa looked around the assembly, but still no one spoke. He repeatedly
asked that Draupadé’s question be answered. Had she been won or not? Was
she now the Kauravas’ slave?
The silence in the great hall was broken only by Draupadé’s sobs. After another
agonizing minute had passed, Vikarëa said, “If no one will respond, then I shall
say what I consider just and proper. O best of men, it is said that there are four
vices to which kings are prone: hunting, drinking, womanizing and gambling.
The man addicted to these vices lives by forsaking virtue. Therefore, that
which is performed by one under the sway of any of these sins cannot be taken
seriously. Madly under the influence of gambling, and urged on by the sinful
Çakuni, Yudhiñöhira staked this princess. She belongs to all the Päëòavas and
was lost after Yudhiñöhira had already lost himself. Nor was Yudhiñöhira
playing the game willingly. Rather, the king invited him here to oblige him to
play an unfair match. Considering all this, I say that Draupadé has not been
won.”
190

As Vikarëa sat down, the assembly was in an uproar. Practically everyone
applauded him and censured Çakuni.
Karëa at once leapt up and waved his huge arms about to silence the assembly.
His angry voice boomed. “O Vikarëa, I have observed many improper things in
this assembly, and your words are an example of one of them. Like fire
springing from a log, your anger will simply consume you. All the great
personalities among the Kurus are silent. Obviously this means they consider
Drupada’s daughter fairly won. You are immature. Therefore you rail in anger
even though you do not know the laws of morality and speak like a fool.
Yudhiñöhira has staked her as a fair bet and lost her.”
Karëa, like Duryodhana, still remembered his humiliation when Draupadé
refused to allow him to compete in her svayaàvara. The pain of that refusal
still rankled. “Well,” he thought, “the proud princess is now getting what she
deserves.” He turned to the assembly and argued that there was no sin in
bringing Draupadé into the hall in her present state. After all, she had already
accepted five husbands. What kind of moral woman was she? In his opinion,
she was unchaste. He pointed to Draupadé as he spoke. “For such a woman
there is nothing wrong even if she is brought naked into an assembly. Indeed,
she now belongs to the Kauravas and must obey our command. O Dushashana,
why not take off her robes? And remove also the Päëòavas’ royal dress, too.
They are no longer kings.”
Bound by morality, the Päëòavas slowly removed their upper garments and
threw them down. They sat silently as Dushashana approached the wailing
Draupadé. The Kaurava took hold of the end of her cloth and pulled on it
forcefully. Draupadé held her sari tightly in an attempt to protect herself, but it
was useless. Her strength was nothing compared to Dushashana’s. She looked
again at her five husbands. It was obvious that they could not help her. As
Dushashana pulled harder, she looked around the hall like a frightened deer
assailed by a lion. There was only one person now who could save her: Kåñëa.
The Supreme Personality saw everything and was always her shelter. Draupadé
fixed her mind on Kåñëa, threw up her hands and cried, “O Govinda! O
Keçava! O beloved of the gopés and Lord of Våndävana! O Janärdana, You are
the destroyer of all affliction. I am sinking into the Kuru ocean. O Lord, O soul
of the universe, O creator of the world! Save me who am distressed and losing
my senses in this evil assembly!”
From where He was seated in Dwärakä, Kåñëa heard Draupadé’s piteous cries.
191

He expanded Himself by His inconceivable power and went swiftly to
Hastinäpura. By His mystic potency He immediately entered the assembly hall.
Without being seen by anyone He provided Draupadé with an unlimited supply
of cloth to cover her. Dushashana pulled and pulled at her sari, and as he did so
the princess spun around––but he could not disrobe her. There seemed to be
no end to her sari. The astonished prince pulled with even more strength, but
Draupadé remained covered. Soon a large heap of cloth lay piled on the floor.
Seeing this wonderful event, all the kings praised Draupadé and censured
Dushashana. The prince was exhausted from his futile attempt to undress the
Päëòavas’ wife. He sat down, perspiring heavily. Bhéma leapt up and raised his
arms. “O kings of the world,” he thundered, “listen to my words! I shall now
make a vow unlike any that has been made before. Nor shall such a vow be
made in future. If I do not forcefully tear open the breast of this sinful wretch
on the battlefield and drink his blood, then may I not obtain the path of my
ancestors.”
Hearing Bhéma’s terrible words, the kings applauded him and again censured
Dushashana. A clamor arose. Shouts of “Shame, shame!” filled the hall.
Vidura once more brought silence to the hall. He turned to Dhåtaräñöra and
Bhéñma. “O learned men, you do not answer Draupadé’s question and thus in
this assembly we persecute religion. A distressed person comes to an assembly
of good men like a man feeling the heat of a blazing fire. The assembly should
extinguish his fire and cool him with truth and morality. The distressed man
asks about his rights according to morality and he is entitled to an answer. O
King, Vikarëa has offered one answer to Draupadé’s question according to his
own knowledge and judgment. Now you should also reply.”
Bhéñma, Droëa and Kåpa looked expectantly at Dhåtaräñöra. They were unable
to tolerate any more from Duryodhana. Still the blind king maintained his
silence. Vidura continued, “One who knows the rules of morality yet sits in an
assembly without properly answering a question receives a sinful reaction.
Listen as I recount the ancient history of Prahläda and the son of a åñi named
Aìgiräsha.”
Vidura described how Prahläda’s son, Virocanä, had once quarreled with a åñi
named Sudhanva for the sake of a bride. They had both gone to Prahläda and
asked, “Which of us is superior? Answer us truthfully.”
Prahläda looked at both of them but said nothing. Sudhanva became angry and
said, “If you do not answer or if you answer falsely, then your head will break
192

into a hundred pieces.”
Trembling with fear, Prahläda then consulted the celestial sage Kaçyapa. “O
exalted one, tell me what regions are obtained by one who, being asked a
question, does not reply or answers falsely.”
Kaçyapa said, “He who knows but does not answer out of temptation, anger or
fear is bound by Varuëa’s thousand nooses. He who is called as witness but who
speaks falsely is similarly punished. After one full year, one of the nooses is
loosened. Therefore one should speak the truth as he knows it. If virtue,
pierced by sin, goes to an assembly, it is the duty of every man there to remove
the dart. If they fail to do so, then they will be pierced by that same dart. In an
assembly where a censurable act is not rebuked, every member of that assembly
is afflicted by sin. Grief will overcome them all in due course.”
After hearing Kaçyapa’s words, Prahläda said to his son, “Sudhanva is
undoubtedly your superior, as much as his father Aìgiräsha is mine.”
Sudhanva immediately blessed Prahläda, “As you have spoken the truth
without being moved by affection for your son, may he live for one hundred
years.”
Vidura concluded, “Hearing this great instruction about religion, let all those
present deliberate on what should be done. Draupadé should be given an
answer.”
Still there was silence in the hall. Seeing the Kuru elders saying nothing, and
considering this tacit approval of her condition, Karëa spoke to Dushashana.
“Take the servant-woman to the inner apartments.”
Dushashana again grabbed Draupadé’s hair and began to drag the helpless
princess, who was trembling and crying piteously to her husbands. Pulling
herself free from his grasp, she addressed the assembly in tearful words. “Wait a
little, O worst of men. I have not as yet offered my respects to my superiors.
Forgive me. It was not my fault as I was forcibly dragged here by this low
wretch, this disgrace of the Kurus. The morality of the Kuru house has been
lost forever today. Never before have we heard of a married woman being
brought in this state before an assembly. She who was never before seen even
by the wind or the sun has now been exposed before all men. Indeed I am being
publicly persecuted by wicked men.”
Dhåtaräñöra listened with his head bowed as she went on. “What could be more
distressing for me than that? Although I am high-born and chaste, the
Päëòavas’ wife and Kåñëa’s friend, I am nevertheless dragged into this
193

assembly. Where is the religion of all these kings? O Kauravas, answer me
truthfully. Am I, Dharmaräja’s lawful wife, born in the same order to which he
belongs, to be considered a servant woman or not? I shall be obedient to your
command. O Kurus, this despicable destroyer of Kuru fame is cruelly dragging
me. I cannot tolerate it any longer. Tell me what I should do and I will happily
obey you.”
Bhéñma shed tears as Draupadé spoke. He looked at her with compassion and
said, “O blessed lady, I have said that the ways of religion are subtle. Even wise
men find it hard to understand them. Sometimes what a great and powerful
man calls religion is accepted as such, even though it may not normally be so.
What a weak man says, no matter how moral it may seem, is generally
disregarded. From the importance of the matter you have raised, its intricacy
and subtlety, I find myself unable to answer you.”
Bhéñma stopped and looked around at the silent assembly. Turning back to
Draupadé he continued, “It is certain that as the Kurus have become slaves of
greed and folly, our race will soon be destroyed. O Päïcälé, that even under
today’s circumstances you would turn to religion shows how worthy you are
and adds glory to our house. Your husbands are equally praiseworthy. They do
not deviate from virtue in such difficulty. The Kauravas, however, sit with
downcast faces. They look as if they are dead. I do not think they are going to
answer you. You should ask your question of Yudhiñöhira. He alone should say
whether or not you have been won.”
Draupadé wept like a female osprey. Still the kings remained silent. They
appeared to be afraid of Duryodhana’s power. The Kaurava prince continued
to smile, even after hearing Bhéñma’s words. Rising, he said to Draupadé, “O
Päïcälé, I agree with Bhéñma. The answer to your question depends upon your
husband. Let the illustrious Yudhiñöhira, resembling Indra himself and ever
devoted to virtue, state whether or not he acted rightly. If he declares himself
to have gambled you away falsely, because he was no longer your lord at the
time, I shall free you. I will also free his brothers if he makes the same
declaration about them. Let Yudhiñöhira tell us first, however, that he lost his
discrimination. After Yudhiñöhira has spoken, O thin-waisted lady, then you
should accept either ourselves or the Päëòavas as your lords. All the Kurus
here are floating in the sea of your affliction. They are naturally magnanimous.
Therefore, looking at your unfortunate husbands, they are unable to answer
your question.”
194

Again the assembly erupted. Many kings applauded Duryodhana’s words.
Others cried out, “Alas!” and “Oh!” But each now turned to look at
Yudhiñöhira, eager to hear what he would reply.
As the hum of voices gradually died down, Bhéma stood suddenly. His voice
filled the hall. “If the high-souled Dharmaräja were not our lord and guru, then
we would not pardon the Kuru race. But he is the lord of all our religious and
ascetic merits. Indeed, he is the lord of our lives. If he considers us won, then
we are won. If it were not so then who is there among mortal creatures on this
earth who could escape with their life after touching the hair of the Païchäla
princess? Look at my two arms. They are maces of steel. Having come within
their grasp, who could escape? Not even Indra himself! Bound by the ties of
virtue, and by the reverence due our elder brother––and because I am being
repeatedly urged by Arjuna to remain silent––I do nothing. If but once
commanded by Yudhiñöhira I would, by means of my slaps alone, kill
Dhåtaräñöra’s sinful sons as a lion kills a flock of small animals.”
Hearing Bhéma speak, Bhéñma, Droëa and Vidura said with alarm, “Be
peaceful, O Bhéma. Anything is possible for you.”
Karëa then jumped up from his seat. “It seems that Khattwa, Bhéñma and
Droëa are independent,” he exclaimed, his face red with anger. “They always
censure their master and never wish for his prosperity. I shall say what is right
in this case. The slave, the son and the wife are always dependent. Whatever
they possess belongs to their master. O Draupadé, you are the wife of a slave
who is now incapable of possessing anything of his own. Go then to the king’s
inner quarters and serve his relatives. Select another husband who will not lose
you at gambling. Your husbands are all slaves and cannot be your masters any
longer. Obviously Yudhiñöhira considers that life and manhood are useless, as
he has offered Drupada’s daughter as a stake in the presence of this assembly.”
Bhéma glowered at Karëa. Breathing heavily, it seemed he was about to leap
forward at any moment. Still, he remained obedient to Yudhiñöhira. Bound by
virtue he did nothing. Looking around as if to burn everything with his blazing
eyes, he turned to Yudhiñöhira and said, “My lord, I cannot become angry at
the words of the suta’s son since we are now slaves. O King, could our enemies
ever have spoken in this way in my presence if you had not staked this
princess?”
Yudhiñöhira sat silently, stunned. Duryodhana laughed and said, “Come, O
King, tell us the truth. Is Draupadé won or not?”
195

Reveling in his cousins’ anguish, Duryodhana smiled at Karëa. To further
insult and incite Bhéma, the Kaurava prince then uncovered his right thigh,
which resembled the trunk of an elephant, and showed it to Draupadé. “Sit
here upon the lap of your new lord, O princess. What have you to do with the
Päëòavas now?”
Bhéma could take no more. He exploded. “Hear this, you wretch! If I do not
break that thigh in battle, then let me not attain the regions of my ancestors.”
Fire was emanating from every part of Bhéma’s body as he spoke, and his heavy
chest rose and fell like the ocean.
Vidura jumped up and addressed the assembly. “O kings, observe the danger we
are now in from Bhéma. A calamity threatens to overtake our race. This has
been sent by destiny. Dhåtaräñöra’s sons have gambled deceitfully. Now they
are quarreling over a woman. This kingdom’s prosperity is at an end. Alas! The
Kurus have given way to iniquity. This entire assembly is now polluted by sin.
O kings, take to heart the precept I shall declare: having first lost himself,
Yudhiñöhira was unable to lose Päïcälé. She cannot be considered a slave.”
Duryodhana looked at the agonized Päëòavas. “I am willing to abide by the
decision of Bhéma, Arjuna and the twins. Let them declare that Yudhiñöhira is
no longer their master and I will free Draupadé.”
Arjuna retorted, “Yudhiñöhira was certainly our lord and master before he
began to play. Having lost himself, let the Kurus decide whose master he is
now.”
As Arjuna spoke a jackal suddenly cried out in Dhåtaräñöra’s nearby sacrificial
chamber. Asses brayed in response and fearful birds cried in all quarters of the
sky. Seized by anxiety, Bhéñma and Droëa cried out, “All peace!” Vidura urged
the king to do something before total disaster overtook them.
Dhåtaräñöra at last accepted that things had gone too far. He had remained
silent long enough. Raising his hand he silenced the assembly, which was in
chaos because of the evil omens. The blind king said, “O wicked-minded
Duryodhana, O wretch, you are already as good as dead now that you have
insulted a wife of the Kuru chiefs in this way, especially the Päëòavas’ wife,
Draupadé.”
Dhåtaräñöra knew that they now faced grave danger. If he did not appease the
Päëòavas, then united with the invincible Kåñëa, they would wreak a terrible
vengeance upon the Kauravas. The king attempted to console Draupadé. “O
Päïcälé, please ask from me any favor you may desire. Chaste and always
196

devoted to virtue, you are the foremost of all my daughters-in-law.”
Draupadé looked up at Dhåtaräñöra, who had said nothing while she was being
persecuted. She knew he had relented only out of fear. Still, this was her
opportunity to rectify the situation. She bowed before the king and said, “O
best of the Bharata race, if you desire to do me good then let Yudhiñöhira be
freed from slavery. He is the father of my son, Prativindya. Let not people
speak of that boy, born and raised as a royal prince, as if he were the son of a
slave.”
Dhåtaräñöra replied, “O blessed girl, it shall be so. Ask for another favor. I am
not satisfied by giving you only one boon.”
“Then also free Bhéma, Arjuna and the twins, along with their chariots and
weapons.”
Dhåtaräñöra again granted the favor without hesitation. Then he asked
Draupadé to request a third boon. This time the princess said, “O King, greed
destroys virtue. I dare not ask a third favor. Indeed, the scriptures ordain that a
kñatriya woman may ask no more than two boons. My husbands, being freed
from slavery, will be able to obtain prosperity by their own virtuous acts.”
Karëa broke out laughing. “Just see how these great heroes have been saved by
a woman. When they were sinking in a boatless ocean of distress, this beautiful
princess became the boat of their salvation. I have never heard of such a thing
before today.”
Bhéma flared, but again Arjuna checked him. “Desist, brother. Great men
never care for the harsh words uttered by inferior men. Even if able to
retaliate, they do not take seriously acts of hostility, preferring instead to
remember even a little good that their enemies may have done them.”
Bhéma was hardly pacified by Arjuna’s words. He spoke in a low voice to
Yudhiñöhira. “I shall at once kill all these foes. What need is there for further
discussion? O lord, you may then rule the earth without a rival.”
Bhéma repeatedly cast angry glances at the Kauravas, even as a lion looks at a
herd of small animals. Arjuna restrained him with appealing looks, placing his
hand on his brother’s heaving shoulder. Smoke, sparks and flames issued from
Bhéma’s ears, mouth and nostrils as he fought to restrain himself. With his
furrowed brows and red eyes he appeared like Yamaräja at the time of universal
destruction. Yudhiñöhira embraced him and said, “Be peaceful, brother.” He
then turned to Dhåtaräñöra, “O King, you are our lord. Command us what we
should do now.”
197

Dhåtaräñöra replied, “Go in peace, Ajätaçatru. You are full of humil-ity and you
wait upon your elders. Therefore you are wise. Those who are wise do not
remember an enemy’s hostility. Instead, they see only the good in them. Only
the worst of men use harsh words in a quarrel, while superior men do not react
when provoked. Knowing their own feelings, they can understand the feelings
of others. Therefore they always act with compassion, even toward their
enemies.”
Dhåtaräñöra then begged Yudhiñöhira to forget Duryodhana’s harshness and to
try instead to remember whatever kindness the king and his wife Gändhäré
had shown him. He told Yudhiñöhira that he had allowed the gambling match
in order to examine the strengths and weaknesses of his children and the
Päëòavas. The king concluded, “In you, O Yudhiñöhira, is virtue, in Bhéma,
prowess, in Arjuna, patience, and in the twins there is pure reverence for and
service toward superiors. Go then, all of you, and live in peace. Return to your
own kingdom. Let there be brotherly love between yourselves and my sons. Be
ever fixed in virtue.”
The Päëòavas bowed before the king and then left. They ascended their
chariots with Draupadé and started for Indraprastha. The assembly broke up
and all the kings retired to the palatial mansions provided for them by
Dhåtaräñöra. As they left the hall, some of them praised Yudhiñöhira and others
Duryodhana. The blind king was led away by Vidura. As he recalled the
heinous wrong committed by his sons toward the Päëòavas, and especially
toward their wife, he became gripped by fear. Giving them their property could
hardly repair the damage that was done by the insult to Draupadé. Bhéma
would certainly never forget his vows and, at the first opportunity, would
doubtlessly take his revenge. Sighing, the Kuru monarch entered his chambers
and began his evening prayers.

Chapter 21
The Päëòavas Exiled
After everyone had left the gambling match, Dushashana said to Duryodhana,
“O great hero, that old man gave everything back that we strived so hard to
198

acquire. The Päëòavas have been sent back to their kingdom and we are back
where we started.”
The two brothers consulted Karëa and Çakuni. They condemned the blind
king for his softness. How could he have been so foolish as to show kindness to
such powerful enemies? That was a serious mistake. Unless they acted quickly
to reverse the situation, they would soon be facing a great danger. Their spies
had already reported how the five brothers were proceeding toward
Indraprastha. Bhéma was whirling his massive mace, Arjuna was repeatedly
twanging the Gäëòéva, Nakula and Sahadeva were waving their great swords,
and Yudhiñöhira held aloft his spear. It was clear that they were ready to fight.
On Çakuni’s suggestion, Duryodhana again approached his father. Their only
hope, Çakuni said, was another gambling match. This time, the Kauravas
should win something. The Gandhara monarch revealed his plan and
Duryodhana immediately went to Dhåtaräñöra’s chambers.
Duryodhana found the king seated on a golden couch. Sitting at his feet he
said, “Father, we must recall the Päëòavas for another game before it is too
late. We have stirred to anger a number of venomous serpents. How can we
possibly expect them to tolerate the insult we offered to their wife? A powerful
enemy must be destroyed by any means. We have started something which we
cannot now stop.”
Duryodhana told his father that if the Päëòavas could somehow be sent away,
then it would give him time to find allies and build his strength. Using the
Päëòavas’ vast wealth, he could make his position unassailable. First, however,
Yudhiñöhira and his brothers had to be removed from the scene. Duryodhana
described the plan Çakuni and he had contrived. The king should call the
Päëòavas back for one final game of dice. It was clear that they and the
Kauravas would not be able to co-exist peacefully. Therefore, whoever lost the
dice game should live in the forest in exile for thirteen years. During the final
year, they could emerge from the forest but had to remain incognito. If they
were discovered, then they would have to again go into the forest for a second
twelve years. Such would be the stakes for this final game.
Dhåtaräñöra remained silent after his son had stopped speaking. It was true that
the Päëòavas were now a real threat. Who could gauge the outcome of a war
between those powerful brothers and his own sons? But another gambling
match? What would Vidura and Bhéñma say? It would probably be wiser to let
things stand as they were for the present. Yudhiñöhira was virtuous and would
199

keep his brothers in check.
Seeing his father’s hesitation, Duryodhana implored him. The king felt himself
weakening. It was almost impossible for him to refuse his son. And if
Duryodhana were to win the final match, as seemed likely, then the Kauravas
would become the undisputed rulers of the earth. He himself would sit at their
head. Even though Yudhiñöhira was the world’s emperor, if he agreed to the
stakes and lost he would certainly feel honor-bound to enter the forest.
Considering that everything lay in the hands of fate, the king agreed to
Duryodhana’s proposal. He ordered that the Päëòavas should be brought back
to play one last game in which everything would be settled.
When they learned of this, the other Kuru elders objected strongly, but
Dhåtaräñöra would not listen. He ignored their counsel and messengers were
sent from Hastinäpura to find the Päëòavas.
Seeing her husband’s blind acceptance of Duryodhana’s dark plans, Gändhäré
became anxious. She had been mortified to learn of Draupadé’s ordeal in the
assembly hall. It seemed that Duryodhana lacked all moral scruples. How could
the king support him? How could he possibly have sat in silence as the gentle
Päëòava queen was so harshly abused? When Dhåtaräñöra was alone, the
blindfolded queen approached him. “Do you not recall Vidura’s advice when
Duryodhana was born? He warned us that if we did not cast aside that disgrace
of our race, he would surely cause our destruction. It seems this is now coming
to pass. O ruler of men, do not for your own fault sink into an ocean of
calamity. Do not accept the counsel of wicked-minded persons who are but
boys. Who would rekindle a great fire after it has been extinguished? Who
could be so foolish as to again provoke Kunté’s peaceful sons?”
The king remained impassive. Gändhäré was wise and thought always of his
welfare and the good of the Kuru house, but her advice now was like a bitter
medicine. He could not swallow it. She continued, “You alone have caused the
disaster we now face. Lead your sons on the right path. Do not watch them
rush towards death. Abandon Duryodhana now. The affection you bear for
him will destroy this kingdom. Let your mind, guided by wise counsels, follow
its natural inclination toward peace and virtue. Surely you know that
prosperity acquired through wickedness is soon lost, while that which is gained
through honest means takes root and descends from generation to generation.”
Dhåtaräñöra sighed and stood up to leave. “If it is time for the destruction of
our race then, what can I do? If it is God’s will, then let it take place without
200

hindrance. How can I influence events ordained by destiny? Let the Päëòavas
return and again gamble with my sons.”
The queen said nothing more. It was hopeless. Surely the end of the Kurus was
nigh, since no one could sway the king from his folly. She called for her
servants and was led back to her quarters.
***
The Päëòavas had gone a considerable distance from Hastinäpura when to
their surprise they saw a group of messengers from Hastinäpura, headed by the
pratikamin, approaching them. Yudhiñöhira dismounted from his chariot and
the servant stepped forward and said, “O Yudhiñöhira, your uncle has ordered,
‘O best of the Bharatas, the assembly awaits you again. Come back for one final
game of dice.’”
Yudhiñöhira could immediately understand Dhåtaräñöra’s intention. He turned
to his brothers and said, “All creatures receive the good or evil fruits of their
work as ordained by the Supreme. Whether I play another dice game or not,
the fruits of my past activities are unavoidable. Although I know the Kauravas
wish to destroy me, I cannot ignore the summons. A living creature made of
gold had never before been seen, yet Räma allowed himself to be fooled by a
golden deer. When calamity approaches, men’s minds become confused. Surely
the path of religion is subtle and highly difficult to ascertain.”
Yudhiñöhira turned and retraced his steps back to Hastinäpura. He was fearful.
Despite his best efforts to follow the orders of his elders and avoid conflict, still
a war seemed inevitable. To refuse Dhåtaräñöra’s summons would only bring
the conflict into the open more quickly. But what would be the result of
another dice game with Duryodhana?
The five brothers soon arrived back at Hastinäpura. To the consternation of
their friends and well-wishers, they again entered Dhåtaräñöra’s great hall.
Although he knew full well that he had no chance of success, Yudhiñöhira sat
down to play dice with Çakuni one last time. When the Päëòavas were again
seated in the hall, Çakuni said, “O Yudhiñöhira, the old king has returned your
wealth. That is well. Now let us play with a stake of greater value. If we are
defeated, we shall accept exile in the forest. We will wear deerskins and remain
there for twelve years. During the thirteenth year we will live in a city, town or
village. If you should discover us, however, we shall be exiled in the forest for
another twelve years. If you are defeated, you and your brothers, along with
201

Draupadé, will accept the same conditions.”
Çakuni’s mouth curved into a sinister smile. The ivory dice in his hand clacked
as he explained the stakes. Whichever side was the loser would be expected to
surrender their kingdom to the winner. The kingdom would be returned when
the thirteen-year period was over.
As the stakes were described, all those in the hall cried out, “Alas! Shame upon
Duryodhana’s friends that they do not warn him of the danger he brings upon
himself!” Some of them turned to Dhåtaräñöra and said, “Whether or not
Duryodhana understands his foolishness, you should order him to stop. He will
bring down only death and destruction. Check him at once. This is your duty.”
Dhåtaräñöra said nothing and Yudhiñöhira replied, “O King, how can one like
me who always observes a kñatriya’s duty refuse your challenge? Everyone
knows this about me. Besides, it is Dhåtaräñöra, my father and guru, who orders
me to play. What can I do but accept the stakes?”
The game began. Everyone in the hall sat breathless as it moved toward its
inevitable conclusion. Finally, Çakuni’s “I have won!” echoed round the hall
again. The Kuru elders cried out, “Alas! Shame! This ancient house is
doomed!”
Duryodhana laughed and ordered that deerskins be brought immediately for
the Päëòavas. When the brothers had put on the ascetic garb and were
preparing to leave for the forest, Dushashana spoke in great happiness. “Now
Duryodhana’s unopposed and absolute sovereignty shall begin. The Päëòavas
stand vanquished. Indeed they are miserable. Whether or not we have acted
sinfully does not matter. It is clear that the gods have bestowed their grace
upon us, for today we have defeated our enemies. Kunté’s sons are deprived of
happiness and kingdom forever. Those who laughed at Duryodhana shall now
abandon their royal robes and armor and go to the forest possessing nothing.”
Relishing the moment to the full, Dushashana continued to taunt the
Päëòavas with cruel words. Seeing the five brothers in their black deerskins
resembling five powerful åñis, he said, “Although the Päëòavas look like wise
men installed in a sacrifice, they should now be considered unworthy to
perform any sacrifice.”
Dushashana then turned toward Draupadé. “King Drupada did not act well
when he bestowed this princess upon the Päëòavas, who are impotent men. O
Draupadé, what joy will you get from serving your husbands in the forest?
Select a better husband from among the Kauravas so that this calamity may
202

not overwhelm you. Do not waste any more time waiting upon the Päëòavas.”
Bhéma rushed toward Dushashana like a Himälayan lion might rush toward a
jackal. “O crooked wretch, you rave in words uttered only by the sinful. You
have won today only by Çakuni’s skill, yet still you dare to boast. As you pierce
our hearts with words as sharp as arrows, so shall I pierce your heart in battle to
remind you of your words today. Then I shall send you to Yamaräja’s abode
along with your followers.”
Giving up all shame Dushashana laughed and danced around in the Kuru’s
midst, singing, “O cow, O cow.”
Bhéma restrained himself, with difficulty, by fixing his mind on virtue. He
spoke again to the sneering Dushashana. “Wretch, how do you dare to use such
harsh words, having won by foul means? I shall surely tear open your chest and
drink your life-blood in battle, or I will never attain to the regions of bliss. My
anger shall be pacified only when I have slain all of Dhåtaräñöra’s sons.”
Yudhiñöhira headed for the door, followed by his brothers and Draupadé. In
great joy Duryodhana walked alongside Bhéma, mimicking his powerful lionlike gait. Half-turning toward him, Bhéma said, “Do not think that by this you
have gained anything over me. I will be back to kill you and all your followers.
Neither of us will forget what has happened today.”
Dhåtaräñöra was still silent. Bhéñma, Vidura, Droëa and Kåpa, all of whom were
shedding tears to see the Päëòavas go into exile, called out, “Fie! Fie!” They
looked helplessly at the blind king.
Before the Päëòavas left the hall, they stopped before the king and Bhéma
spoke again. “I shall kill Duryodhana and all his brothers, O King. Arjuna will
slay Karëa, and Sahadeva will kill the evil Çakuni. My words will be made good
by the gods. When I have beaten Duryodhana to the ground with my mace, I
will then place my foot on his head.”
Arjuna added, “The promises of superior men are not empty words. You will
see all this come to pass on the fourteenth year. As Bhéma directs, I will kill
Karëa, who is malicious, jealous, harsh-speeched and vain. I will also slay all
kings who foolishly stand against me in battle. If my vow is not carried out,
then so shall the Himälayas be moved, or the sun’s rays become cool. I will not
fail. This will come to pass in fourteen years if Duryodhana does not return our
kingdom.”
Arjuna felt sure that Duryodhana would never return their kingdom. The war
was inevitable. All the brothers knew it. As Arjuna finished speaking,
203

Sahadeva, sighing like a snake, his eyes red with anger, said, “O Çakuni, you
have destroyed the fame of your race. What you call dice are actually pointed
arrows aimed at your heart. If you have anything left to do in this life, do it
now, for I shall certainly kill you in battle when we return from the forest.”
Nakula also vowed to rid the earth of Duryodhana’s followers. Having made
their promises, the brothers turned toward Dhåtaräñöra. Yudhiñöhira said, “I bid
you farewell, O King, and also you, O Kuru elders. I shall see you all again upon
my return. I bow to you and ask your blessings.”
The elders were too ashamed to reply. They prayed for the Päëòavas’ welfare.
Then, after a moment, Vidura spoke. “Your mother, the revered Kunté, is a
royal princess and should not be made to go to the forest. She is delicate and
old. Let that blessed lady remain in my house while you are gone.”
Yudhiñöhira agreed, saying, “You are our uncle and as good as our father. Let it
be as you say, O learned man. We are all obedient to you. Without doubt you
are our most respected guru. Please command us what else should be done.”
“O Yudhiñöhira, best of the Bharata race,” Vidura replied, “do not feel pained
by this turn of events. There is no shame in being defeated by sinful means.
You five brothers will reside happily in the forest, enjoying each other’s
company along with the company of the virtuous Draupadé. You have already
received many instructions from åñis and saints. This exile will be a further
opportunity to receive spiritual training. The learned Dhaumya and the godly
Åñi Närada will instruct you as you lead a simple forest life. Actually, you will
be benefited by your withdrawal from worldly affairs and wealth.”
Vidura wished them well, praying that they would return in safety. He blessed
them that they might obtain from the gods their various opulences: victory
from Indra, patience from Yamaräja, charity from Kuvera, sense control from
Varuëa, strength from Väyu, forbearance from the earth and energy from the
sun-god. Finally Vidura said, “Leave then with our permission, O son of Kunté.
None can accuse you of ever having acted sinfully. Farewell.”
Yudhiñöhira thanked his uncle for his blessings and bowed low before him,
Bhéñma and Droëa. Each of his brothers then offered their respects to the Kuru
elders, who in turn blessed them. They then made their way out of the hall.
Before following her husbands, Draupadé approached Kunté to ask her leave.
As she entered the inner chambers a loud cry went up from all the ladies there.
They were plunged in grief to see the Païchäla princess about to enter the
forest. Draupadé saluted and embraced them all according to their status. She
204

bowed before Kunté, who lifted her up and embraced her.
With tears in her eyes, Kunté said, “O child, do not grieve for this great
calamity which has overtaken you. The hearts of good women are never moved
by the inevitable influence of destiny. Knowing all your duties, you should
follow your husbands with a happy heart and continue to render them service.
You are chaste and accomplished, and you adorn the ancient Kuru race. It is
fortunate indeed for the Kurus that they were not burnt by your wrath. O
sinless one, go now in safety, blessed by my prayers. Protected by your own
virtue, you will soon obtain good fortune.”
Kunté’s voice was choked. She had never been separated from her sons before.
How could she face thirteen years away from them? Sobbing loudly, she asked
Draupadé, “O child, take particular care of Sahadeva. That gentle boy holds a
special place in my heart.” Draupadé replied, “So be it,” and, still wearing a
single blood-stained cloth, her hair disheveled, she left the inner apartments in
tears. Kunté followed close behind. As she came out she saw her sons, shorn of
their royal robes and clad in deerskins. They were surrounded by rejoicing foes
and pitying friends. Overwhelmed by motherly affection, Kunté embraced
them and said with difficulty, “You are all virtuous and well-behaved. You are
devoted to the Lord and ever engaged in the service of your superiors. How
then has this calamity overcome you? I do not see whose sin has fallen upon
you. Surely it is due to your having taken birth in my womb that you now face
this reversal despite your numerous excellent qualities.”
Kunté lamented loudly for her sons. How would they survive in the wilderness?
She decided that Mädré had been the more fortunate wife. She had already
attained her liberation. Surely she had forseen this terrible disaster and had
entered Päëòu’s funeral fire in relief. If Kunté had known that this was to
happen, she would never have brought her sons from the mountains to
Hastinäpura.
Kunté let out an anguished cry. “O great creator! Have you forgotten to ordain
my death? Surely that is why I am still living although faced with such tragedy.
O my sons, I obtained you after so much difficulty. How can I leave you now? I
shall accompany you to the forest.”
Folding her hands, she prayed aloud to Kåñëa, “O Kåñëa, O You who dwell in
Dwärakä, where are You? Why do You not save me and my sons, the best of
men? Those who are wise say that You always protect those who think of You.
Why is this now proving false?”
205

Kunté then censured the Kuru elders who could stand by and watch as her
virtuous sons were exiled to the forest. Weeping, she turned to Sahadeva. “O
my son, you should not go. Stay behind and earn the fruit of the virtue of
serving the mother. Let your pious brothers fulfill the terms of the vow.”
The Päëòavas were pained to see their mother grieving. They consoled her as
best they could, then took their leave. Vidura gently took Kunté by the hand
and led her toward his house. Gändhäré and the other ladies of the royal house
also wept, covering their faces with their lotus-like hands.
With difficulty the brothers made their way along Hastinäpura’s crowded
streets. The news of their exile had spread quickly, and the streets were filled
with grieving citizens. Led by Dhaumya, they left the city and the people they
loved, unable to say anything to anyone.

Chapter 22
Into the Forest
When the Päëòavas were gone, Dhåtaräñöra became prey to anxiety. Thinking
of the dangers awaiting his sons he could not enjoy peace of mind. He brooded
in his rooms for some time, then called for Vidura. When his brother arrived
the king timidly asked, “I desire to hear how Yudhiñöhira and his brothers left
the city. How did Draupadé proceed? What was the exalted Dhaumya doing as
they left the city?”
Vidura replied, “Yudhiñöhira walked with his face covered by a cloth. Bhéma
was looking at his mighty arms and Arjuna was scattering sands as he walked.
Sahadeva smeared his face with dirt and Nakula covered his body with ashes.
The lotus-eyed Draupadé followed them with her face bathed in tears and her
hair disheveled. Dhaumya walked before them, carrying kusha grass and
uttering fearful mantras from the Säma Veda relating to Yamaräja.”
Intrigued by this description, Dhåtaräñöra enquired further, “Tell me why they
have assumed these various guises, O Vidura.”
“Although your sons persecuted him and deprived him of his kingdom by foul
means, the wise Dharmaräja has not deviated from the path of virtue. Thus he
covered his face, thinking, ‘I may consume innocent citizens by looking at
206

them with eyes made fearful by anger.’ Bhéma strode forth from the city
repeatedly stretching his arms and thinking how none could equal him in
strength. He desires to do to his enemies acts worthy of those arms. Arjuna,
who is capable of drawing his bow with both hands, scattered sands to
symbolize the countless arrows he will let loose in battle. Sahadeva smeared his
face thinking, ‘None should recognise me in this hour of calamity. The
incomparably handsome Nakula covered himself with ashes thinking, ‘I should
not steal the hearts of women as I walk exposed along the public highway.’”
Hearing of Bhéma and Arjuna’s belligerence, the blind king became even more
fearful. What would become of Duryodhana and his brothers now? Dhåtaräñöra
listened with growing concern as Vidura continued his description.
“The chaste Draupadé, attired in a single piece of cloth, her hair bedraggled due
to Dushashana’s touch, went along saying, ‘The wives of those who have
reduced me to this plight will, in fourteen years from now, have to lament as I
am lamenting. Bereft of their husbands and sons, they will enter the city by
this road, having offered oblations of water to their dead relatives at the river.’
“O Dhåtaräñöra, the learned and self-controlled Dhaumya, holding blades of
kusha pointed south, uttered the Säma Veda, thinking, ‘When all the Kauravas
are killed their priests will sing these same mantras.’”
Vidura told the king how Hastinäpura’s citizens were condemning the Kuru
chiefs and wailing with sorrow. While the brothers were leaving, everyone saw
the many evil omens. Lightning flashed from a cloudless sky and the earth
trembled. The sun was eclipsed and meteors fell. Jackals yelped from all
directions, and vultures and ravens shrieked from the temples of the gods. “All
these signs portend the destruction of our race, O King. This is only the result
of your own evil desires.” Vidura looked at Dhåtaräñöra, who sat wringing his
hands and saying nothing.
Just at that moment the great Åñi Närada suddenly appeared, surrounded by
other powerful sages. He stood before Dhåtaräñöra and said gravely, “On the
fourteenth year from now, for Duryodhana’s fault, Bhéma and Arjuna will
destroy the Kauravas.”
After saying this, Närada rose upwards into the sky with the other åñis and
disappeared. All the Kurus were gripped by fear. Närada’s words could not
prove false. Seeing war as inevitable, Duryodhana, Karëa and Çakuni
approached Droëa to offer him command of the army. Droëa said, “The
Brahmins have said that the Päëòavas are of divine origin and cannot be
207

killed. Out of fear of those heroes, however, you have sought my shelter and I
cannot refuse. Destiny is supreme. I shall do everything in my power to protect
you, even though the Päëòavas are allied with Drupada, whose son was born to
kill me. Thus I too must be about to die. O Kurus, enjoy while you can. Offer
sacrifice and give charity freely. At the end of fourteen years, calamity will
overtake us all.”
Droëa spoke in Dhåtaräñöra’s hearing. The old king found himself more and
more anxious as he thought of the injustice for which he had been responsible.
Now his son had everything he wanted, but how long could it last? Enmity with
the Päëòavas would be dangerous even for the gods. Dhåtaräñöra’s thoughts
went back to the day Duryodhana was born. Why had he not then listened to
Vidura’s advice? Even then his affection for his son had overpowered all his
judgment and reason. Now he was about to face the consequences for his
sentimental weakness.The king called for his secretary Saïjaya, who, although
a charioteer and çüdra by birth, was Vyäsadeva’s disciple and his own friend.
Saïjaya had often been able to console Dhåtaräñöra with his wisdom. When he
arrived he saw the king sitting with his head bowed, sighing repeatedly. With a
wry smile the charioteer said, “O King, you have now obtained the whole earth
and
all
its
wealth.
Why
then
do
you
grieve?”

208

Dhåtaräñöra shook his head. “What do they not have to grieve for who will
have to meet in battle those foremost of fighters, the Päëòavas?”
Saïjaya spoke frankly. “This, O King, is your own fault. You have created a
hostility which will destroy the world. Although Bhéñma, Droëa and Vidura
condemned Duryodhana’s behavior, your wicked son had the beloved and
virtuous Draupadé dragged into the assembly hall and cruelly insulted. Why did
you not check him? Surely the gods deprive that man of his reason to whom
they have ordained defeat and disgrace. He sees everything in a strange light.
When destruction is at hand, his mind is polluted by sin and evil then appears
as good. That which is improper appears proper, while that which is proper
appears otherwise.”
Sitting alone with his secretary, Dhåtaräñöra listened sorrowfully to his words,
which he knew were moral and true. The king held his head as Saïjaya
continued.
“By dragging the chaste and ascetic Päïcälé into the hall, the Kauravas,
wretches that they are, have brought upon themselves wholesale destruction.
Who else but Duryodhana and his wicked allies could have so abused
Drupada’s divinely born daughter, dragging her into the hall when she was in
her season and covered with blood? There she saw her husbands, robbed of
their wealth, kingdom and even their dress, and forced into slavery. Bound by
ties of virtue they were unable to exert their prowess. But, O King, the time
will soon come when we shall see their power displayed.”
Dhåtaräñöra’s voice faltered as he replied. “O Saïjaya, Draupadé’s pained
glances can consume the whole world. What chance is there for even one of
my sons to survive? All the Kuru women, headed by Gändhäré, sent up a
frightful wail when Dushashana seized Draupadé. Even now they weep along
with my subjects. Enraged at Draupadé’s persecution, the Brahmins refused to
perform their fire sacrifices. We see fearful omens all around the kingdom. It
seems our destruction is near at hand. Surely this is the influence of allpowerful destiny.”
After speaking in this way for some time, the king dismissed Saïjaya and sat
alone in his chamber throughout the night, the gambling match replaying in
his mind again and again.
***
209

The Päëòavas left Hastinäpura by the northern gate, accompanied by a
number of servants. As they were leaving the city, the crowds looked on and
openly criticized the Kuru elders.
“When the wicked Duryodhana aspires to this kingdom we are all lost. Our
wealth, families, homes and even our selves are gone. Ruled by that sinful,
malicious, avaricious man, who is aided only by other sinful men, we are
doomed. How can we find any happiness? Let us follow these virtuous heroes to
the forest.”
A few citizens approached Yudhiñöhira. “Where will you go leaving us behind?
We are distressed to learn of your defeat by deceitful means. Take us with you.
We do not wish to meet with destruction by living in the kingdom of a sinful
king. By such association we will be polluted by sin, whereas by associating
with you, we will be uplifted to the highest level of virtue.”
Yudhiñöhira folded his palms and replied, “We are indeed blessed, as the people,
with the Brahmins at their head, credit us with merits we do not possess. I,
with all my brothers, would ask you to do one thing for the sake of the love you
bear us. The king along with our grandfather Bhéñma, the wise Vidura, our
mother Kunté and our friends are in Hastinäpura. Please stay here and cherish
them. Only this will satisfy me.”
The citizens cried out in pain. Sorrowfully they unwillingly retraced their steps
back into the city, thinking only of the Päëòavas.
When the citizens were gone, the Päëòavas ascended their chariots and moved
toward the north. At dusk they arrived on the bank of the Ganges and found
the great banyan tree known as Pramäëa. They decided to spend the night
there and thus dismounted their chariots and bathed in the Ganges. As
darkness fell the many Brahmins who had followed the brothers lit their sacred
fires, which cast an orange glow into the blackness of the night. Those holy åñis
sitting around the fire chanting Vedic mantras in melodic tones soothed the
Päëòavas. Surrounded by such self-realized souls, Yudhiñöhira and his brothers
again shone resplendent like celestials in the heavens.
In the morning the brothers prepared to enter the forest. They sat before the
sacred fire and offered prayers to the gods to invoke auspiciousness. Then they
asked the Brahmins to bless them and allow them to leave. Yudhiñöhira spoke
sorrowfully. “We were robbed of our kingdom, wealth and everything else we
possessed. O best of men, we will not be able to maintain you as is our duty. In
the forest we will have to subsist on fruits and wild roots. The forest is also
210

filled with dangerous beasts and serpents. Please therefore return to
Hastinäpura. The suffering of Brahmins can overwhelm even the gods, what to
speak of ourselves. I do not wish to be the cause of your privations, O holy
ones.”
The Brahmins’ leader, Shaunaka, replied, “O King, we will go with you. Do not
be anxious about how we will survive. We shall procure our own food and take
great delight in an ascetic life. By our prayers and meditations we shall do you
good, and we shall keep you entertained with our recitations from the holy
scriptures.”
“I do not doubt that it must be as you say,” replied Yudhiñöhira. “I am always
pleased to be in the company of Brahmins. But now I am destitute. My brothers
are anguished on my account and I see myself as reproachable. How shall I now
see you, who do not deserve to suffer, subsist on food you have procured
yourself. Alas! Fie upon Dhåtaräñöra’s wicked sons.”
Yudhiñöhira sat and wept with his head in his hands. In Indraprastha he had
maintained tens of thousands of Brahmins. Now he could not provide food for
even a few.
Seeing the king feeling so dejected, Shaunaka consoled him by speaking from
the Vedas. “A thousand causes of grief and a hundred causes of fear overwhelm
the ignorant day by day, but they never overwhelm those who are learned. O
King, intelligent men like you are never cast into illusion. You cannot be
bewildered by reverses, knowing full well the eternal truths of the Vedas. Bring
that wisdom to mind now, O Yudhiñöhira.”
Shaunaka explained how the root of suffering is attachment to matter. As a
fire in the hollow of a tree consumes the whole tree to its roots, so a small
attachment, if nurtured, can destroy a man. One who has renounced
attachment, even though living in the world, becomes free from evil passions
and the suffering they produce.
Yudhiñöhira listened attentively, taking delight in the knowledge he had heard
spoken so many times. He never tired of hearing it. Shaunaka told him that the
desire for wealth and opulence, which could never be alleviated, is man’s worst
enemy. The highest happiness comes from contentment, while the struggle for
wealth, fame, followers and the association of loved ones is the cause of
bondage and ultimately pain.
“Therefore, O King, you should not covet anything. Do not desire to
accumulate wealth even for virtuous purposes. It is better never to have
211

touched mud than to wash it off after being covered in it. If you wish to
acquire virtue, then free yourself from all desires for wealth.”
Yudhiñöhira was puzzled. “O Åñi, I do not desire anything for myself. I only wish
to have enough wealth to support the Brahmins. What use is there in leading a
householder’s life if he cannot cherish and support his dependents? Is it not the
duty of a householder to maintain both his family members and the
brahmacärés and renunciants? So too should a householder welcome guests and
travelers. This is said to be the path to religious merit. What is your opinion, O
learned Brahmin?”
“Alas, this world is full of contradictions,” Shaunaka replied. “That which
makes the good and honest ashamed pleases the wicked. Moved by ignorance
and passion men act simply to gratify their stomachs and sex organs. When the
senses come in contact with their objects a desire springs up in the heart to
enjoy those objects. Blinded by desire, men become absorbed in following the
dictates of the senses, which they mistake for real happiness.”
Shaunaka explained that even pious men may be overpowered by desires when
associating with the world and its enjoyable objects. Yudhiñöhira had already
achieved success in his householder life. Now, without attachment or material
desire, he should concentrate on his practice of yoga and austerity in order to
attain full spiritual success. By his spiritual power he would then be able to
support the Brahmins.
Yudhiñöhira thanked the åñi for his instructions, which he said he would follow.
Then, still desiring to find the means by which he could maintain those
ascetics who wished to accompany him into the forest, the king asked
Dhaumya’s advice. “O great sage, I cannot abandon the Brahmins, but at the
same time, I have no power to provide for them. What should I do?”
Dhaumya reflected on Yudhiñöhira’s question for some minutes, then he
replied, “Long ago all created beings were afflicted by hunger. Thereupon
Sürya took compassion upon them. Drawing up water with his rays he stayed
over the earth. Then the moon, by his cooling powers, converted the resultant
vapors into clouds. Then rain fell, and by the combination of sun and rain food
was brought forth from the earth. Thus all beings are actually supported by the
sun. Take shelter of the sun-god, O King, and you will be able to fulfill your
purposes.”
Dhaumya explained to Yudhiñöhira how the great kings of the past had all
protected and delivered their subjects by virtue of their own ascetic meditation
212

and vows. The Päëòava immediately understood. In order to secure the means
to support the Brahmins, he should worship the sun-god with an ascetic vow.
Thus he asked the sage what means he should follow.
Dhaumya instructed Yudhiñöhira in the 108 names of the sun, as well as the
Vedic prayers he should recite. Then Yudhiñöhira entered the Ganges, stood
facing the sun, and offered numerous prayers and worship to its deity. He took
neither food nor water for several days, and controlled his breathing through
the process of präëäyama-yoga. Renouncing sleep, the king continuously
praised the sun-god from the waters of the Ganges.
Three days later the blazing sun-god appeared before Yudhiñöhira and said, “I
am pleased with your prayers and austerities, O King. You shall get all that you
desire. I shall provide you with food for the twelve years of your exile in the
forest.”
The god gave to Yudhiñöhira a large copper plate with the following
instruction: “When Päïcälé has cooked a meal she should place the food on
this dish. That food will then be inexhaustible in quantity until the time when
she herself eats. You can thus feed any number of men from this plate, O
King.”
The god then rose into the sky and vanished, adding, “You will regain your
kingdom in fourteen years from now.”
Yudhiñöhira came out of the river with the plate and took hold of Dhaumya’s
feet in worship. With great happiness he embraced his brothers and then
handed the mystical plate to Draupadé. She immediately cooked a meal and
placed it upon the dish. After offering the food to the Lord with appropriate
prayers, she served the Brahmins. To her amazement and delight she saw that
as she served from the plate, the food was immediately replenished. It was only
when she took her own meal after serving her husbands that she saw the dish
finally empty.
When they had eaten, the Päëòavas, blessed by auspicious rites and Vedic
prayers, set out for the forest of Kämyaka, accompanied by hundreds of
Brahmins.

Chapter 23

213

Dhåtaräñöra’s Anxiety
In Hastinäpura Dhåtaräñöra was becoming increasingly sorrowful. Needing
solace, he called for Vidura and said, “O Khattwa, your intelligence is no less
than that of the great Bhärgava. You are acquainted with all the subtleties of
dharma. You regard all the Kurus equally; tell me therefore what is good for me
and for them. Now that things have taken this course, what should we do? How
can we again secure the citizens’ faith and love? And especially, how can we
avoid total annihilation of our race?”
Vidura replied, “O King, religion, as well as economic development and sense
pleasure, depend upon virtue. A kingdom’s success also rests upon virtue.
Therefore, O best of men, cherish and love both your own sons and the sons of
Päëòu. You destroyed virtue when you allowed your sons, headed by Çakuni, to
play dice with Yudhiñöhira. The only way you can now atone for this evil and
win praise in this world is to return the Päëòavas their kingdom. Be satisfied
with what is rightfully yours and do not covet others’ possessions.”
Dhåtaräñöra shifted uncomfortably in his seat. This was not the advice he had
wanted to hear. He was more interested in knowing how the Kauravas could
secure their present position. Destiny had conferred upon them sovereignty of
the entire earth. Now they needed to strengthen their position in order to rule
it successfully. What help would it be to concede the kingdom to their most
powerful enemies? Dhåtaräñöra felt his anger rising as Vidura continued to
speak.
“O descendent of Bharata, I once told you to abandon Duryodhana. Had you
listened to me then you would not be repenting now. You can still do it. Cast
aside Duryodhana and bring Yudhiñöhira back as the monarch. Let your sons
and their followers wait upon the Päëòavas. Have Dushashana apologize to
Draupadé in the open court, and he should also beg Bhéma’s pardon. This will
be good for all of us and it will also save the kingdom from destruction. What
else can I advise you at such a time?”
Dhåtaräñöra’s anger boiled over. It seemed that Vidura always sided with the
Päëòavas and never favored him or his sons. Placing his hand on his bejeweled
scepter, he said, “O Vidura, you speak only to please the Päëòavas and do not
care to please me. I do not approve of your words. How do you expect me to
214

abandon my own flesh and blood for another’s sake? Although the Päëòavas
are as good as my sons, Duryodhana has sprung from my body. You ask me to
leave my own body aside in order to favor another’s. Although I hold you in
great esteem, today I find your words crooked. I therefore reject them. You may
stay here or go away as you please. I no longer require your advice. However
well an unchaste wife is treated, she always forsakes her husband.”
Dhåtaräñöra rose suddenly and stalked off into his inner chambers. Vidura
shook his head sadly and said, “This race is doomed.” He decided to follow the
Päëòavas into the forest and made preparations for his departure.
***
Leaving aside their chariots and carrying only their weapons, the Päëòavas had
begun to travel in a westerly direction, going from forest to forest. They passed
through Kurukñetra and crossed over the rivers Yamunä, Drishadwati and
Sarasvaté. Finally, on the banks of the Sarasvaté, they saw the great Kämyaka
forest. Many ascetics lined the river bank while performing their sacrifices and
austerities. The Päëòavas entered the Kämyaka and built thatched huts in
which to live. In the company of the Brahmins they began to devote their time
to sacrifice and scriptural study.
One evening, as they sat by the sacred fire listening to Brahmins recite Vedic
histories, the brothers heard a chariot approaching. They looked up and saw
Vidura coming toward them. Surprised, Yudhiñöhira said to Bhéma, “Why is
Vidura here? Has he been sent to fetch us for yet another game of dice? Does
the mean-minded Çakuni wish to take from us even our weapons?”
The Päëòavas rose from the fire and greeted Vidura with all respects. They
settled him in their midst and after inquiring about his welfare, Yudhiñöhira
offered Vidura refreshments and a place to rest. The following day, Vidura
related to the brothers what had transpired in Hastinäpura.
“O Ajätaçatru, I told the king what was beneficial for him, but he did not care
to listen. As the unchaste wife of a noble man can never be brought back to
virtue, so the king will not take to the right path. He will never meet with good
fortune. As water falling upon a lotus leaf rolls off, so my counsel had no effect
on him. He has sent me away with harsh words.”
The Päëòavas consoled Vidura, and he said, “I shall now tell you what, in my
opinion, will be conducive to your ultimate success. You should bide your time
patiently and find ways to increase your strength. Perform asceticism and
215

worship the gods. This will help you gain power. Always speak the truth and be
kind to your dependents and followers. Share your food with them and never
boast in their presence. This conduct increases the prosperity of kings.”
Yudhiñöhira thanked Vidura for his advice, which he said he would follow.
Then another chariot was heard approaching. This time it was Saïjaya coming
toward them. Dhåtaräñöra’s charioteer bowed before Yudhiñöhira and was
graciously received with kind words of welcome. When he was comfortably
seated, he explained to Yudhiñöhira why he had come.
“Having dispatched Vidura with cruel words, the king is consumed by
repentance and sorrow. This morning he entered the assembly hall and fell
senseless to the floor. When he regained consciousness he said to the assembled
kings, ‘My brother Vidura is like the god of justice, Yamaräja. Remembering
him, my heart burns with anguish and grief.’”
Saïjaya continued, “The king told me to fetch Vidura back to Hastinäpura. He
said, ‘Go quickly, O Saïjaya, and see whether my brother, whom I angrily sent
away with harsh words, lives or not. He has never done me the slightest wrong.
Rather he has suffered at my hands. Bring him here soon before I give up my
life.’”
Saïjaya turned to Vidura. “O descendent of Kuru, please return to the city and
revive the king. This is his order.”
Even though Dhåtaräñöra seemed quite unable to heed his good advice, Vidura
decided to return. He loved his elder brother. He knew that Dhåtaräñöra was
intelligent, despite his foolish behavior. Vidura felt that if he was near the king
and able to offer counsel, then at least there would be a chance that he would
come to his senses.
After taking Yudhiñöhira’s permission, Vidura returned to Hastinäpura and
went to see Dhåtaräñöra who was overjoyed to see him. The king said, “O
virtuous and sinless one, by good fortune have I got you back. I could not sleep
last night, thinking I was lost.”
Vidura replied that he had forgiven Dhåtaräñöra his insult. “You are my guru
and worthy of my highest respect. I came here swiftly when Saïjaya told me of
your desire. O King, it is only natural that any virtuous man feels inclined
toward helping the distressed. Both your sons and those of Päëòu are equally
dear to me, but because the Päëòavas are now in distress I feel compassion
more for them.”
With apologetic words the two brothers continued speaking together for some
216

while, happy to be reunited.
***
Duryodhana, however, was not pleased to see Vidura return. He summoned
Çakuni, Karëa and Dushashana and said, “The intelligent Vidura has returned.
He is always inclined toward the Päëòavas. Before he manages to convince the
king to bring the Päëòavas back, let us consider what should be done. If I ever
again see the Päëòavas flourish, I shall not be able to maintain my life.”
Çakuni laughed. “What folly are you speaking, O King? The Päëòavas have
already left for the forest. They will be gone for the next thirteen years. They
agreed to accept the wager and will never deviate from truth. Even if your
father does ask them to return, they would not agree to do so until their exile
has expired. Anyway, we do not need to be afraid. We need only to pretend
that we agree with your father and await an opportunity to overcome them
again.”
Dushashana applauded Çakuni’s words. “I like your advice, uncle.”
Karëa looked at Duryodhana, who was still uneasy. “O King, all of us here are
your friends and well-wishers. We shall always support you against the
Päëòavas. You have nothing to fear. But I agree with Çakuni. The brothers will
not break their vow. If somehow they do return, then we can find some means
to again defeat them.”
Duryodhana turned away from his counselors. He stood and looked out the
latticed window at the beautiful palace gardens. He breathed heavily and
ground his teeth. How could he be happy as long as those Päëòavas were still
alive?
Karëa said, “I know what you are thinking, O ruler of men. I share your
feelings. We must root out the Päëòavas once and for all. The dice game has
not settled the issue, because the Päëòavas still live.”
Karëa’s handsome face contorted with anger as he thought of Arjuna, his old
rival. He longed to face him in battle. Thirteen years was a long time to wait.
Striding back and forth, Karëa went on passionately. “Here is my honest
opinion, O King. Now let us put on our armor and take up our weapons, mount
our chariots and go in force to the forest. We will find the Päëòavas and kill
them. This is a good time, while they are destitute and weakened by sorrow.
They have no power and no influence. We will easily be able to defeat them.”
Everyone was stirred by Karëa’s strong words. His was the right solution.
217

Without hesitation Duryodhana arranged for a large force to accompany him;
with Karëa and his brothers by his side, he set out for the forest.
On their way out of the city, however, they met Vyäsadeva. The sage had seen
Duryodhana’s plan by his spiritual vision. He ordered Duryodhana to return to
the palace. The prince felt chastened, but he dared not defy the åñi’s order,
fearing the power of his curse.
Vyäsadeva then went to see Dhåtaräñöra. When he had been properly received
and worshipped, he said, “O greatly wise Dhåtaräñöra, listen as I tell you what is
best for the Kurus. I am not at all pleased that the Päëòavas have been sent to
the forest through dishonest means. If you do not return their kingdom, then,
at the end of the thirteen years, they will not have forgotten their enmity.
Without doubt they will kill the Kauravas.”
Vyäsadeva sat upon an elevated seat in the Kuru assembly. He looked at the
king, who sat surrounded by his ministers and counselors. They all listened
respectfully as the sage continued. “Your foolish son now desires to slay the
Päëòavas. You should check him. If he tries to kill those heroes in the forest,
he will lose his own life. O descendent of Bharata, Duryodhana regards the
Päëòavas with such envy that unless you interfere in his schemes, he will cause
the Kuru race to be destroyed.
“O King, why not send Duryodhana to the forest to serve the Päëòavas? He
will then be out of harm’s way. Perhaps the virtuous Päëòavas will even come
to like him, although I am doubtful. The nature a man acquires at birth stays
with him all his life. It seems impossible that Duryodhana would ever be able to
humble himself before the Päëòavas or before anyone else.”
The sage looked around the assembly. “What do Bhéñma, Droëa and Vidura
think? What is your view, O King? You should do the right thing immediately,
otherwise your happiness will be destroyed.”
Dhåtaräñöra lifted a hand decked with gleaming rings and placed it against his
forehead. Sighing, he replied, “O illustrious one, I did not like this gambling
business from the beginning. I think I was forced to give my consent by
irresistible destiny. Neither Bhéñma, Droëa, Vidura, nor the Queen Gändhäré,
liked the dice game. I have no doubt that it happened under the Lord’s
deluding potency, maya. I knew all this at the time, but due to my paternal love
I was unable to abandon the envious Duryodhana.”
“O King, I can understand how you feel. The son is always a man’s most dear
object. But why do you not also see the Päëòavas as your sons? They are
218

suffering distress. Why do you not feel compassion for them now? I am now
addressing you as my own son. I feel the same love for my other two sons,
Päëòu and Vidura. You have one hundred and one sons and Päëòu has only
five. When I think of Päëòu’s sons I wonder only how I may help them. O best
of men, if you wish to keep all the Kurus alive, then order Duryodhana to make
peace with the Päëòavas.”
Dhåtaräñöra slowly shook his head, his brilliant crown catching the sun rays
pouring through the windows. “O wise Åñi, it is exactly as you say. I know it
well, as do all these kings. I have already heard the same advice from Bhéñma,
Vidura and Droëa. Somehow, I cannot follow that advice. Please therefore be
gracious to the Kurus and instruct my wicked son to take the righteous path.”
Vyäsadeva, who could see past, present and future, said, “Soon the illustrious
Åñi Maitreya will visit after having visited the Päëòavas. He will admonish
your son for the sake of the Kuru’s welfare. Follow his advice without
hesitation. Otherwise he will curse your son.” Vyäsadeva then stood and left
the assembly.
As Vyäsadeva predicted, Maitreya Åñi soon arrived. The itinerant ascetic, who
carried only a staff and a water pot, was received with all respect by
Dhåtaräñöra and his sons. They worshipped him with offerings of arghya and
other rites. Dhåtaräñöra then offered him a jewel-encrusted seat in the
assembly. When the sage was seated comfortably the king asked, “O illustrious
one, was your journey from the forest a pleasant one? Are the heroes, the five
Päëòava brothers, living there happily? Will they spend the full thirteen years
there? How will the brotherly affection between my sons and nephews be
restored?”
Maitreya looked around the assembly. “While on a pilgrimage I came to the
Kämyaka forest and met Yudhiñöhira and his brothers. They now wear
deerskins and have matted their hair, and they live there surrounded by åñis. I
heard from them of the grave errors Duryodhana committed and of the terrible
danger that you now face as a result. Therefore, I have come here to offer some
advice. My affection for you is great and I always wish you well.”
The sage asked how it was possible that the king was overlooking Duryodhana’s
evil acts. How could both Dhåtaräñöra and Bhéñma have allowed him to create
such enmity with the Päëòavas?
“You are the monarch here,” the åñi said solemnly. “You are thus able to punish
wrong-doers. For having allowed wicked acts to be perpetrated in your own
219

assembly hall, O King, you have been condemned by the sages. Do you not fear
the consequences?”
Maitreya turned toward Duryodhana, who scowled at his words. The sage spoke
softly. “O mighty-armed hero, I utter words meant only for your good, as well as
that of the Kurus, the Päëòavas and indeed the whole world. Do not quarrel
with the Päëòavas. They are all as powerful as thousands of mighty elephants.
They are virtuous and possessed of great prowess. With his bare hands, Bhéma
has slain three powerful Räkñasas, enemies of the celestials who were capable of
assuming any form at will. He killed these three––Hiòimba, Baka and
Kirmira––as easily as a tiger kills small deer. Do you remember how that same
Bhéma killed, in single combat, the invincible Jaräsandha? Who is foolish
enough to create enmity with such heroes, having as they do Kåñëa, Drupada
and Drupada’s sons as their allies? Take my advice, dear child, and make peace
with them. Do not bring this danger upon yourself.”
Duryodhana looked away and made no reply. He exposed his thigh and slapped
it loudly, then hung his head. Then stretching his leg as if bored, he scratched
the ground with his foot.
When he saw Duryodhana’s impudence, Maitreya’s eyes turned red with anger.
He touched holy water and, holding the sacred thread hanging from his
shoulder, said in a voice like thunder, “O insolent one, since you slight my
words and pay no heed to my advice you shall soon reap the result. In the great
war which will spring from the wrongs you have perpetrated, Bhéma will smash
your thigh with his mace.”
Dhåtaräñöra immediately became alarmed. He sought to console and gratify
Maitreya with gentle words, asking him to be merciful toward Duryodhana.
Maitreya said that if Duryodhana made peace with the Päëòavas, the curse
would be lifted. Otherwise it would not be reversed.
Dhåtaräñöra felt a little relieved, having managed to mitigate Maitreya’s curse.
He then said, “O Åñi, we have heard how Bhéma destroyed Hiòimba and Baka,
but not Kirmira. Who was this demon? What was his strength and how was he
killed? We wish to know everything.”
Maitreya replied, “I will not speak any further to this assembly because
Duryodhana has rejected my words. Vidura knows well the history of Kirmira.”
And with that the sage rose and left the city.
When the offended sage was gone, Dhåtaräñöra asked Vidura to relate the
story. Vidura replied, “O King, I heard this story from Yudhiñöhira when I
220

spoke to him in the forest. Having left Hastinäpura the Päëòavas traveled for
three days and nights, finally arriving at the Kämyaka forest. As they moved
through this forest during the fearful hours of the night they encountered a
terrible Räkñasa with flaming eyes. He stood as tall as a tree and held a blazing
torch. With arms and legs outstretched like the branches of a huge sal tree, he
blocked the Päëòavas’ path. He had eight fangs protruding from his wide open
mouth, and his eyes were the color of copper. His flaming red hair stood erect
and he resembled a mass of clouds charged with lightning and adorned by a
flock of cranes. Roaring like thunder he spread the Räkñasa illusion and
confounded the Päëòavas’ senses.”
The assembly listened spellbound as Vidura told the story. “Birds and other
creatures dropped down everywhere simply from hearing the demon’s awful
cries. Deer, buffaloes, leopards and bears fled terrified in all directions. The
forest itself seemed to be moving due to all the fleeing creatures. A violent
wind blew up and dust clouds swirled. Even as grief is the greatest enemy of the
five senses, so that Räkñasa appeared to the five Päëòavas. “Spying the
brothers from a distance, clad in their deerskins and carrying weapons, the
Räkñasa obstructed their path like the Mainäka mountain. When Draupadé saw
the horrifying creature, she closed her eyes and stood amid her husbands like
an agitated river amid five hills. Dhaumya at once uttered Vedic mantras to
counter the demon’s illusions, and the wind ceased and the dust settled. Seeing
his power checked, the Räkñasa opened his eyes in anger––he looked like
Death himself.
“Yudhiñöhira was stern. ‘Who are you? What do you want of us?’
“The Räkñasa replied, ‘I am Kirmira, the brother of Baka. I live comfortably in
this uninhabited forest. I eat all men foolish enough to come here. Who are
you that have come today to become my food?’
“‘We are the five sons of Päëòu,’ Yudhiñöhira answered. ‘We have been exiled
from our kingdom and desire to spend our time in this forest, which is your
dominion.’
“When their identity was disclosed, the Räkñasa bellowed in joy. ‘Ha! What
good luck. Fate has today accomplished my long-cherished desire. I have
wandered around in the hope of finding Bhéma, my brother’s killer. Now he
stands here before me at the dead of night, when my power is greatest, and
when I am hungry. Disguised as a Brahmin this wretch slew my brother and
stole his sister. I shall now wreak my vengeance on him. I will kill him and
221

offer his blood to Baka’s departed soul. In this way, I shall be freed of my debt
to my brother. I shall devour Bhéma, digesting him even as Agastya digested
the Asura Vätäpi.’
“Yudhiñöhira rebuked the Räkñasa. ‘This can never be.’ The mighty Bhéma at
once tore up a huge tree and stripped it of its branches, and in the twinkling of
an eye Arjuna had strung his bow and stood with an arrow at the ready. But
Bhéma stopped his brother and advanced alone to face the demon. Tightening
his waist cloth, he shouted an angry challenge. ‘Stay and fight!’ Armed with
the tree he rushed toward him. As Indra hurls his thunderbolt Bhéma brought
down the tree with force upon the Räkñasa’s head. The tree smashed to pieces
while the demon remained unmoved. He hurled his flaming brand at Bhéma
and it flew toward him like a streak of lightning. Bhéma dropped quickly to the
ground and turned the torch away with his left foot.
“Roaring terribly the Räkñasa himself tore up a great tree and rushed at Bhéma
like Yamaräja bearing his death-dealing staff. The two combatants pulled up
tree after tree and hurled and smashed them together as they fought. The
battle resembled the fight of old between Vali and Sugréva and soon a large
area of the forest had been stripped of trees. The angry demon then lifted and
hurled a massive rock at Bhéma, who caught the boulder and tossed it back.
Kirmira rushed at Bhéma with outstretched arms, even as Rähu goes to devour
the sun. They grappled together, rolling about on the earth like a couple of
infuriated bulls locked in mortal combat.
“The fight was fierce and hard, lasting for almost an hour. Bhéma, proud of his
strength, was conscious of Draupadé watching him. Then he remembered
Duryodhana’s insults toward the princess. Looking at the demon as if he were
the Kaurava, Bhéma’s anger swelled. He seized the Räkñasa like one maddened
elephant seizing another. Kirmira also seized the Päëòava, but Bhéma lifted
him and threw him down violently. He then took hold of the demon by the
waist and began to shake him as trees are shaken by the wind. Even as he was
being shaken, the demon reached up and with all his strength grasped hold of
Bhéma by the neck. Bhéma repeatedly lifted and smashed the Räkñasa down,
even as the demon gripped him with hands like steel vices.
“The earth shook and the forest echoed with the sound of Kirmira’s body
striking the ground. He roared fearfully like a discordant trumpet. Bhéma lifted
him and whirled him around with tremendous power. Seeing that the Räkñasa
had fallen unconscious, Bhéma threw him to the ground. He placed his knees
222

on his chest and strangled him. As the demon died, Bhéma said, ‘O sinful
wretch, you need no longer wipe away the tears of Baka and Hiòimba’s
relatives, for you are now going to join them.’
“Leaving Kirmira’s body lying on the path, devoid of clothes and ornaments,
Bhéma rejoined his brothers. They gathered round him and praised him. Again
placing Draupadé in the center of their party, they entered deeper into the
forest.”
The assembly was amazed to hear this story. Vidura concluded, “This is what I
heard from Yudhiñöhira. When I was passing through the forest I saw for myself
the Räkñasa’s body after being smashed by Bhéma’s blows.”
Dhåtaräñöra sighed and said nothing. He was becoming increasingly anxious.
Bhéma had promised to kill all his sons. Who or what could ever prevent him
from fulfilling his promise? The king’s heart burned with fear and anguish.

Chapter 24
Yudhiñöhira’s Moral Instructions
When Kåñëa heard the news that the Päëòavas had been exiled, He decided to
go and see them in the forest. He invited Balaräma, Dåñöadyumna, Çikhaëòé
and many other kings to accompany Him, along with Subhadrä and her son,
and together they rode to the Kämyaka forest. Seeing Yudhiñöhira and his
brothers dressed in deerskins and stripped of their kingdom, both Balaräma
and Kåñëa were enraged.
Kåñëa said, “I cannot tolerate this injustice. The earth shall drink the blood of
Duryodhana, Karëa, Çakuni and that fourth one, Dushashana. After we kill
them and their followers, we will install Dharmaräja on the throne. Those
cunning men deserve to be slain. This is quite in accord with the eternal
morality.”
Kåñëa’s anger blazed. It seemed as if He were about to consume the creation.
Arjuna quickly sought to pacify Him by recollecting His many wonderful
deeds.
“O Kåñëa, the great Åñi Vyäsadeva has told me that You are the cause of
creation, the mover of all minds and the beginning and end of all things. All
223

asceticism rests in You, who are the embodiment of all sacrifice and the eternal
Supreme Person. All the gods depend upon You and You are the origin of the
universal creator Brahmä. O mighty-armed Keçava, You have appeared many
times on earth in different incarnations.”
Accepting Kåñëa as the cause of even the almighty Viñëu, Arjuna described
the various Viñëu-avatäras who had appeared in past ages. “O Kåñëa, as
Narasiàha You slew the mighty Asura Hiraëyakaçipu; as Aditi’s son, Vämana,
You spanned the entire universe with three steps. O soul of all beings, covering
the heavens, You dwell in the body of the sun and imbue him with Your own
effulgence.”
Arjuna went on to describe Kåñëa’s activities in His present appearance. “You
have killed numerous demonic kings who were fierce enemies of even the gods.
O Janärdana, You have manifest here on earth the sacred and eternal city
Dwärakä, which abounds in opulence and is always crowded with åñis. Envy,
untruth, malice and cruelty are absent in You, who are always the well-wishing
friend of all creatures. Närada has told me that at the end of the yuga all
things, mobile and immobile, will enter Your body. O Kåñëa, there is no limit
to Your glories. I have spoken of only a minute part.”
As he spoke, Arjuna felt himself becoming overpowered by transcendental
ecstasy. His voice choked up and he was unable to continue. Pleased and
pacified by Arjuna’s expression of love, Kåñëa said, “You are Mine and I am
yours. All that is Mine is yours. He who hates you also hates Me, and he who
follows you also follows Me. Formerly you were Nara and I was Näräyaëa.
Though individuals, we are as one. No one can understand our oneness and
difference.”
Draupadé, her dark beauty enhanced by her soft deerskin clothes, came forward
with folded palms and said to Kåñëa. “O irrepressible one, all the great åñis have
described You as the Supreme Person. The entire universe exists in You and
You are the refuge of all ascetics and sages. Even as children sport with their
toys, so do You sport with the celestials. Those seeking Your protection are
never overcome by calamity. O slayer of demons, how is it then that one like
me, the wife of the Päëòavas, the sister of Dåñöadyumna and Your friend, could
have been so insulted by the Kauravas?”
Draupadé’s dark eyes filled with tears as she spoke. Subhadrä also wept as she
stood with her arm around Draupadé’s shoulder. As she recalled the dice game
Draupadé became angry. “Why, O Kåñëa, did my five powerful husbands sit
224

silently while I was humiliated by wicked men of no importance? Fie upon
Bhéma’s arms and Arjuna’s celebrated Gäëòéva, for they could not protect a
woman in distress, not even their wife. Fie upon Bhéñma and Dhåtaräñöra!
Although I am their daughter-in-law they were prepared to see me a slave.”
Draupadé hid her face with her soft hands, which resembled lotus buds. Her
shoulders shook as she cried. Regaining her composure after a few moments,
she took a deep breath and concluded, “O Kåñëa, You are my only shelter. I
deserve Your protection for four reasons: due to our family relationship, our
friendship, the respect You bear for me and the fact that You are my Lord.”
Kåñëa replied, “O fair lady, you will see the wives of those with whom you are
angry weep as you now weep when their husbands lie dead on the battlefield,
their bodies covered with arrows and weltering in blood. Do not grieve. I shall
do for the Päëòavas whatever lies within My power. You shall be the queen of
kings. I speak the truth. The heavens may fall and the Himälayas move, the
earth may be rent and the ocean dry up, but know for certain, O Draupadé,
that My words will never prove false.”
Draupadé was solaced by Kåñëa’s words. She did not doubt that He acted only
for her ultimate welfare. The princess glanced across at Arjuna, who said, “O
lotus-eyed lady, do not weep. What Kåñëa has said will come to pass. It cannot
be otherwise.”
Standing by his sister’s side Dåñöadyumna declared, “I shall slay Droëa, our
brother Çikhaëòé will kill Bhéñma, Bhéma will kill Duryodhana and Arjuna will
kill Karëa, who offered you such unbearable offense in the sabha. Dear sister,
with Räma and Kåñëa’s assistance even Indra cannot conquer us. What then
can be said of Dhåtaräñöra’s sons?”
All present now turned again toward Kåñëa. Looking at Yudhiñöhira, Kåñëa
said, “O lord of the earth, had I not been otherwise engaged at the time, I
would have personally come to prevent the gambling match. By pointing out
the evils associated with gambling I would have gained the support of Bhéñma,
Droëa, Kåpa and Bählika. Between us we would surely have swayed the blind
king from his crooked purpose.”
The Brahmins present gathered around to hear Kåñëa speak and He glanced at
them with affection. “Indulgence in illicit sex, gambling, hunting and
intoxication are the four evils which beset men and deprive them of their
prosperity. Gambling is particularly marked by the destruction of property, by
misfortune and by the squandering of wealth. It leads only to harsh words and
225

enmity.”
Kåñëa said He would have pointed this out to Dhåtaräñöra and if the king did
not listen, He would have used force to bring him to his senses. “And if anyone
had supported the king in his ignorance, I would have destroyed them all. All
this would surely have taken place, O King, if I had not been away from
Dwärakä at the time. It was only upon My return that Sätyaki informed Me of
the events in Hastinäpura. Immediately upon receiving the news I came here.
My heart is pained to see you now, overtaken by calamity and sunk into
misfortune.”
Yudhiñöhira asked Kåñëa where He had been during the gambling match. Kåñëa
explained that He had gone to do battle with a king named Shalva, a friend of
Çiçupäla. When Shalva heard that Kåñëa had killed Çiçupäla, he went to
Dwärakä and attacked the city while Kåñëa was in Indraprastha. Shalva owned
a great airship which resembled a flying city. He had received this wonderful
airship as a gift from Çiva. In battle he used it as a base from which to attack
his foes. Raining down weapons of every kind, he had challenged Kåñëa, not
realizing He was absent from Dwärakä. After wreaking havoc in Dwärakä, he
had returned to his own city.
Because Yudhiñöhira was interested, Kåñëa described in detail the fight that
had taken place between Shalva and Dwärakä’s warriors. He then told the
Päëòava how, after returning to Dwärakä and hearing of Shalva’s attack, He
had gone personally to fight him. A terrible battle ensued. Shalva had acquired
great mystic power through his performance of asceticism. While he was
fighting with Kåñëa, he created an illusion and seemingly killed Kåñëa’s father
Vasudeva right on the battlefield. By his mystic power Shalva also sent showers
of arrows, clubs, winged darts, lances, thunderbolts, bullets, rockets, swords,
axes and other weapons down upon Kåñëa and His forces. In the end, Kåñëa
killed Shalva and destroyed his airship with the Sudarçana chakra.
Kåñëa concluded His narration. “That is why, O Yudhiñöhira, I was unable to
come to Hastinäpura. The dice match took place just after I had slain Shalva
and was engaged in restoring Dwärakä back to its former condition. If I had
come, Duryodhana would not now be alive and the gambling match would
never have taken place. What can I do now? It is difficult to stem the tide
when the dam is broken.”
Kåñëa stood up to leave. He could do nothing for the Päëòavas until the end of
the thirteen years. He knew that Yudhiñöhira and his brothers were too
226

virtuous to break their word. They would doubtlessly remain in the forest for
the full period. Kåñëa therefore told them that He would return to see them at
the end of their exile. If Duryodhana did not return their kingdom, He said,
then He knew there would be a battle in which the Kaurava and his followers
would be annihilated.
The Päëòavas bade Kåñëa and His party farewell, and Arjuna especially bid an
affectionate goodbye to Subhadrä and their young son Abhimanyu. Closely
followed by Dåñöadyumna and the other monarchs, Kåñëa left the forest on His
golden chariot, which shone like the sun. As the thunderous sound of the
chariot wheels died away into the distance, Yudhiñöhira ordered his brothers to
make ready for their own departure. He wanted to enter more deeply into the
Kämyaka forest and find a suitable place where they might spend their exile.
Still accompanied by hundreds of Brahmins, the brothers made their way into
the forest. After some time they came to a great lake called Dwaitavana.
Swans, chakravarkas and other graceful birds swam in its waters and the lake’s
edges were crowded with red, blue and white lotuses, which were so fragrant
that the air was heavy with their perfume. Numerous fruit trees, loaded with
golden fruits, grew all around the lake. Peacocks, cakoras, cuckoos and other
birds, all singing beautiful songs, played in the trees. The brothers also saw
many Siddhas and Cäraëas sporting in the woods and on the lakeshore, and
numberless åñis sitting motionless at the water’s edge, their minds fixed on the
supreme Brahman.
Yudhiñöhira was delighted. The area was beautiful. They would live there. The
brothers rested beneath a large banyan tree, looking like five great elephants
sitting by the side of a mountain. Dhaumya then performed sacred rituals to
sanctify the place where they would build their cottages, and then they began
construction.
Living in that forest, the Päëòavas resembled a number of Indras amid the
celestials. They served the åñis and Brahmins by offering them excellent fruits
and roots. Dhaumya and other priests would perform daily sacrificial rites in
honor of the gods and the Päëòavas’ ancestors. They thought constantly of
Kåñëa and passed their time hearing the Brahmins recite Vedic texts.
Soon after their arrival at Dwaitavana, the ageless Åñi Märkaëòeya visited
them. It was said that Märkaëòeya had lived since the dawn of creation and
knew of everything that had occurred in the history of the universe. He
greeted the Päëòavas with affection and accepted their worship. The åñi, whose
227

body was effulgent with spiritual light and who appeared to be a youth of
sixteen, smiled to see them. They reminded him of Räma and Lakñman, who
had been exiled to the forest hundreds of thousands of years previously. The
sage had also visited them.
Since arriving in the forest, Yudhiñöhira had felt grief at what he had caused
beginning to engulf him. Seeing Märkaëòeya smiling, he asked, “O illustrious
one, all these ascetics here are sorry to see our plight. How is it that you alone
smile with delight?”
“I am not delighted, my child. Rather, I am amazed at how much your situation
resembles the life of Daçaratha’s son, Räma. He too suffered due to His
unfailing truthfulness, and He too lived in the forest, exiled for some years. I
remember seeing Him thousands of years ago wandering Mount Rishyamukha
with His bow. Like you, Räma was high-souled and innocent, and like you, He
lived in the forest out of filial obedience to His father. This is why I am
smiling. No matter how powerful each of us may be, we cannot avoid the
calamities that arrive through destiny. No one, therefore, should ever act
unrighteously, thinking, ‘I am powerful.’”
Märkaëòeya then assured Yudhiñöhira that, like Räma, he too would regain his
kingdom from the Kauravas when his period of exile was over. After promising
to come again while they were in the forest, he headed to the north.
***
While the Päëòavas dwelt at Dwaitavana the air was constantly filled with the
sounds of Vedic recitations. The entire region was as holy as Brahmä’s abode.
The sounds of mantras from the Yajur, Åg and Säma Vedas, charming and
delightful to the mind, were mingled with the twang of the Päëòavas’
bowstrings. They honed their martial skills by hunting dangerous forest
animals. In accordance with scriptural codes, they maintained the population
of tigers, boar, buffaloes and other beasts in the Kämyaka forest, protecting the
åñis from attack as they engaged in meditation and sacrifice.
Yudhiñöhira loved the company of Brahmins. Now that he lived in their midst,
his mind felt serene and his grief dissipated. All the world’s greatest åñis had
come to Dwaitavana to be with him––Närada, Vyäsadeva, Vasiñöa, Bhågu,
Aìgirä, Kaçyapa and others––and they all worshipped Yudhiñöhira as the
celestial sages worship Indra in heaven. Yudhiñöhira also returned their
worship and spent his time discussing with them about spiritual topics. He was
228

actually starting to enjoy forest life. In many ways he found it preferable to the
onerous and often harsh duties of being a king. The gentle son of Dharma was
happy to live a simple life of spirituality, but he always kept in mind his Godgiven duty as a kñatriya. That responsibility could not be whimsically
abandoned––even if unpleasant, duty must always be done for the Lord’s
pleasure. It was thus with mixed feelings that Yudhiñöhira dwelt in the forest,
awaiting the day when he could again resume his duties as a ruler.
Draupadé, however, was still sorrowful. She found the course of events that led
up to their exile difficult, and she burned with the humiliation they had all
received at Duryodhana’s hands. Sitting alone one evening with Yudhiñöhira,
she revealed her feelings. “O King, when I think of the wicked Duryodhana
and his followers living happily in Hastinäpura, after having sent you to the
forest, my heart burns. Without doubt he is delighting in our misfortune.
When you set out for the forest all the Kurus cried except the wretched
Duryodhana, Karëa, Çakuni and that vicious Dushashana.”
Draupadé again found herself weeping. She remembered her parting words
with Kunté and Gändhäré. Both of them had grieved at her humiliation. How
long would it be before she was avenged and the wrong-doers punished?
“Seeing you seated here on this grass mat, and remembering your ivory throne
crusted with jewels, I feel such anguish that I can hardly look at you. Your body
is smeared with mud from the riverbank when once it was daubed with the
finest sandalwood paste. You once wore costly silk garments: now you wear
deerskins and tree bark. How can I bear to see my other husbands, who were
once waited upon by numerous servants, now scouring the forest for food?”
Draupadé’s sorrow suddenly turned to anger. “All this is due to the evil schemes
of sinful men. O King, does your plight not arouse anger in you? Why are you
so peaceful? Look at Bhéma, glancing at you again and again. Constrained only
by his love for you, he does not rise up and destroy the Kauravas. Honoring
your promise he sits containing his anger. Look too at Arjuna. He understands
Bhéma’s mind and is forever pacifying him. By the power of Arjuna’s bow
thousands of kings were obliged to wait upon the Brahmins at your Räjasüya.
Now that same Arjuna has become grief stricken. Does this not make you
angry? And look at Mädré’s youthful sons. They are as dear to you as they are to
your mother Kunté. Now they are forced to live the hard lives of ascetics. Does
this not make you angry?
“I cannot understand why you have not risen up to destroy the Kauravas.
229

Surely after all that has happened such a response would be in accord with
morality. Is your discrimination failing? It is always appropriate for a kñatriya to
show anger when sin is committed, and sin has surely been committed by the
Kauravas. How can you sit here as if you forgive them? If a king cannot
distinguish between the time to be angry and the time to forgive, then he is
lost.
“I also know the scripture. Scripture states that Duryodhana and his brothers
deserve to be punished. Scripture states that the humble and ever-forgiving
person is always neglected, while he who is powerful and assails others at the
proper time is respected as a king.”
Yudhiñöhira looked with compassion upon his wife. She had suffered so much,
and if anything stirred his heart, it was her suffering, for which he felt he had
been the cause. Yes, his heart still burned when he thought of how she was
dragged into the assembly hall. The pain of that moment would stay with him
for the rest of his life. But this was not the time to make war. Draupadé could
not understand the entire situation. He replied gently, “O intelligent lady,
through anger we may sometimes gain wealth, but anger ultimately destroys
mankind. Real prosperity crowns one who conquers anger and brings adversity
to one whom anger controls. Anger is the root of all destruction. An angry
man commits sin blindly. An angry man will kill even his preceptor and insult
his elders. He cannot distinguish between right and wrong. There is nothing
an angry man might not say or do, even to the point of sending himself to
Death’s abode. Knowing this, I will not indulge in anger, Draupadé. Rather, I
will strive to control it.”
Draupadé listened respectfully. She knew her husband’s grasp of religion and
morality was unsurpassed. He was capable of instructing even the gods. Sitting
on a simple mat of kusha grass, Yudhiñöhira continued.
“When a weak man is oppressed by one more powerful, he should not display
anger––lest he bring about his own destruction. There are no blessed regions
in the hereafter for those who destroy themselves. Thus the weak should
always control their anger. Only fools praise anger, considering it equivalent to
energy. The wise keep anger at a distance. The man consumed by anger does
not easily acquire generosity, dignity, courage, skill or the other attributes
possessed by men of character. The wise consider him a man of character who
restrains his wrath. The pious always praise such a man because they
understand that the forgiving man is always victorious. One who represses his
230

anger even when antagonized rejoices in the next world. For this it is said that
a wise man, whether strong or weak and even if in difficulty, should always
forgive his persecutor.”
By now Yudhiñöhira’s brothers had gathered and were listening. Yudhiñöhira
went on describing the glories of forgiveness. “If there were not persons in this
world who exercised forgiveness, then chaos would soon prevail. If kings and
other superiors give way to anger, then the distressed people would quickly
meet with ruin. If inferiors do not tolerate their superiors’ admonishments,
then sin will take root and destroy mankind. I shall cite to you the verse
spoken in ancient times by the Åñi Kaçyapa: ‘Forgiveness is virtue, forgiveness
is sacrifice and forgiveness is the Vedas. Forgiveness is purity and penance; it is
truth, piety, religion, and the holy Näräyaëa. Through forgiveness the universe
is sustained, and by practising forgiveness a man can attain to everlasting
regions of bliss.’
“How then can I renounce forgiveness, O Draupadé, in which is established
spirituality, truth, wisdom and the three worlds? Both this world and the next
belong to the forgiving person. Therefore forgiveness is considered the highest
virtue.”
Yudhiñöhira smiled at his wife. “Bhéñma, Droëa, Vidura, Kåpa and the other
Kuru elders desire peace. Vyäsadeva and the other åñis also praise peace,
Päïcälé. Therefore let us first try for a peaceful settlement. If Dhåtaräñöra
yields to temptation and does not return our kingdom, then the Bharata race
will be destroyed. But let me not be the cause, princess. Forgiveness and
humility, both of which are unknown to Duryodhana, are the qualities of the
self-controlled. They constitute eternal virtue. I shall therefore adopt them.”
Draupadé was still doubtful. If virtue conferred victory and success on a man,
then how could Yudhiñöhira have undergone such a calamity? He had never
strayed from virtue at any time. Even during the gambling match he acted only
with virtuous intentions. Now he was cast into misfortune, while the sinful
Duryodhana enjoyed prosperity. The princess said, “It seems to me, O King,
that although you always protect virtue, virtue has not protected you. Even the
celestials know that you live only by virtue. I am sure you would abandon me
and your brothers before abandoning virtue. You serve the Brahmins with
everything you possess. You never disregarded your elders, equals or even
inferiors. Although you conquered the earth, you did not become proud. You
have performed great sacrifices and given unlimited charity. Even now while
231

living a life of hardship in this forest, your virtue has suffered no
diminishment.”
Draupadé looked her husband in the eyes as she made her point. “Despite all
this, still your intelligence was perverted by destiny and you gambled away
everything––your wealth, kingdom, brothers, even me. How could one like
you, who are simple, gentle, modest, liberal and truthful, be drawn to gambling?
Gambling is a vice. I just cannot understand how it is possible.”
Although Draupadé understood that everything was under the control of the
Supreme Lord, she felt her faith challenged by Yudhiñöhira’s seemingly
inexplicable situation.
“Surely, O King, all creatures are made to act by the Lord, even as a puppet is
moved by its controller. No one can pass a moment independently. God
ordains our happiness and distress in accord with the results of our past
actions. Everyone depends upon the Lord. He brings us together and uses us as
instruments to fulfill each other’s karma. It thus seems to me that it is the Lord
who has brought about your calamity. But how has He sanctioned such
injustice, so contrary to the ways of virtue and truth? And if He is not to
blame, then it means that the controlling principle is who has the most power.
If actions are not bound with God-given consequences, then I lament for those
who are not powerful.”
Yudhiñöhira could see that his wife was bewildered by grief and sorrow. “O
gentle lady born from sacrifice, although your speech is sweet and well
articulated, it is atheistic. None should ever perform virtue with a desire to
gain its fruits. Such a sinful trader of virtue will never reap the results. I
practice virtue only because I desire to follow the Vedas and satisfy the Lord.
The Vedas state that he who doubts virtue is destined to be born among the
brutes. He who doubts religion, virtue, and the words of the åñis is excluded
from the regions of immortality and bliss. Such a person is considered lower
than a thief.”
Draupadé bowed her head as her husband continued. “O thin-waisted lady, you
have seen with your own eyes the results of virtue in such immortal sages as
Märkaëòeya, Vyäsadeva, Maitreya and the celestial sage Närada. All these
shining and ever-blissful åñis describe virtue as the foremost duty. If the pieties
practiced by the virtuous bore no fruits, then this world would long ago have
been covered by darkness. None would have pursued liberation nor cared to
acquire knowledge or even wealth. All men would have lived like beasts and
232

the world would be thrown into confusion.”
The Brahmins, who had by now also come to hear Yudhiñöhira’s speech,
nodded in agreement. Darkness had set in and fires now burned in the great
clearing where they sat. Draupadé could hear the flames crackling as well as the
sounds of crickets as Yudhiñöhira continued. “Do not doubt virtue because you
do not see its results, Päïcälé. Without doubt the fruits will manifest in time, as
will the fruits of sin. The fruits of true virtue are eternal and indestructible,
leading one to the highest regions of happiness. Therefore do not speak ill of
God. Try to understand the Supreme Being and His desires. O Draupadé,
always bow to Him. This will be for your own good.”
Tears fell from Draupadé’s eyes. She knew her husband’s words were true.
Surely God was infallible and always the well-wishing friend of all living
beings. But who could understand God? His activities were inscrutable. No one
can understand His plans. The apparent reversal of the virtuous Päëòavas––
and even that the reversal had seemingly come through Yudhiñöhira’s own
inexplicable actions––was incomprehensible and quite incredible.
Draupadé sighed. “I accept what you have said, O best of men. The Lord is
certainly bestowing upon all beings the fruits of their own work. Even if some
sudden calamity or good fortune befalls us, we must understand it to be the
results of some action in a former life. But besides destiny there is exertion. A
man who does not exert himself will eventually be ruined. I feel you should
exert yourself now to recover your kingdom. Even if you fail you will at least
have satisfied everyone that you did all that human endeavor can accomplish.
Although the results are not in our hands, we should still perform our work.
The wise always condemn inaction. Why then do you remain inactive? This is
my doubt.”
Draupadé fell silent. Then stirred by her words Bhéma felt impelled to speak.
He too was angry and found the forest almost unbearable. It was not the
austerity he minded but the thought of Duryodhana and his brothers enjoying
their ill-gotten gains. Why did Yudhiñöhira suffer in silence? Draupadé was
right. It was time for them to act. Bhéma burst out, “O Yudhiñöhira, what do
you hope to gain by living like an ascetic? You are not a yogé but a king. You
should walk the path of kings. Duryodhana robbed you of your kingdom. He is
like a weak, offal-eating jackal stealing the prey of lions. How do you tolerate
it? How can you abandon the wealth that was both our source of virtue and
pleasure, in exchange for this trifling virtue called ‘keeping your promise’?
233

Surely you fail to see what is of true value.”
Yudhiñöhira remained calm while Bhéma vented his long pent-up anger. The
forest reverberated with his words, his voice as deep and powerful as a
kettledrum. “O King, it was only due to your carelessness that we lost our
kingdom. Only to please you did we allow Duryodhana and his brothers to
wrest from us our wealth and afflict us with such pain. On your command we
now pain our friends and enliven our enemies. Surely it was folly that we did
not kill the Kauravas then and there. Instead we have meekly come to the
forest––an act worthy only of weak men. Kåñëa does not approve, nor does
Arjuna, the twins or myself. O King, has your despair led you to lose your
manliness on the plea of virtue? Only cowards cherish despair, being unable to
win back what they have lost.”
Bhéma argued that so-called virtue which produced calamity was not virtue at
all. What use was virtue for its own sake? Kings should practice virtue to make
their kingdoms prosperous and to achieve pleasure. All three things––virtue,
profit and pleasure––should be pursued equally. None of them should be
sought at the cost of the others. “Have you lost sight of your proper duty? You
are a powerful warrior supported by other powerful men. Use that power to
regain your rightful kingdom. When you have established your rule, then
acquire religious merit by ruling piously and giving charity to the Brahmins. By
giving up this promise to stay in the forest you will be casting aside an inferior
principle for the greater good.”
Bhéma softened, “The Brahmins and the people want you to rule them. They
all despise Duryodhana. You are capable of taking back your kingdom, and you
have Arjuna and myself to help you. Who can withstand us in battle? Let us
use strategy and strength to win back what is ours. This is our duty.”
Yudhiñöhira remained silent for some moments as he summoned patience. He
looked up at Bhéma. “O descendent of Bharata, I cannot reproach you for
giving me pain with your arrow-like words. It is true that due to my folly I have
brought this calamity upon us. I knew I could not defeat Çakuni at dice, yet I
allowed myself to be drawn into the game. I should have exerted greater
control over myself. O Bhéma, the mind cannot be controlled when it comes
under the influence of manliness, pride and prowess. I do not censure you for
what you have said, but I do consider what has happened to us to be
preordained.”
Yudhiñöhira made it clear that he would not break his promise. “Do you recall
234

the conditions of the final dice game? Çakuni said, ‘He who loses this game
shall go to the forest and remain there for thirteen years. The winner shall
take his kingdom and return it when the forest term has expired.’ I then
uttered, ‘So be it.’”
Yudhiñöhira hung his head and fell silent as he remembered that day. What
had overcome him? He had thought he was acting only for virtue, but as a
result all his loved ones had suffered. Still, he was resolute. No matter how
painful their present situation, there was no turning back. He would not
abandon his promise. The agreement would be kept.
Yudhiñöhira was firm. “How then, O Bhéma, shall I now falsify my word for the
sake of wealth? To me nothing is greater than truth. For a respectable person it
is better to die than to transgress his word. Let us pass our days here in peace.
Better days will come. A farmer scatters seeds and awaits the harvest. In the
same way, virtue and truth always bring results in time. Do not doubt this
principle.”
Bhéma was not convinced. His heart was too full of anger. He had not even
been able to sleep since coming to the forest. Neither could he face the
prospect of waiting so many years before he could vent his rage on the
Kauravas. What virtue had they ever observed? Why then should Yudhiñöhira
treat them as honorable? Did he think they respected his virtue and adherence
to truth? They saw him as weak and were laughing at him. If only Yudhiñöhira
would see sense and order them to gear up for battle. Bhéma tried again to
convince him.
“O great King, how can any mortal make a promise that is dependent on the
passage of time? No one knows when his life will end. We have now been in
the forest for thirteen months. Let that be our thirteen years. Indeed the Vedas
state that in certain circumstances a month can substitute for a year. Let us go
now and crush our enemies. Even if we were to go to hell on that day, that hell
will feel like heaven. Although only Draupadé and I have revealed our hearts to
you on this matter, Arjuna, the twins, Kunté, and our many allies share the
same feelings. Only because they seek to please you do they remain silent. It is
only weakness that forces you to adhere to your pledge, dear brother. No one is
praising you for your kindly disposition toward our enemies.”
Bhéma stood silhouetted by the fire. His huge frame resembled a blazing
mountain. “O King, although remaining fixed in virtue, you still cannot see the
truth, like an ignorant man who has memorized the Vedas without knowing
235

their meaning. You are a kñatriya, yet you act like a Brahmin. A king’s duties
are fraught with crookedness and cunning. You know this well.”
Bhéma had another concern: how would they be able to live incognito for the
thirteenth year? They were known throughout the world, and Duryodhana had
many supporters. Numerous kings who had been subjugated by the Päëòavas at
the time of the Räjasüya now backed the Kauravas. Duryodhana would have
his spies looking for them everywhere. Bound by Yudhiñöhira’s promise, they
would be living in the forest forever. Force would be the only way out, sooner
or later. Bhéma implored Yudhiñöhira, “Please give the order for battle, O hero.
There is no higher duty for a kñatriya. If there be any sin in this course, then
you can counteract it later by sacrifice and charity.”
Yudhiñöhira sighed again, but did not speak. Bhéma was overcome by passion,
he thought, and not thinking carefully. Could he not understand that their
suffering had been somehow ordained by the Supreme Lord? All they could do
now was follow their religious duties as prescribed by God, leaving the results
in his hands. They could not please the Lord by abandoning religion, and to
please God was always everyone’s prime duty. Surely Bhéma knew that.
But there was another consideration. Yudhiñöhira’s was a calm voice as he
explained his mind to Bhéma. “O mighty-armed hero, when a man performs
sinful deeds depending upon his own power, such deeds become only a source
of pain for him; but if he reflects carefully before action, he will attain success.
Listen as I tell you what is likely to happen if we follow your suggestion, born as
it is of pride and mental unrest.”
Yudhiñöhira then listed the many kings allied with Duryodhana. There was
Bhéñma, Droëa and Kåpa––out of obligation they would certainly side with
Duryodhana. Then there was Açvatthämä, Karëa, Vahlika, Bhüriçravas and
Duryodhana’s brothers. There were hundreds of other kings who would fight
alongside the Kauravas because they had been previously defeated by the
Päëòavas. Duryodhana’s treasury was full, especially as he now had control of
Indraprastha. He could easily and quickly amass a vast army. On the other
hand, the Päëòavas had no position, no wealth, no army and only a few allies.
“Duryodhana’s forces are virtually unassailable. The Kuru chiefs are masters of
the celestial weapons. I doubt that even Indra and all the gods could vanquish
them. I especially fear Karëa, who is impetuous, angry, invincible,
accomplished in every weapon and encased in impenetrable armor.”
Yudhiñöhira remembered how Karëa had been born with a natural coat of
236

armor on his body. Although he appeared to be a charioteer’s son, it was
obvious that his origin was in some way divine. For some reason he harbored a
deep envy of Arjuna. One day, Yudhiñöhira knew, Karëa and Arjuna would
wage a great battle to settle their enmity. The skirmish at Draupadé’s
svayaàvara had been nothing. Karëa had not wanted to exert himself against
what he thought was a Brahmin, but if he displayed his full power, then who
could be sure that Arjuna would be able to defeat him.
“Thinking of Karëa and the danger he poses, I cannot sleep at night. Without
overcoming him, as well as all the other heroes I have mentioned, we will not
be able to defeat Duryodhana. O best of men, consider all this carefully.”
Hearing his brother’s admonition, Bhéma became pensive. Yudhiñöhira was
right, of course, and he could not argue with him. Although Bhéñma, Droëa,
Kåpa and the other kings in Hastinäpura had always been their friends and
well-wishers, it was different now. If it came to war they would surely side with
the Kauravas. The thought of fighting against those invincible heroes was
daunting, especially because he felt so much affection for them. Bhéma sat
down, defeated.
As the Päëòavas sat together in silence, Vyäsadeva appeared out of the forest.
They quickly stood up and bowed before the åñi. After taking a seat among
them, the åñi said to Yudhiñöhira, “O mighty-armed one, I have divined your
thoughts. I wish to help you, and therefore I have come. I will destroy the fever
in your mind by telling you how to defeat Bhéñma, Droëa, Kåpa, Karëa,
Duryodhana, and all his followers. Listen carefully.”
Vyäsadeva then took Yudhiñöhira aside and spoke to him in private. He taught
him the mystical skill called Pratismriti, then instructed him to teach the same
skill to Arjuna. This skill allowed the practitioner to travel great distances in a
short time. Thus Arjuna could go to the Himälayas, approach the gods, and
receive from them their special weapons.
“Due to his asceticism and prowess, he is quite capable of approaching the
celestials,” Vyäsadeva said. “Indeed, he is Näräyaëa’s eternal associate. Indra,
Rudra and all the principal gods will surely bestow their weapons upon Arjuna,
and he will perform tremendous deeds by receiving them.”
After giving Yudhiñöhira the Pratismriti mantras, Vyäsadeva left. Just before
leaving, he also told Yudhiñöhira to move to a different forest. Otherwise the
brothers might disturb the animal population in the Dwaitavana by hunting
them excessively. Having lived there more than a year, they had killed many
237

deer, tigers, boar and other wild animals. Accompanied by the Brahmins whom
they were supporting, Yudhiñöhira and his brothers moved to another part of
the great Kämyaka forest, this time on the banks of the river Sarasvaté.

Chapter 25
Arjuna Goes to Heaven
When the Brahmins determined an auspicious day, Yudhiñöhira taught Arjuna
the Pratismriti mantras. The king had delayed teaching him as he knew that
Arjuna would leave for the Himälayas as soon as he had the knowledge. It
would be difficult to live without him. But it was Vyäsadeva’s desire that he go,
so Yudhiñöhira knew the separation could not be avoided forever. Ultimately,
it was probably their only chance to be successful in recovering their kingdom.
Taking Arjuna aside, Yudhiñöhira held him by the hands and said, “O
descendent of Bharata, the four divisions of the science of arms are held by
Bhéñma, Droëa, Kåpa, Karëa and Açvatthämä. They have all received divine
instructions and know how to use every sort of weapon. Having been honored,
gratified and supported by Duryodhana, they always seek to do him good. We
should not doubt that they will support him in battle. The whole world is now
under Duryodhana’s sway, and he is our avowed enemy. You are our sole
refuge. Depending on you we shall regain our kingdom from Duryodhana.
Listen now as I tell you what should be done.”
Yudhiñöhira then informed Arjuna of Vyäsadeva’s instructions. He told him
that he should leave as soon as possible for the Himälayas and, by meditating
on the mantras he was now going to repeat, he should seek the gods’ audience
in order to receive their weapons. “Allow me to initiate you today, O virtuous
one, and go at once to propitiate Indra. Being pleased with you I am sure Indra
will give you his weapons and, by his order, so will the other gods.”
Arjuna fully controlled his mind and senses. Then, with due rites, Yudhiñöhira
bestowed the Pratismriti mantras on him. When he was finished Yudhiñöhira
stood up, with tears pricking his eyes as he thought of Arjuna’s separation.
“Now go, dear brother.”
With his arms and hands clad in iguana skin gauntlets and gloves, and his body
238

covered in golden mail, Arjuna took up his Gäëòéva bow and his two
inexhaustible quivers and stood ready to depart. Brahmins and Siddhas uttered
blessings upon him and, not knowing how long he would be gone, he bade an
affectionate farewell to his brothers.
As Arjuna was about to depart, Draupadé came before him and said, “O
mighty-armed Dhanaïjaya, may all that the noble Kunté desired at your birth,
and all that you yourself desire, be accomplished. May none of us ever take
birth again in this terrible kñatriya order. I offer my respects to the ascetic
Brahmins, who are detached from this miserable world. My heart still burns
with Duryodhana’s insult, but today I grieve even more because you are
departing. In your absence we will spend our time thinking only of you. There
will be no joy without you. All our hopes rest in you, O hero. May the Lord and
all His energies protect you at all times, and may success be yours. Go now and
attain your goal.”
Arjuna smiled at Draupadé, circumambulated his brothers and Dhaumya, and
then began running swiftly along the path, frightening creatures along the way
with his speed. By chanting the mantras Yudhiñöhira had given him, he felt
himself travelling over mountains and forests at the speed of mind. By the end
of the first day he arrived at the great Mandara mountain. Arjuna stopped and
looked around. The mountain was beautiful with its bluish stone rising up into
the clouds. It was covered with blossoming trees, their many-colored flowers
creating rich tableaus and their scent captivating his mind. The sound of
peacocks, cranes and cuckoos filled the air, and he could see Siddhas and
Cäraëas sporting on the mountain slopes. Arjuna decided to climb the
mountain and begin his austerities there.
Upon reaching a plateau high on the mountain, he suddenly heard a voice
resounding in the sky. “Stop!” Arjuna looked around and saw an ascetic sitting
at the foot of a tree. The tawny-colored Brahmin had a brilliant aura. His lean
body was covered in deerskin and his matted locks hung down to his shoulders.
The ascetic said, “O child, who are you? You appear to be a kñatriya. Do you
not know that this is the abode of peaceful Brahmins who are free from anger?
Even to have been able to reach this spot indicates that you already attained a
high state of purity. Now perfect your life. You have no need of weapons here.
Throw them away.”
Arjuna made it clear that he had no plans to renounce his weapons. “I need my
weapons to serve my elder brother Yudhiñöhira, who has been wrongfully
239

deprived of his kingdom. O Brahmin, I will not cast them aside.”
Seeing Arjuna’s dedication to duty, the ascetic replied, “O slayer of foes, I am
pleased with you. Know me to be Çakra, king of the gods. Ask me for a boon.”
Arjuna was overjoyed. Here was Indra! With folded hands he said, “O exalted
one, the boon I desire is that you bestow all your weapons upon me.”
Indra smiled. “O Dhanaïjaya, I can grant you life in the celestial regions of
bliss. Ask for this. Why do you desire only my weapons?”
“How could I incur the world’s condemnation by not avenging myself on the
enemy and by abandoning my brothers in the forest?” Arjuna’s anger rose as he
remembered Duryodhana’s treachery.
Indra spoke gently. “O child, when you meet Çiva, I will give you all my
weapons. Try to propitiate him, for he is the greatest of the gods. By seeing the
three-eyed wielder of the trident, all your desires will be fulfilled.”
After saying this Indra disappeared, and Arjuna was left alone. He decided to
remain where he was and begin his austerities and worship of Çiva. He took off
his armor and set his weapons down by the same tree where Indra had sat. The
tree was situated next to a flowing river, and Arjuna bathed in its clear waters,
then sat down to meditate. As he did so, conchshells were heard in the sky and
showers of flowers fell from the heavens. Arjuna was pleased by the auspicious
sign, and he sat with half-closed eyes, controlled his breathing, and began to
intone prayers to Çiva.
During the first month of his meditations, Arjuna ate only fruit on every third
day. During the second month, he ate fruit only on every sixth day, and during
the third month he ate fruit once a fortnight. During the fourth month he
lived only on air, standing on the tips of his toes with his arms upraised. He
bathed three times a day and kept his mind and senses under perfect control.
As a result of his austerities, Arjuna began to glow like the sun.
In the heavens the celestial åñis grew anxious. They approached Çiva and said,
“Arjuna has become greatly effulgent due to his austerities on the breast of the
Himälayas. The earth is becoming heated by his asceticism and is sending forth
smoke. O chief of the gods, you should stop him before he upsets the universal
order by the power of his penance.”
Çiva replied, “You need not feel anxiety on account of Phälguné. He does not
wish to attain heaven or prosperity. I know his purpose and will satisfy him
today.”
The åñis bowed before Çiva and returned to their own abodes. Çiva then
240

assumed the form of a tall, powerful, golden-hued hunter, and descended to the
place where Arjuna was meditating. Umä, his consort, accompanied him in a
similar costume, and many of his goblin followers, who assumed various forms
and wore bright garments, followed them. Many of the female goblins assumed
the forms of beautiful women and also descended. As Çiva appeared on the
mountainside with his followers, the mountain seemed ablaze with beauty.
Strangely, however, all nature became silent. Even the springs and waterfalls
ceased their sounds.
As Çiva arrived, he saw a Dänava assume the form of a boar and charge at
Arjuna. The demon intended to kill Arjuna, and he roared loudly in challenge.
Arjuna heard the boar’s roar and quickly lifted and strung his bow. Placing a
virulent arrow on his bowstring, Arjuna called out, “I have done you no harm.
As you seek to kill me, I shall certainly send you to Yamaräja’s abode.”
At the same moment Çiva also trained his arrow on the boar and shouted to
Arjuna, “Stop! This dark-colored boar is mine. I saw him first and have already
aimed my arrow at him.”
Arjuna ignored Çiva’s claim and released his arrow, which sped toward the
massive boar. Çiva simultaneously released his arrow and the two shafts both
struck the Dänava at the same time. There was a sound like thunder as the
arrows hit the demonic boar’s rock-like body. Assuming his natural form, the
demon gave up his life with a terrible cry.
Arjuna looked around at the hunter. His body shone like a golden mountain.
He was surrounded by hundreds of women. Arjuna glared at him. “Who are
you, dressed like a hunter and wandering in this solitary forest surrounded by
your followers? Are you not afraid? Why have you pierced this boar which I
targeted first? Do you not know that this is against all accepted practices in
hunting. Indeed you have insulted me and so I will punish you by taking your
life.”
The hunter replied with a smile, “O hero, you need not be concerned about
me. I always dwell in the forest. But what brings you here? You are obviously
royalty, used to living in luxury. How is it that you have adopted an ascetic
life?”
Arjuna held his bow tightly. “Depending on the strength of my arms, I live in
this forest. See how I killed this fearful Räkñasa who was intent on killing me.”
The hunter laughed derisively. “It was I who killed this one, not you. I saw him
first, and it was by my arrow that he was sent to Death’s abode. You are overly
241

proud of your strength. Do not accuse others when you yourself are at fault. O
wicked-minded wretch, you have wronged me and will therefore not escape
with your life. Stand and receive my arrows. Try to defend yourself, if you
can.”
Infuriated, Arjuna immediately struck the hunter with a cluster of swift
arrows, but he simply smiled and received Arjuna’s shafts without flinching.
He called out, “O wretch! Send your fiercest arrows, those that are capable of
piercing to the heart.”
Arjuna released another volley of shafts. Becoming angry, Çiva sent back
hundreds of his own arrows. A great battle then ensued. Showers of snake-like
arrows sped back and forth. As Arjuna countered the hunter’s arrows, he was
surprised to see that, although struck by countless shafts, his adversary was not
affected. The Päëòava increased the force of his attack, but the hunter stood
unmoved. Seeing that he could not shake his foe, Arjuna called out in
admiration, “Excellent! Well done!”
Arjuna looked with wonder at the hunter. Clearly this was not an ordinary
man. No one could withstand the force of thousands of arrows shot from the
Gäëòéva without being moved. Perhaps he was a celestial. Arjuna decided to
use his mystical weapons. No matter who this was––even if he was a
Gandharva or a Yakña––unless he was actually Çiva himself, Arjuna intended
to kill him.
Arjuna then invoked weapons which fired thousands of arrows blazing like the
sun. Çiva cheerfully received all his shafts as a mountain receives a downpour
of rain. Then to Arjuna’s amazement he found that his celestial quivers were
suddenly exhausted. How was that possible? Who was this who swallowed up all
his arrows? With what could he fight now? Arjuna raised his great bow like a
club and rushed at the hunter. He struck him a number of heavy blows, but
Çiva snatched away his bow and drew it into his body. It simply vanished.
Arjuna then drew his sword and brought it down upon the hunter’s head with
all his strength, but it shattered to pieces.
Arjuna was afraid, but he continued to fight. This time he lifted rocks and
boulders and threw them at the hunter. He tore up trees and slung them at the
hunter. Still he made no impression. Arjuna’s mouth smoked with wrath. He
rushed at his foe and pummeled him with his fists. Çiva struck him back and a
hand-to-hand fight ensued. They struck one another and grappled furiously,
each seizing the other and shoving him with full force. Sparks and smoke flew
242

from their bodies.
Finally, the hunter released Arjuna and he fell back, dazed, almost
unconscious. Arjuna looked at the hunter in astonishment. He had failed to
make the least impression on him. Surely this must be the exalted god Çiva. No
one else could have fought with such power.
Arjuna retreated to a distance and quickly fashioned an image of Çiva from the
earth. He worshipped it with flowers and as he did so, he saw flowers falling
onto the hunter’s head. Now he had no doubt. This was the deity he was
seeking. Arjuna fell headlong at the god’s feet, and as he did so he felt all his
fatigue dispelled.
Çiva was pleased with Arjuna and he spoke to him in a voice as powerful as
roaring clouds. “O Phälguné, today you have satisfied me. There is no warrior
equal to you in courage or patience. O best of the Bharata race, your strength is
practically equal to mine. You were formerly a åñi and have now taken birth to
serve the Supreme Lord’s purposes. Soon you will acquire the weapons with
which to defeat your enemies, even if they be celestials. I shall bestow upon you
my own irresistible weapon. Now I will give you the eyes to see me in my
original form. Behold!”
Arjuna looked up and saw Çiva with his three eyes, holding a trident, a divine
serpent draped around his bluish neck. Arjuna bowed down and prayed, “O
great god, O highly exalted one, you are the refuge of all the celestials. The
very universe has sprung from you. You are Viñëu in a different form and are
unconquerable by gods, demons or men. O Çaìkara, pray forgive me. It was
only to receive your audience that I came to this mountain. Please pardon me
for my rashness in fighting with you. I seek your protection.”
Çiva lifted Arjuna to his feet and embraced the Päëòava. “I have pardoned
you. You are Nara, the friend of Näräyaëa. Previously you two chastised the
demon hordes at Indra’s coronation. Kåñëa is that Supreme Näräyaëa, and
with Him you will again punish the wicked. O Pärtha, take back your Gäëòéva
bow. Your quivers will again become inexhaustible. There is no man on earth
equal to you. Ask from me whatever you desire.”
Çiva handed the Gäëòéva bow to Arjuna and Arjuna said, “O lord, if you are
pleased with me, then I humbly ask that you bestow upon me your irresistible
personal weapon known as the Päçupäta. You destroy the universe with this
weapon at the end of creation, and with it I may be victorious over Räkñasas,
Dänavas, Gandharvas, Nägas, ghosts and spirits. It will enable me to emerge
243

successfully from the battle I shall fight against Bhéñma, Droëa, Kåpa, and the
son of the suta, Karëa.”
Çiva replied, “O son of Kunté, I will give you this weapon. You are capable of
holding, throwing, and withdrawing it. Not even Indra, Yama, Kuvera, or
Varuëa knows the mantras to this weapon––what to speak of any man.
However, you must use it only against celestial fighters. The Päçupäta should
never be released at lesser enemies or else it may destroy the creation. This
weapon is discharged by the mind, eyes, words, or a bow. No one in the three
worlds of moving or nonmoving creatures can withstand its force.”
Arjuna then bathed for purification and stood before Çiva to receive the
mantras. The god gave his weapon to Arjuna and it then waited upon him just
as it waited upon Çiva himself. When the celestials saw the fearful weapon
standing in its embodied form by Arjuna’s side, the earth trembled and terrible
winds blew in all directions. Thousands of conches and trumpets were heard
resounding in the sky. Çiva said, “Now go to heaven and receive Indra’
weapons.” He then departed with Umä and his many followers.
***
When Çiva was gone, Arjuna stood for a few moments gazing at the sky, awed
by what had just transpired. He had seen the god of gods. The unknowable
deity had touched him with his own hand. Arjuna now considered his enemies
already vanquished and his ends accomplished. He possessed Çiva’s irresistible
weapon. Although he could not discharge the Päçupäta at human foes, its very
possession made him feel invincible.
While Arjuna stood absorbed in thought, Varuëa appeared before him
accompanied by the rivers personified and many Nägas, Siddhas and other
lesser gods. Kuvera was also in attendance, his body resembling pure gold and
seated upon a splendid chariot. Kuvera was accompanied by countless Yakñas.
They stood before Arjuna, illuminating everything with their bodily
effulgence. Arjuna also saw in the sky the god of justice, Yamaräja,
approaching on his chariot with mace in hand and flanked by the personified
forms of Death and Time.
On a nearby mountain summit, Arjuna saw Indra and his queen Çacé seated on
the back of the celestial elephant Airävata and appearing like the rising sun. A
white umbrella was being held over his head and he was surrounded by
Gandharvas and åñis, who were eulogizing him with Vedic hymns.
244

Arjuna chanted numerous prayers in praise of the gods and offered them fruits
and water. As he stood gazing in amazement, Yamaräja spoke, his voice as deep
as autumnal rain clouds. “Behold, O Arjuna, that all the world’s protectors, the
Lokapälas, have come here. We shall bestow upon you divine eyes. O sinless
one, you were formerly the Åñi Nara. At Brahmä’s behest, you have taken your
birth as a mortal. You shall vanquish in battle the powerful Bhéñma and the
many other fierce warriors headed by Droëa. The enemies of the gods, Daityas
and Dänavas, have taken their birth in the world of men. These shall all be
slain in a great battle in which you will play the main role. Your fame on earth
shall be eternal.”
Yamaräja offered his personal weapon, a celestial mace, to Arjuna. The
Päëòava received the weapon along with the mantras for hurling and
withdrawing it. After that, Varuëa gave Arjuna his inescapable Nägapasha
nooses. Arjuna also received Kuvera’s weapon, the antardhäna, which could
baffle and render unconscious even mighty Asuras. Then Indra spoke: “O
subduer of enemies, you shall perform a great work for the gods. Now you must
ascend to heaven. There I will give you my own weapon and other irresistible
astras belonging to the celestials. My chariot, driven by my servant Mätali, will
soon carry you there.”
The Lokapälas then vanished, leaving Arjuna alone. As he looked up, he saw
what appeared to be a second sun gradually increasing in brilliance in the sky.
The whole region vibrated as the radiance increased. Arjuna realized that this
was Indra’s chariot descending to earth. The chariot was huge, and it was
drawn by ten thousand celestial horses of greenish and golden hue. Mätali, in
golden armor, was holding the reins. As the chariot approached, Arjuna could
see upon it innumerable swords and maces, as well as all kinds of missiles. Axes,
darts, lances, and spears of every kind were placed all around the chariot.
Celestial thunderbolts and brilliant lightning bolts glowed from its sides. Hugebodied, fierce Nägas with fiery mouths were seated on the chariot, along with
great silver canons furnished with wheels and capable of sending celestial
missiles a vast distance.
Arjuna saw Indra’s dark blue flagstaff, the Vaijayanta, standing in the middle
of the chariot as straight as a bamboo and as tall as a great palm tree. Then the
chariot halted and Mätali stood before Arjuna. Bowing low, he said, “O
fortunate one, I have been instructed to take you to Çakra. Your father,
encircled by the celestials, åñis, Gandharvas and Apsaräs, wishes to see you in
245

heaven. Çiva has also ordered me. Ascend this chariot and come to the
heavenly regions.”
Arjuna again bathed for purification, then offered prayers to Mount Mandara:
“O king of mountains, you are the refuge of pious sages seeking heaven. You
have sheltered me and I have lived here happily. I offer you my thanks and bid
you farewell.” With that, Mätali led Arjuna to a flight of crystal steps leading
up to the chariot.
Mätali urged the steeds which drew the chariot with the speed of the mind
high into the sky. As they entered the celestial regions, Arjuna saw thousands
of wondrous chariots carrying shining beings of great beauty. He saw kings and
warriors who had been slain in battle and had attained effulgent celestial
forms. As they moved along the paths of the gods, Arjuna saw Siddhas,
Cäraëas, åñis, Guhyakas and Apsaräs. The region glowed with a brilliance born
of the ascetic merits of such beings. Amazed, Arjuna inquired into their
identities. The charioteer replied, “These are pious persons, O son of Kunté,
stationed in their respective spheres. You have seen their shining abodes from
the earth as stars in the firmament.”
The chariot passed through the gate of Indra’s planet, where Arjuna saw
Airävata, the great white elephant with four tusks. The elephant resembled
Mount Kailäsa with its four summits. Passing through divine regions meant for
pious men who had performed great sacrifices and asceticism, they arrived at
last in Amarävaté, Indra’s capital city.
Arjuna gazed with wide open eyes at the astonishing city. Flowers from all the
seasons bloomed simultaneously, and there were groves of sacred trees.
Fragrant breezes moved among their golden leaves, creating cascades of
brilliant light. Countless mansions and palaces stretched into the distance.
Arjuna saw the famous Nandana gardens, in which the gods sported with
Apsaräs.
“Those who turn their backs in battle can never see this place,” Mätali said,
seeing Arjuna’s amazement. “Neither can those who are wicked-minded, who
have not performed sacrifice, who have not abstained from liquor and meat,
who have not bathed in holy rivers nor given charity to Brahmins ever reach
this abode.”
As they proceeded through the city, Arjuna beheld celestial cars traveling by
the occupants’ wills. Gandharvas and Apsaräs eulogized Arjuna as he passed.
He heard the sound of celestial music and of thousands of conchshells and
246

drums. Arjuna entered Indra’s magnificent assembly hall and met with the
Sädhyas, Maruts, Viçvadevas, and twin Açvinés. He saw the Adityas, Vasus,
Rudras, and the many royal saints headed by King Dilépa. Närada Åñi was also
present along with the Gandharva leader, Tumbaru.
After offering his respects to the assembled personalities, Arjuna approached
his father, the king of the gods. Indra was seated beneath his white umbrella
and was being fanned by golden-handled and perfumed cämaras. Many pure
Brahmins praised him with hymns from the Åg and Yajur Vedas, and the
Gandharvas and Cäraëas played celestial instruments of all descriptions for his
pleasure.
Arjuna prostrated himself before Indra, who got down from his throne and
embraced him. The thousand-eyed god took Arjuna by the hand and led him
back up the flight of golden steps to his bejeweled throne. Indra then had his
son sit next to him on the throne, where he shone like a second Indra. With
his perfumed hand, Indra affectionately stroked Arjuna’s head. Out of love,
Indra gently patted and rubbed his arms, which were like gold columns. The
deity gazed without satiation at his son’s face. Seated together on the throne,
Arjuna and Indra appeared like the sun and the moon together in a clear sky.
Indra gave Arjuna the celestial sight to perceive Amarävaté’s divine beauty.
The city was unimaginably opulent. The Päëòava looked around at the
numerous effulgent åñis who sat reciting sacred texts from the Vedas. Groups of
Gandharvas headed by Tumbaru sang hymns in voices which entirely
captivated the mind. As they sang, Apsaräs performed exquisite dances full of
gestures and sidelong glances. They shook their breasts and moved their broad
hips.
The celestials offered Arjuna the sacred arghya and washed his feet. At Indra’s
command, Arjuna was then escorted to Indra’s palace. Arjuna took up
residence there and Indra instructed him in how to use the celestial weapons,
and especially the irresistible thunderbolt weapon, Vajra, and Indra’s powerful
lightning flashes.
Although living amid splendor and opulence, Arjuna could not forget his
brothers in the forest, and he longed to return to them. Whenever he thought
of his brothers, he also remembered the circumstances that had brought them
to the forest, and he remembered Çakuni, Dushashana, Duryodhana and
Karëa. Arjuna had no peace. As he was equipped with one powerful weapon
after another, he thought only of the inevitable battle that would take place in
247

the future. No one would be able to stand against him now. Those wickedminded men would be punished. Draupadé would be avenged and Yudhiñöhira’s
kingdom would be recovered.
When Arjuna had become adept at using all the weapons, Indra told him, “You
should go to your friend Citrasena and learn singing and dancing from him. He
can teach you such music that does not exist in the world of men and is known
only to the celestials. This knowledge will prove useful to you in the future.”
Arjuna thus learned the Gandharva skills. The Päëòava did not know why
Indra had requested him to study such subjects, but he was sure the god could
see by divine intelligence that such knowledge would surely be helpful in the
future.
***
Arjuna lived in Amarävaté for five years, thinking always of his brothers. As
the time for him to leave approached, Indra summoned Citrasena and spoke
with him in private. “O chief of the Gandharvas, I have seen Arjuna casting
glances at Urvaçé. Go to her and have her wait upon the Päëòava with all her
feminine graces and skills. As you have taught him all the arts of music, so now
you should teach him the art of associating with women.”
Citrasena said, “So be it,” and went at once to Urvaçé and described Arjuna’s
many virtues.
“O lady of fair hips, know that I have come here on Indra’s command to ask
from you a favor. There is one now living in heaven who is renowned among
men for his grace, behavior, beauty, vows and self-control. He is famous for his
might and his prowess, and he is respected by the pious. He is also endowed
with presence of mind, is a genius, and possesses great energy. That mighty
hero is forgiving and without malice. He knows all the Vedas with their many
branches, is devoted to his elders, is never boastful, sees even small things as if
they were important, and is always the shelter of his dependents. His name is
Arjuna, and his father Indra brought him to heaven. O blessed lady, Arjuna
seems inclined toward you. Please go to him and allow him to obtain you.”
Urvaçé cheerfully replied, “Having heard of Arjuna’s virtues, how could I fail to
be attracted? Indeed, thinking of that hero I am already stricken by the god of
love. O Citrasena, go now wherever you like and I shall go to him.”
Having succeeded in his mission, the Gandharva left. Urvaçé then prepared to
meet Arjuna. She bathed and smeared her body with perfumed unguents.
248

Dressing with layers of diaphanous silks, she adorned herself with jewels and
gold ornaments, as well as fragrant garlands of brightly colored flowers. She
was absorbed in thoughts of Arjuna and her heart was pierced with Cupid’s
arrows. Inflamed by desire, she imagined herself lying with Arjuna on a soft,
wide bed laid over with silk sheets.
Setting out at a time when the moon began to rise, the thin-waisted Urvaçé
went toward Arjuna’s abode. As she walked, her long black braids, which she
had decorated with bunches of flowers, swung around her beautiful white face.
Her two finely tapering breasts, adorned with a string of diamonds and pearls
and smeared with fragrant sandalwood paste, trembled as she walked gracefully
through the gardens. Her high, round hips, covered with thin cloth and decked
with golden chains, moved from side to side. The rows of golden bells around
her ankles tinkled gently. She defied the splendor of the full moon and was
quite capable of breaking the vows of great ascetics. Exhilarated by the little
liquor she had drunk and full of desire, she cast glances from side to side and
seemed even more alluring. Seeing her pass, the Siddhas and Cäraëas
considered her the finest sight in heaven. She soon arrived at Arjuna’s door
and sent word to him through the doorkeeper.
Arjuna immediately invited her into his house. He was anxious that the
goddess had come to see him at night. Seeing her incomparable beauty he
closed his eyes out of modesty. Arjuna worshipped her as if she were his
superior and said, “O foremost of Apsaräs, I bow down to you. What is your
command? I am your servant.”
Hearing his words, Urvaçé was overjoyed. Her voice rang out like tinkling bells.
“O best of men, I will tell you what brings me here. When you first came to
heaven, a large assembly was convened during which we celebrated your
arrival. All the gods and celestials were present, and you were seated by Çakra’s
side. You saw me then, dancing in the midst of the chief Apsaräs. Your gaze
rested upon me for some moments and Indra noticed your attentions. Thus he
has sent me here through Citrasena. I have come to wait upon you, O hero. My
heart is stolen by your virtues and I am under the control of Kämadeva. This is
my wish: let me possess you tonight.”
Arjuna at once covered his ears in shame. “O blessed lady, O most charming
one, it is not proper for me to hear you speak such words. You are the wife of
my superior. As the illustrious Kunté or the beautiful Çacé, Indra’s consort, is to
me, so too are you, O goddess. Do not doubt what I say. O lady of sweet smiles, I
249

did indeed gaze upon you, but not out of desire. There was quite another
reason.”
Arjuna had heard of Urvaçé while at home on the earth. Thousands of years
previously she had become Pürurava’s wife, who was one of Arjuna’s ancestors.
It was her son who had been the forefather of Arjuna’s dynasty. Arjuna told
Urvaçé that he thus felt quite unable to make her his lover. “O blessed one,
when I gazed at you I was simply amazed to see the mother of my dynasty. You
should not entertain any other feeling for me than that of your son.”
Urvaçé smiled. “O son of Indra, we of the heavenly realms are not fettered by
human morality. You need not see me as a superior. I have sported with other
sons and grandsons of the Püru dynasty without incurring sin. Be favorable
toward me. I am burning with desire and feel devoted to you. Do not reject me,
for that is not the practice of virtuous men.”
But Arjuna could not change his attitude. “O beautiful lady, hear what I tell
you and let the four directions and all the celestials also hear. You are no
different to me than Kunté, Mädré or Çacé. I bow my head to you as my mother.
Please protect me as your son.”
After Arjuna had spoken in this way, it was clear to Urvaçé that he was firm in
his determination. Rejected and insulted, she became angry. With knitted
brows and quivering lips, she exclaimed, “As you insult a woman who has come
to you at your father’s command and out of her own desire––a woman pierced
by Cupid’s arrow––you shall lose your manhood and live as a dancer in the
company of women. O Arjuna, you shall become a eunuch and lose all respect.”
With that, Urvaçé turned and left Arjuna.
Arjuna thought carefully. Surely Indra must have known that this would
happen. Why then had he asked Citrasena to send Urvaçé to him? Arjuna went
at once to Citrasena and told him what had transpired, repeatedly mentioning
the curse. Citrasena then went to Indra and informed him of the situation.
Indra called for Arjuna and spoke to him in private.
“O best of men, because you are her son, Kunté is the most glorious mother.
You have defeated even the åñis by your self-control and patience. Do not
worry. Urvaçé’s curse will be for your good and will prove useful. You will need
to pass your final year of exile incognito. At that time, Urvaçé’s curse will take
effect and, living as a eunuch, no one shall discover you. Having passed one
year without your manhood, you shall regain it at the end of that period.”
Arjuna was relieved. The Päëòava then stopped worrying about the curse and
250

continued to live happily in the heavens with his father and Citrasena.

Chapter 26
To Badarékä Äçrama
In Hastinäpura Dhåtaräñöra sat in his chamber, his head in his hands. As time
passed he was becoming increasingly anxious. What would happen at the end
of the Päëòavas’ exile? Would they not return with blazing weapons to seek
vengeance? How would any of the Kauravas survive? If only Duryodhana
would give up his envy. Yudhiñöhira would certainly live peacefully with his
cousins if they were willing to share the kingdom, but that seemed unlikely. It
appeared that nothing could change Duryodhana’s attitude. Even he could not
sway him.
Dhåtaräñöra’s anxiety doubled when he heard from Vyäsadeva that Arjuna had
gone to the heavens to obtain weapons. Seeking comfort, the king called
Saïjaya; when he was seated before him, he said, “O Suta, have you heard
anything more about Arjuna’s activities? That powerful hero has ascended to
heaven in his own body. My son is Arjuna’s sworn enemy. Their enmity will
surely destroy the world. Aided by Arjuna, Yudhiñöhira can conquer the three
worlds. Who among mortals can stand before Arjuna as he rains down virulent
arrows?”
Tears flowed from the king’s blind eyes as he continued. “I do not see my son
becoming successful even though Bhéñma, Droëa and Karëa support him. None
of these warriors can equal Arjuna, the infallible Kåñëa’s friend. The man who
can slay Arjuna does not exist, nor can anyone live long after coming within
the range of his arrows. It seems to me that our armies have already fled in all
directions upon hearing the fearful rumble of his chariot wheels. Surely
Brahmä created that hero to become the destruction of our race.”
Saïjaya said nothing. He had heard the king make similar statements on many
occasions, but still Dhåtaräñöra did nothing to control his sons. It was as if he
was hoping that Duryodhana and his followers could defy the inevitable
outcome of their sinful activities. The old king was no fool, but he was so
attached to his son that he allowed his attachment to overpower his reason.
251

After some moments Saïjaya said, “O King, your words are all true. Nothing
you have said is wrong. When they saw their wife insulted in the sabha, the
Päëòavas became consumed by wrath. I do not see how they will ever forgive
your sons. I have heard from Vyäsadeva that Arjuna satisfied the immortal
Çiva and received from him his weapon. Your race now faces disaster.”
Dhåtaräñöra continued to lament. The annihilation of the Kauravas was
certain, he said. Allied with Kåñëa, the Päëòavas were invincible. Duryodhana
and Karëa were the causes of the calamity he now faced. “O Suta, when I shall
hear that my armies have been crushed by Arjuna and Bhéma, I, forever
obedient to Duryodhana’s desires, shall then recall all the good advice my wellwishers gave me which I should have heeded.”
With a wry smile Saïjaya replied, “O King, again you have spoken the truth.
You do not care for good advice. Therefore, it is only by your own fault that
you now lament. You could have stopped Duryodhana, but you chose not to do
so. Now we shall all suffer the reaction.”
Dhåtaräñöra fell silent. He now felt that the events were beyond his control. It
was true. He was too attached to Duryodhana. He could not refuse his son
anything. His half-hearted attempts to check Duryodhana were simply a waste
of time. His sons laughed at his weakness. They knew they could sway him in
the end. The blind king held his forehead and sighed. Would he ever see his
son seated on the emperor’s throne? That right had become his only due to
Päëòu’s retirement. If only Duryodhana could win that right for himself. But
how? Destiny seemed all-powerful. Feeling helpless, the king remained awake
throughout the night, as he had on so many occasions.
***
After Arjuna had left for the Himälayas, his brothers and Draupadé continued
to live in the Kämyaka. They missed him sorely, and they had no idea how long
he might be away or whether or not he would ever return. But they knew they
would only be successful in their fight to regain the kingdom with Arjuna’s
assistance. Thus they prayed for his safe passage to the mountains and for his
success in gaining the celestial weapons.
Yudhiñöhira felt especially anguished. Bhéma would frequently remind him of
the gambling match. That mighty Päëòava wanted only to take up arms and
chastise the Kauravas. Despite his brother’s counsel, he could not see the point
of acting honorably toward dishonorable persons. Nor could he see how they
252

would ever gain success by peaceful means.
“As soon as we leave the forest,” Bhéma said one day to Yudhiñöhira, “the sinful
Çakuni will immediately challenge you to another game of dice. You will not
refuse, although you are still unskilled at the game. Surely you will lose your
senses and we shall again be consigned to the forest. O great prince, simply
command me and I shall destroy Duryodhana right now, even as a fire
consumes a pile of grass.”
Yudhiñöhira consoled his brother. He never allowed himself to become angered
by his words, which he knew were spoken out of affection. Bhéma wanted
nothing more than to see his elder brother as emperor of the world.
As the Päëòavas discussed, the Åñi Vrihadashwa approached them. He
emerged from the woods as the sun comes out from behind a dark cloud. The
brothers immediately bowed before him and offered him a seat, arghya, and
other items.
The sage was clad in deerskin and had matted hair. Yudhiñöhira folded his
hands and said, “O almighty one, due to the nefarious schemes of evil-minded
gamblers, I have been deprived of my wealth and kingdom. Now my brothers
are suffering and my wife has been humiliated. We are all exiled. My mind
burns both with the remembrance of my enemies’ cruel words and my own
foolishness, and I feel sorrow to think of my relatives and subjects. Now I have
been deprived of Arjuna’s company, who is dearer to me than life. I remain
awake whole nights feeling his absence. Have you ever heard of any king or
prince more unfortunate than myself?”
Vrihadashwa replied that he knew the history of an ancient king who had
ruled the Niñadha tribespeople. He too had been defeated at dice by his brother
and exiled to the forest with his wife. The king’s name was Nala, and his wife
was called Damayanté. This story, the sage said, destroyed evil in people’s minds
and pacified their hearts. Yudhiñöhira requested him to please narrate the story
in detail. It turned out that Nala and Damayanté’s plight had been even worse
than that which they were now experiencing. After losing everything and
being sent to the forest, the king and his wife had also been separated, and
both had wandered alone for a long time before finally being reunited and
regaining their kingdom.
“You, on the other hand, O Yudhiñöhira, are here with your brothers and wife
and are surrounded by Brahmins. Do not grieve. Men of your caliber always
understand that material happiness and distress come and go according to
253

destiny. It is beyond human exertion to change it.”
The åñi assured Yudhiñöhira that he could help him never again to fall victim to
Çakuni. “I am acquainted with the science of dice, O virtuous hero, and I shall
pass this knowledge unto you.” Vrihadashwa then taught Yudhiñöhira the skills
of the game and took his leave.
***
The Päëòavas passed their days discussing spiritual topics and the art of
kingship, and hearing the Brahmins’ recitation from scripture. They also
underwent a daily regimen of physical training to keep themselves fit as
warriors. Draupadé cooked wild roots and vegetables gathered in the forest,
then placed everything on the sun-god’s dish and offered the food to the Lord.
From the inexhaustible plate she then fed the hundreds of sages, then her
husbands, and after everyone else had eaten, she accepted her own meal.
Besides the Brahmins who resided near the Päëòavas, many traveling
Brahmins stopped to see Yudhiñöhira. From them, Yudhiñöhira learned that
Arjuna was performing severe asceticism in the Himälayas. The Päëòavas and
Draupadé felt pained to hear of it and prayed that he would soon achieve the
goal of his mission and return.
One day Yudhiñöhira saw the effulgent Åñi Närada standing before him. After
the Päëòavas had worshipped him, the sage offered his blessings and asked if
there was anything he could do for them. Yudhiñöhira bowed before Närada
and said that he wished to travel to various pilgrimage sites. He asked Närada
which sites would be most beneficial for them to visit. Närada told Yudhiñöhira
of the many holy places he should visit with his brothers. He also asked
Yudhiñöhira to request the åñis who were living with the Päëòavas to
accompany them. “In this way, O king, you will receive great merit. The paths
to the tirthas I have described are infested with Räkñasas. Only you are able to
visit such holy places and thus enable these Brahmins to see them as well.”
Närada assured Yudhiñöhira that by traveling to the holy places, the Päëòavas
would have the opportunity to meet such glorious åñis as Välméki, Kaçyapa,
Atri, Vasiñöha, Märkaëòeya and others. “Soon the powerful sage Lomaça will
come here. Go with him to the tirthas, O King. In this way you will attain
everlasting fame equal to that of the kings Mahavisha, Yayäti and Pürurava.
You will destroy your enemies and recover all that is rightfully yours. Like
Bhagératha, Manu, and even Lord Räma, you will rule the earth and shine
254

among kings as the sun shines among stars.”
Just after Närada departed, Lomaça Åñi arrived. The sage was radiant in his
black deerskin, and he carried only a water pot. Receiving him with honor, the
Päëòavas sat around him and asked him to tell of his travels. Lomaça replied,
“O heroes, while journeying throughout the worlds I went to Amarävaté,
Indra’s great city. There I saw the exalted king of the celestials and, to my
astonishment, your brother Arjuna sharing his throne. Indra asked me to come
to you and to assure you of Arjuna’s welfare. Thus I have come with all speed.”
Lomaça told the Päëòavas how Arjuna had acquired the celestial weapons,
including Çiva’s famous weapon. He had also learned to sing and dance from
the Gandharvas. He would be returning soon. “Your brother asked me to lead
you to the tirthas so that you may gain pious merits. Indra also made this
request, and it is my desire as well. Although I have already been to all the
tirthas twice, I shall go for a third time with you.”
Yudhiñöhira and his brothers were overjoyed to hear of Arjuna’s success.
Yudhiñöhira said, “O exalted Brahmin, your words are like a shower of nectar.
Who could be more fortunate than one who is remembered by the king of the
celestials? Now having you as our guide, our fortune is complete. Be pleased, O
Åñi, to show us all the holy places.”
Yudhiñöhira then addressed the Brahmins who were staying with them. “O best
of men, let those mendicants, Brahmins and yogés who are incapable of bearing
hunger, thirst, and the fatigue of travel and severe climate desist from
following me.”
Yudhiñöhira knew that the journey to the tirthas would be difficult. He did not
want to expose the Brahmins to unnecessary suffering. He continued, “All
those desiring regular meals and living upon cooked food should stay back. You
may now go to King Dhåtaräñöra for your maintenance. The king of the
Païchälas will also provide for you. With your permission, we shall now
depart.”
Sorrowfully, a number of Brahmins took their leave and traveled toward
Hastinäpura. Only a few hundred ascetic Brahmins remained to travel with
Lomaça, Dhaumya and the Päëòavas. They chose a day to begin their
pilgrimage which was marked by favorable constellations. Then before leaving,
the brothers put on armor over their deerskin and bark garments. They took up
their weapons with the expectation of meeting Räkñasas. As they began their
journey, Yudhiñöhira said to Lomaça, “O foremost of celestial åñis, I do not
255

think that I am without religious merit, but still I am afflicted with sorrow. On
the other hand, I see that my enemies lack all merit but yet they prosper. How
can such apparent contradictions exist?”
“O son of Kunté, you should never grieve for such things. A man may be seen
to prosper in sin, obtain good fruits or vanquish his enemies, but he is finally
destroyed to the root. I have seen many Daityas and Dänavas prosper by sin,
but I have also seen them overtaken by utter destruction. O ruler of the earth,
I saw all this in the Satya-yuga especially.”
Lomaça narrated how during Satya-yuga, the first in the cycle of ages, the
Asuras pridefully refused to perform religious acts while the Devas practiced
virtue and engaged in sacrifice. At first the Asuras, seeking only wealth,
became powerful and wealthy, but it did not last. “From the possession of illgotten wealth there arose every kind of evil propensity, and from that arose
shamelessness. All good behavior disappeared and for want of good conduct
and virtue the Asuras could no longer express forgiveness or morality. They
lost their prosperity because the goddess of fortune, Lakñmé, left the Asuras and
sought out the celestials––while the goddess of adversity, Alakshmi, sought out
the Asuras. When afflicted by adversity the Asuras became angry and became
possessed by Kali, the god of quarrel and destruction, who influenced them
toward more and more sin. Destitute of all sacrifice and religious ritual, they
soon met complete ruin.
“On the other hand, the virtuous Devas visited holy places and engaged in
sacrifice, charity and asceticism. Thus the prosperity they attained was lasting.
“Therefore, O best of men, you too will gain good fortune by visiting the tirthas
and by your ascetic life in the forest. Dhåtaräñöra’s sons, addicted to sin, will
certainly be destroyed exactly as the Asuras were destroyed.”
Reassured by Lomaça’s words, Yudhiñöhira and his brothers, along with
Draupadé, followed the åñi through the forest. Behind them walked their
attendants, headed by Indrasena, the brothers’ long-time intimate servant who
had gone with them into the forest. The Brahmins followed the servants, and
the party formed a long line through the undergrowth.
Gradually they visited the many sacred tirthas and bathed in numerous holy
rivers and lakes. They offered oblations to their ancestors and heard spiritual
instructions from the ascetics living at the sacred sites. The brothers also heard
the fascinating accounts of kings and åñis of former ages associated with all the
holy places.
256

When they reached the Himälayas, Lomaça warned the party to proceed with
caution. “There is Mount Meru and the peaks of Kailäsa, Gandhamädana,
Triçåìga and Makaragiri,” he said, pointing ahead to the splendid mountain
rising into the clouds. “Here reside thousands of invisible celestial beings. The
Kimpuruñas, Yakñas, Kinnaras, Suparëas, Nägas and Räkñasas, all as swift as the
wind and as powerful as a thousand mighty elephants, move about on these
mountain ranges. Sinful men cannot gain access here, for they will be
destroyed by the celestials.”
As Lomaça prayed to the gods for protection, Yudhiñöhira said to Bhéma,
“Carefully guard Draupadé, dear brother. She always seeks and deserves your
protection when she is afraid. We shall now proceed into these sacred
mountains. By virtue of our asceticism and the pious merits we have earned
through sacrifice, we may all be allowed to approach this holy region.”
Lomaça had told the brothers that they would meet Arjuna in the mountains
as he descended from heaven onto the summit of the Gandhamädana
mountain. They decided to go there and await Arjuna’s arrival. The path to
the mountain peak, however, was fraught with danger. Lomaça asked
Yudhiñöhira to tell his servants and most of the Brahmins to stay back. Bhéma
then placed Draupadé on his shoulders, and the party, with only a few
Brahmins, made their way into the Himälayan range along the craggy
mountain paths.
The terrain was rugged and the climb arduous. At last they came to the
Alakanandä river, said to descend to earth from the heavens. They worshipped
the holy river and bathed in its crystal clear waters. The brothers looked
around at the brilliant scenery that surrounded them on the high mountain
plateau. It seemed as if they had arrived on a heavenly planet. Blossoming trees
of every color gave off celestial fragrances. The ground was carpeted with soft
bluish grasses and expanses of wild flowers. Transparent lakes filled with blue
lotuses and crowded with swans and chakravarkas lay amid groves of fruit
trees. The musical sounds of cuckoos, peacocks and countless other birds filled
the air. Lomaça told the Päëòavas that Indra came daily to this region to
perform his rituals and prayers.
The brothers saw in the distance what appeared to be a number of massive
white mountains, but Lomaça told them it was the bones of Naraka, a mighty
Asura whom Viñëu had slain in a past age. The åñi related the story as they
traveled onward toward Gandhamädana. As they approached the mountain,
257

the path became increasingly difficult. Leaving behind the heavenly terrain,
they moved slowly along snow-bound and rocky paths. Suddenly, a violent
wind blew up filling the air with dust and dried leaves, blinding the Päëòavas.
Bhéma held onto Draupadé, who became terror stricken as she heard great trees
crashing to the ground all around them. It felt as if the mountain itself were
being torn asunder by some celestial power. Each of them sought whatever
shelter they could find beneath rocks and huge sal trees. When the dust storm
subsided, rain fell in torrents. Rivulets and streams began to flow everywhere,
covered in froth and mud. As the rain continued, the streams grew louder and
wider and began to carry away trees and bushes. The sky was thick with black
clouds throwing out quick lightning which, despite the ferocity of the storm,
seemed to play with grace upon the mountainside.
Gradually the storm abated and the sky cleared. The sun shone brightly and
steam began to rise from the ground. The travelers emerged from their hiding
places and, reunited, continued toward Gandhamädana.
But Draupadé was exhausted and felt she could not go any further.
Overwhelmed, she fainted and fell to the ground like a plantain tree uprooted
by the wind. Nakula rushed forward and caught her as she fell, and laid her
gently on the deerskin Sahadeva spread out. Yudhiñöhira said, “How can this
beautiful lady, accustomed to every luxury, sleep now on the ground? Her
delicate hands and feet have turned blue with cold, and she lies there
exhausted. Alas, this is all my doing. Addicted to dice I have acted foolishly
and brought great suffering on those I love. King Drupada bestowed this
princess upon us in the hope that she would be happy. Now she lies prostrate
on the ground in this fearful wilderness.”
Lomaça and Dhaumya recited mantras capable of destroying all ills. Nakula
gently fanned Draupadé while Sahadeva massaged her feet. As she slowly
regained consciousness, Yudhiñöhira consoled her. He looked at Bhéma. “How
shall we carry on, O mighty-armed one? Many rugged and icy paths lie ahead. I
do not think that Draupadé will be able to tolerate the journey.”
Bhéma suggested that they summon Ghaöotkaca. “My son is powerful and can
carry us through the skies. O King, simply order me and I shall bring him here
by thought alone.”
Yudhiñöhira agreed and Bhéma sat down and meditated upon his son. As soon
as he was remembered, Ghaöotkaca appeared before Bhéma and stood with
folded palms. He bowed at his father’s feet and saluted the other Päëòavas
258

reverently. After an affectionate welcome he said, “O sinless ones, my father
has summoned me and I am ready to do your bidding. Please command me.”
Bhéma embraced his son. “O invincible hero, O child, we are proceeding to the
peak of Mount Gandhamädana where we shall again see our brother Arjuna.
Your mother is worn out with fatigue and cannot continue. Nor shall we find it
easy ourselves to follow the tortuous mountain paths, covered as they are by ice
and snow. You should therefore carry us through the skies.”
Ghaöotkaca bowed. “With pleasure. I have at my command hundreds of skyranging Räkñasas. O Father, I shall carry my mother Draupadé, while other
Räkñasas will carry you and your brothers and all these Brahmins.”
Ghaöotkaca gently placed Draupadé on his shoulders. He looked upon her as he
would look upon his own mother, Hiòimbé. Other huge-bodied Räkñasas
suddenly appeared and picked up the travelers. Lomaça, however, rose unaided
into the sky by his own mystic power, appearing like a second sun.
The Räkñasas flew swiftly through the heavens along the Siddha’s path. As the
party traveled they saw beneath them the beautiful lands inhabited by
Vidhyadharas, Kinnaras, Kimpuruñas, Gandharvas, and other divine beings.
They saw great forests intersected by rivers and filled with elephants, bears,
apes, rurus, surabhi cows and buffaloes. They passed over the country of the
Uttarä-Kurus. Finally, they all arrived at the Gandhamädana mountain. The
Räkñasas took them high onto the mountain to Badarékä Äçrama, the ancient
hermitage of Nara and Näräyaëa Åñis.
The Päëòavas gazed around in wonder. Even though they were high in the
mountains the entire region was adorned with celestial trees in full blossom.
They saw the great Badaré tree spread out like a vast umbrella of lush green
foliage, from which the Äçrama had derived its name. The tree exuded
freshness and calm, and it invited shelter beneath its boughs. Its branches were
loaded with ripened fruits. Colorful birds, intoxicated with the honey falling
from the fruits, flew in and out of the tree, filling the air with music.
The Päëòavas approached the Badaré tree with folded palms. It was surrounded
by soft bluish-green grass. Countless thatched cottages, the dwellings of
numerous åñis, stood around the tree. The whole region was lit by its own
effulgence, requiring neither sunlight nor moonlight, and it was free from
excessive heat and cold. The brothers felt both their physical pains and their
mental anxieties dissipating. Even their hunger and thirst abated as their
minds filled with a deep peace.
259

As they looked about, they noticed the many sacrificial altars tended by
ascetics, and they heard Brahmins chanting in melodious voices. Nearby, the
cool and clear waters of the Ganges flowed on its way to Bharata, after having
descended from heaven.
Some of the foremost åñis living in the hermitage came forward to receive the
travelers. By their mystic vision they already knew who their guests were, and
after accepting their obeisances, they honored them with offerings of pure
water, fruits and flowers.
Yudhiñöhira thanked Ghaöotkaca and his followers and asked them to remain
with them until they returned to the Kämyaka. On the advice of Lomaça and
Dhaumya, the Päëòavas took up residence with the åñis to await Arjuna’s
arrival, passing their time hearing the many åñis’ spiritual discourses.

Chapter 27
Bhéma Meets Hanumän
The Päëòavas remained in Badarékä Äçrama for six days and nights. On the
seventh day, a wind blew up from the northeast, carrying a single celestial
lotus. The flower fell at Draupadé’s feet. The princess looked in wonder at the
golden thousand-petalled flower. Its fragrance delighted her mind and she was
charmed by its beauty. She had never seen anything like it and she showed it
to Bhéma. “Just behold this flower, O mighty-armed one. Have you ever seen
anything so wonderful? It gladdens my heart and I desire to give it to
Yudhiñöhira. Please discover where it came from and bring others so that we
may take them back to our hermitage in Kämyaka.”
Draupadé looked at Bhéma with her dark eyes, which were covered with long,
curling lashes. Feeling her gaze upon him, Bhéma felt commanded. He was
overjoyed at the opportunity to do something for her pleasure. She had
suffered so much over the past years. The gentle princess was not suited to
forest life, and she still felt the agony of the insults she had suffered in
Hastinäpura. Now she suffered even more due to Arjuna’s absence. He had
always been her favorite among the Päëòavas. Bhéma said, “It will be done. O
blessed lady, you will see me return with an armful of these golden flowers.”
260

Bhéma faced the wind and began to climb the mountain. He traveled swiftly,
resembling a furious elephant crashing through the forest. All creatures fled
away in fear as he raced ahead, thinking only of Draupadé.
The region through which Bhéma passed became increasingly beautiful. Not
only were the trees in full bloom, but the rocks were black stone inlaid with
gems. It seemed to Bhéma as if the Goddess Earth had raised her arm adorned
with sparkling ornaments in the form of this mountain. Bhéma felt a cool
breeze fanning his body, and his energy increased. On all sides he saw
numerous Gandharvas and Siddhas sporting on the mountain slopes with their
consorts, the beautiful celestial maidens turning their heads sideways to look at
the Päëòava as he rushed past. Bhéma scoured the mountainside as he ran,
looking everywhere for the lotuses, but he did not find the flowers. He
continued higher into the mountain, roaring with exultation at his own
strength and power. Hearing the tremendous noise, animals at a distance
became afraid. The mountain tigers left their dens and ran about. Some of
them tried to attack Bhéma, but he slapped them aside as he ran. He lifted
elephants and tossed them at other elephants, clearing his path.
Bhéma then came to a plantain forest. He entered it with force and broke some
of the tall trees by hitting against them with his arms and thighs. He was still
shouting, and his roars now mixed with the terrified cries of the forest animals.
The tumult he created carried for miles.
Suddenly, Bhéma noticed aquatic birds rising into the air not far off, frightened
by the noise. Realizing there must be water nearby, and that lotuses grow on
water, he made his way toward the birds. Soon, he saw a delightful lake. The
Päëòava went down to the water which was adorned by innumerable lotuses
and lilies. He dived in and swam about like a maddened elephant. Refreshed
and enlivened, he rose from the water and let out a terrific blast from his
conch shell. Examining the lotuses, however, he realized that they were not the
same as the one Draupadé desired. He set off up the mountain again, following
a path leading up from the lake.
He heard a loud noise just ahead of him. The sound echoed all around the
mountain and made Bhéma’s hair stand on end. He ran forward to see what
could have made such a noise and he found a huge monkey lying across the
path, lashing the ground with his long tail and making the earth tremble. The
monkey was effulgent and resembled a blazing hill of copper. He had broad
shoulders and a slender waist. His face shone like the full moon, and behind his
261

thin lips, Bhéma could see sharp, pearl-white teeth.
Seeing him obstructing his path like a hill, Bhéma roared at him. The monkey,
however, did not seem impressed. He slowly opened his reddish eyes and looked
lazily at Bhéma. “Why have you awakened me? I am ill and deserve your
kindness. Indeed, as a human you should know the codes of religion and show
kindness to all lower creatures. O hero, it seems you do not know virtue
because you have come here forcefully, destroying animals on your way. Who
are you? Where are you going? Do you not know that you cannot proceed
further? This path leads to heaven and men cannot access it. Only those who
are successful in ascetic practices can go to the celestial regions. Therefore,
give up your quest and turn back. Or rest here awhile first and partake of the
sweet fruits and cool water. O foremost of men, do not try to force your way
past and thus die for nothing.”
Intrigued, Bhéma responded politely. “Who are you, O respectable one? Why
are you in the form of a monkey? I myself belong to the royal order. I am a
descendent of Kuru and the son of King Päëòu, and I was born in the Lunar
dynasty from the union of Kunté and Väyu. My name is Bhéma.”
“I am simply a monkey. I shall not allow you to pass. Turn back now. Do not
meet with destruction.”
Bhéma felt his anger rising. Who was this ape? “O monkey, I do not ask that
you give me permission, nor am I interested to hear your thoughts about my
destruction. Stand aside. Do not experience grief at my hands.”
The monkey, still speaking in a lazy voice, said, “I am ill and cannot move. If
you must pass me, then step over my body.”
Bhéma shook his head. “How can I step over you when I know that the allpervading Supersoul, the Lord of all, resides in your heart as he does in the
hearts of every being? I cannot disregard him.”
Bhéma looked closely at the monkey and he thought of the great Hanumän,
Lord Räma’s devoted servant. Could this be him? But that monkey had lived in
a long past age. How could he still be alive? That would mean he was now
almost a million years old. No, it was impossible. Bhéma continued, “Had I not
been aware of the Supersoul I would have leapt over you as well as the entire
mountain, even as Hanumän leapt across the ocean.”
The monkey turned toward Bhéma and opened his eyes wide. “Who is this
Hanumän who leapt over the ocean? Tell me if you can.”
“He was my brother, begotten by the wind-god and endowed with intelligence
262

and strength. He was the best of monkeys and he is celebrated in the
Rämayana. For the sake of Räma’s wife, Sétä, he leapt a hundred yojanas over
the sea to Lanka. I am equal to him in strength and prowess and am thus able
to chastise you. Arise, O monkey, and give way. Otherwise, I shall send you to
Yamaräja’s abode.”
The monkey remained calm. “I have grown old and cannot move. Please move
my tail and make your way past.”
Bhéma moved toward the monkey. This was surely not Hanumän, for
Hanumän’s power was limitless. This monkey was simply some insolent and
powerless being who deserved to be punished for obstructing his path and
refusing to move. Perhaps he was even a Räkñasa assuming a disguise and
waiting for a chance to attack. Bhéma decided to take him by the tail and whirl
him around till he died. The Päëòava bent over and carelessly took hold of the
monkey’s tail with his left hand. To his surprise, he found that he could not
budge the tail.
Placing both hands firmly around the monkey’s tail, Bhéma pulled hard. Still it
could not be moved. Bhéma struggled with all his strength. His face was
contracted, he was covered with perspiration, and his eyes rolled. Despite his
efforts, however, Bhéma could not shift it at all. The Päëòava realized that this
was not an ordinary monkey or even a demon as he had supposed. Bowing his
head in shame, he stood before the creature with joined palms and said,
“Forgive me my harsh words. Are you a Siddha, a Gandharva, or a god? I am
curious. Who are you in the shape of a monkey? I seek your refuge and ask you
in the mood of a disciple. If it is no secret, then be pleased to tell me.”
The monkey sat up. “O chastiser of enemies, as you are curious I shall tell you.
Know me to be the son of that life of the universe, Väyu, born in the womb of
Keshari. I am the monkey named Hanumän whom you mentioned earlier.”
As Bhéma listened in amazement, Hanumän told him in brief the famous
history of the Rämayana, which the Päëòava already knew well. When
Hanumän finished speaking, tears fell from Bhéma’s eyes and he fell to the
ground to offer his obeisances. Rising up again, he spoke joyfully to the
monkey chief. “No one is more fortunate than me, for I have seen my famous
and powerful brother. O great one, I have only one desire. Please show me the
form with which you jumped over the ocean. I shall then have full faith in your
words.”
Hanumän replied, “That form cannot be seen by you or anyone else. When I
263

leapt over the ocean, things were quite different than they are now. It was a
different age, and everything was greater. Now that Kali-yuga is about to begin,
all things have diminished. I can no longer display that gigantic form because
every being must obey the dictates of time. I am no exception. Therefore,
please do not ask me to reveal that form.”
Hearing Hanumän speak, Bhéma became curious to learn more from his
ancient brother. “Please tell me, O Hanumän, what are the different manners
and customs of each age? You have been alive almost since the first age. How
have people pursued religion, economic development, pleasure, and liberation
in each of the yugas?”
Hanumän began with Satya-yuga. At that time, every living being was selfrealized and devoted to the Supreme Lord’s service. With the onset of each
successive age, however, everything diminishes and becomes more degraded.
Virtue, which was fully manifest in the first age, was diminished by a quarter in
each successive age. By now, Hanumän explained, virtue and religion were
three-quarters lost. By the end of Kali-yuga, it will have disappeared entirely.
Hanumän concluded, “As the ages progress and virtue diminishes, so the
nature and abilities of men undergo diminishment. Everything becomes
inauspicious. Even the performance of religious acts in this last age produces
contrary results. How then can I show the form with which I leapt over the
great ocean? And even if I could, why should a wise man such as yourself ask to
see something so unnecessary?”
But Bhéma was insistent. He sensed that Hanumän was able to show his most
powerful form despite his reluctance. The Päëòava greatly desired to see it and
he declared that he would not leave until he was satisfied.
At last the monkey chief relented. Telling Bhéma to stand back, Hanumän rose
up from his resting place and expanded his body to massive proportions. He
covered all sides and towered above Bhéma, looking like a second Vindhya
mountain. In a voice which resounded through the forest he spoke to the
awestruck Päëòava.
“O Bhéma, this is the extent to which you are able to see my form. I could go on
expanding myself almost without limit. My size and power increase amid foes
according to their strength. Räma’s devoted servants can never be overcome by
any enemy.”
Bhéma felt his hair standing erect. Dropping to his knees he said, “O lord, O
greatly mighty one, I have seen your form to my satisfaction. You resemble the
264

Mainäka mountain. As you are able to show such power, how was it that Räma
had to exert himself to fight with Rävaëa? With you by his side, what need was
there for him to do battle with that Räkñasa? It seems to me that you could
have immediately and single-handedly crushed Lanka with all its warriors,
elephants and chariots.”
Hanumän returned to his normal size and replied solemnly. “O mighty-armed
descendent of Bharata, it is exactly as you say. That wretch Rävaëa was no
match for me, but if I had slain him, then the glory of Daçaratha’s son would
have been obscured. By killing the king of the demons and rescuing Sétä, my
Lord Räma has established his fame and glory among men.”
Hanumän then told Bhéma to go back to his brothers. Bhéma explained that he
first had to find the source of the thousand-petalled lotuses and Hanumän
showed him the way to the forest where they grew. “There is the path which
leads to the Saugandhika forest, and there you will see Kuvera’s gardens, which
are guarded by the Yakñas and Räkñasas. In a great lake lie the flowers which
you seek for your wife.”
Hanumän came forward and embraced Bhéma with affection. He briefly
instructed him in the science of kingship and then said, “O Bhéma, having
once again come in contact with a human I have felt in my mind the presence
of my Lord Räma, who is Viñëu incarnate and who is the blazing sun to the
lotus, Sétä, and to the darkness called Rävaëa. Therefore, I wish to give you a
boon. Ask of me whatever you desire. If you wish, I shall go to Hastinäpura and
kill Dhåtaräñöra’s insignificant sons and grind their city to powder. Or, I can
bind Duryodhana and bring him here. Tell me, what can I do for you?”
Bhéma replied that he felt assured of success if Hanumän would simply lend his
support and blessings. Even his presence on the battlefield would guarantee
victory. Hanumän replied, “When you rush forward for the fight, sending forth
lion-like roars, I will add my roars to yours. Remaining on the flagstaff of
Arjuna’s chariot, I will strike fear into the hearts of your foes by my terrific
yells.”
After embracing his brother once more, Hanumän told him to depart for
Saugandhika. Seeing the glint in Bhéma’s impetuous eyes as he made ready to
leave, Hanumän held him by the arms and said, “Do not take the flowers
forcefully, child. The celestials should always be respected. In this way they will
bestow their blessings upon you. As a kñatriya, you should perform your duty to
protect other living beings humbly and keep your passions under control. Go
265

in peace. I bid you farewell.”
Hanumän disappeared and Bhéma headed toward Saugandhika. As he walked
he reflected on the majestic form Hanumän had shown him. Who could
imagine such a sight either on heaven or on earth? Bhéma also remembered
Räma’s glories and the great battle he had fought for Sétä with Hanumän’s
help. Millions of Räkñasas had been slain. Bhéma knew a similar fight awaited
the Päëòavas. Again the all-powerful Lord, the original Supreme Person,
would take part in the fight. The world would then be rid of unwanted
elements. Duryodhana and his brothers were no better than the sinful Räkñasas
which Kåñëa had destroyed as Lord Räma. How could they then rule the world?
Surely it was the Lord’s desire that they be annihilated.
Soon Bhéma’s mind again drifted to his surroundings. He was moving swiftly
again, but the beauty of the woodlands, groves, orchards, lakes and rivers was
not lost on him. Still the cool breeze carried that captivating fragrance from
the blossoming trees. Herds of wild elephants roved about like masses of clouds,
while buffaloes, bears, leopards and deer moved here and there.
Bhéma pressed on. Just after noon, he at last arrived in the Saugandhika region.
There he saw the lake filled with fresh golden lotuses, exactly like the one that
had blown to Draupadé’s feet. Swans swam upon the lake, and other water birds
mingled with them, all making delightful sounds. The lake seemed to be fed by
mountain springs that fell into it in cascades that sparkled in the sun. A
canopy of green and golden trees, which swayed gently in the breeze, provided
shade along the sandy lakeshore. Heaps of precious stones lay here and there.
Along with the thousand-petalled lotuses, other charming flowers of a dark
blue hue grew on stalks made of vaidurya gems. Bhéma’s mind was stolen by
their beauty.
But the thousands of Yakña and Räkñasa guards Kuvera had deployed to protect
his lake saw Bhéma arrive. They moved toward him, and their leader shouted,
“Who are you, O effulgent one? Why have you come here clad in deerskin yet
bearing weapons? We are the Krodhavaçäs, guardians of this lake.”
“I am Bhémasena, Päëòu’s son. I have come with my elder brother Dharmaräja
to Badarékä Äçrama. There too is my dear wife, Draupadé. The breeze brought
to her an excellent Saugandhika lotus, and she asked me to bring her more. O
night-rangers, I have thus come here in order to satisfy that lady of faultless
features, for her wish is always my order.”
The Räkñasa placed his spear on the ground and replied, “O foremost of men,
266

this place is Kuvera’s favorite playground. Humans may not sport here, nor
may they take away the flowers and fruits. Only the celestials are permitted to
use this lake. Others who try, disregarding the lord of wealth, certainly meet
destruction. As you desire to take away the lotuses belonging to Kuvera
without his permission, how can you say that you are Dharmaräja’s brother? Do
not perform an irreligious act. First ask Kuvera’s permission and then you may
enter the lake.”
Bhéma did not care for the warning. He had little regard for Räkñasas and was
certainly not going to be told what to do by them. Completely forgetting
Hanumän’s admonishment, he placed his hand on his mace and boomed out,
“O Räkñasas, I do not see the illustrious Kuvera here, and even if I did, I would
not pray for these flowers. It is not the duty of kñatriyas to beg. In any event,
this lake has sprung up on the mountain breast and belongs to everyone.
Kuvera did not make it, nor did he create the lotuses. Why then should I ask
his permission?”
Having said this, Bhéma plunged into the lake and began to gather the lotuses.
The Krodhavaçäs advanced, shouting at him to desist. Bhéma ignored them. As
far as he was concerned the lotuses were the property of their creator, God, not
any lesser god. Bhéma felt he had as much right to take them as did Kuvera.
The Päëòava knew that Draupadé would first offer them to the Lord before
giving them to anyone else.
Seeing Bhéma taking the flowers despite their warnings, the guards charged.
“Seize him!”
“Cut him up!”
“Bind him!”
The Räkñasas entered the shallow waters and Bhéma stood to receive them.
Taking hold of his mace, inlaid with gold and resembling the mace Yamaräja
carries, Bhéma shouted back, “Stand and fight!”
The guards surrounded Bhéma. Bhéma whirled his mace and met the advancing
Räkñasas with blows. Heroic and courageous, Väyu’s son was devoted to virtue
and truth and was thus incapable of being vanquished by any enemy through
prowess. He killed the Krodhavaçäs by the hundreds, beginning with the
foremost among them. Many of them fell into the water, their arms and legs
broken. Bhéma was a furious whirlwind now. The Räkñasas could hardly look at
him as he fought. They began to flee in fear, taking to the skies.
Seeing the guards retreating, Bhéma lowered his mace and continued to gather
267

lotuses. He drank the lake’s clear water, which tasted like celestial nectar and
which restored his energy and strength. As he picked the lotuses, he presented
them mentally to Draupadé.
The Krodhavaçäs ran back in terror to Kuvera and told him what had
happened. The god only smiled and said, “Let Bhéma take as many lotuses as he
likes for Draupadé. I already knew he would be coming.”
Hearing their master’s words, the guards returned to the lake and saw Bhéma
sporting alone in its waters with a number of lotuses lying near him on the
bank. They watched him in silence, keeping a safe distance.

Chapter 28
Kuvera Offended
At Badarékä, Yudhiñöhira suddenly noticed the appearance of fearful omens. A
violent wind blew up, lashing sand and pebbles into the Päëòavas’ faces.
Meteors fell from the sky and the sun became obscured by darkness. The earth
trembled, dust fell in showers, and explosions were heard in the sky. All around
them the brothers could hear the shrieks of birds and beasts.
Yudhiñöhira looked around. Where was Bhéma? Had his brother gone off on
some adventure? These omens obviously indicated that something powerful
was occurring somewhere. Not seeing Bhéma anywhere, Yudhiñöhira feared
that he might be the cause of the portents. He spoke anxiously to his brothers,
“O invincible ones, arm yourselves. It seems that the time for us to display our
prowess has arrived.”
Yudhiñöhira turned to Draupadé, “Do you know where Bhéma is? Is he intent on
performing some terrible act? Or has he already achieved a tremendous feat?
These omens clearly indicate battle.”
“O hero, this morning I presented to you a golden lotus. I requested Bhéma to
fetch more of those flowers, and he left at once for the higher reaches of this
mountain.”
Yudhiñöhira could immediately understand that Bhéma had disturbed the
celestials by attempting to take the lotuses from them. He went quickly to
Ghaöotkaca and said, “O sky-ranger, you are like a celestial in prowess and
268

ability. We need your help. It seems my younger brother has gone upward to
the regions of the gods. By his own power Väyu’s son can leap into the sky and
come down at will. He moves with the speed of the wind and has left to find
the celestial lotuses. Please carry us to the place where they grow so that I may
see what Bhéma has done.”
Replying, “So be it,” Ghaöotkaca and his followers carried the Päëòavas,
Draupadé and the Brahmins to Saugandhika. Ghaöotkaca had already been
there a number of times, and he knew the way well. As they descended to the
ground near the lake, they saw Bhéma standing on the shore holding his mace.
At a distance they saw the large-eyed Krodhavaçäs watching him. A number of
them lay on the ground and in the water with their heads and limbs smashed.
Yudhiñöhira was shocked. He went over to Bhéma, embraced him and said, “O
son of Kunté, what have you done? Be blessed. But if you wish to do good to me,
then you should never again be so rash as to offend the celestials.”
Seeing Yudhiñöhira there, the Yakña guards folded their palms and bowed their
heads in humility. The Päëòava apologized for his brother’s acts and consoled
them with gentle words. Looking around at the beauty of the region,
Yudhiñöhira desired to remain there for some time with his brothers. He asked
the guards to request Kuvera’s permission for them to stay. Hearing that
Päëòu’s sons had come there, Kuvera was pleased and he gave his assent. Thus
Yudhiñöhira and his party remained for some time on the high slopes of
Gandhamädana, enjoying the heavenly atmosphere.
After a few days, Yudhiñöhira desired to see Kuvera. Sitting by the lakeside one
morning, he told Bhéma. “O brother, we have seen all the holy places with
Lomaça and the other Brahmins. Let us now see that most holy of places,
Kuvera’s abode, always frequented by Siddhas and åñis. Can you think of some
way by which we can enter the heavenly region?”
But as Yudhiñöhira finished speaking, a celestial voice resounded in the sky: “O
King, you will not be able to go to the inaccessible abode of Vaishravana by
this way. Go back to Badarékä Äçrama. From that place you will go to the
hermitage of Våñaparvä, and then to the hermitage of Arstishena. From there
you will see Kuvera’s abode.”
As the divine voice spoke, a cool, fragrant breeze blew down a shower of
flowers. Dhaumya said, “This order of the gods cannot be ignored. We should
leave immediately.”

269

***
During the last few weeks before Arjuna’s return, the Päëòavas spent their
time in the company of åñis, but Bhéma often roved about the mountain with
Ghaöotkaca. One day, while the two heroes were absent, a powerful Räkñasa
appeared at Badarékä Äçrama. He had actually been there all along, having
assumed the form of a Brahmin and living unrecognized by the brothers. He
wanted to steal Draupadé. Seeing his chance, he manifested his monstrous
form, grabbed Yudhiñöhira and the twins in one arm and Draupadé in the
other. He also seized the Päëòavas’ weapons. Then he rushed into the forest.
Sahadeva managed to extricate himself and snatch his sword known as
Kauçika. Then he chased the demon while calling loudly for Bhéma.
Yudhiñöhira reprimanded the Räkñasa. “O fool, virtue decreases in you and yet
you care nothing. What good result do you hope to attain by your vile
behavior? In this material world the celestials, Pitås, Siddhas, animals, and even
worms and ants depend upon men for life. Even your race depends upon men.”
Yudhiñöhira instructed the Räkñasa about the interdependence of all beings. By
sacrifice and religious performances, mankind satisfied the gods and the
Supreme Lord, who in turn supplied them and all creatures their necessities. If
men suffered and were unable to practice religion, then everyone was affected.
Yudhiñöhira warned, “O wretch, as you have shown ingratitude for our having
maintained you for so long, and as you are now trying to steal our wife, you will
surely meet with destruction.”
The Räkñasa felt Yudhiñöhira becoming unbearably heavy. He was forced to
slow his pace. Sahadeva was then able to catch up to him. Yudhiñöhira called
out, “Do not be afraid of this Räkñasa, brother. I have checked his speed and I
sense that Bhéma is not far away.”
Sahadeva stood before the Räkñasa and said, “Stay and fight! Only after killing
me can you carry this lady away into the forest. Otherwise, you will die. I am
Päëòu’s son Sahadeva, and I am here to punish you.”
As Sahadeva brandished his sword, Bhéma arrived wielding his mace. Seeing
his brothers and Draupadé in the Räkñasa’s grip, he blazed with fury and roared,
“O sinful wretch, I found you out long ago when I saw you scrutinizing our
weapons, but as I apprehended no fear from you and as you were disguised as a
Brahmin, I took no action against you. He who kills such a person living as a
guest, even if he knows him to be an enemy, goes to hell. Nor could you be
270

killed before your time had arrived. Today, you have touched the sinless
Draupadé and thus destroyed your life duration. You have swallowed the hook
fastened to the line of fate and, like the fish, will meet your destruction. Go
now to where Hiòimba and Baka have already gone.”
The Räkñasa became alarmed and let Draupadé and her husbands go. His lips
trembled in anger as he rebuked Bhéma. “It is you who are sinful. I know of
your having slain those Räkñasas. Today I will offer them oblations of your
blood. Come and fight. I am waiting.”
Without saying more, Bhéma rushed at the demon. Seeing him unarmed, he
put down his mace and took hold of the Räkñasa with his bare hands. The
demon met him like the Asura Våtra met Indra. As they fought in fury the
earth vibrated with their heavy steps.
The twins came forward to help, but Bhéma checked them. “I am more than a
match for this demon. By my religious merit, my sacrifices, and by my brothers,
I swear that I shall kill this one today.”
The battle between man and Räkñasa raged. They tossed each other about and
aimed terrific blows at one another. Their colliding fists sounded like
thunderclaps. As they rolled about, locked in combat, they broke down
gigantic trees. They then lifted those trees and fought with them. The air was
filled with fragments of wood as the trees were smashed to pieces. When the
entire area was denuded of trees, they fought with rocks and boulders.
Without a moment’s pause the two fought intensely, each seeking the other’s
death. They appeared like a mountain and a mass of clouds coming together.
As they hurled boulders at one another, it seemed as if meteors were falling
from the heavens. Even though repeatedly struck on the head and body by the
rocks, neither fighter flinched. They wrestled like a pair of infuriated
elephants, gnashed their teeth and roared.
The dreadful fight lasted for almost thirty minutes. Finally Bhéma raised his
fist, which resembled a five-hooded serpent, and dealt the Räkñasa a terrible
blow on the neck. He fainted and Bhéma caught hold of him as he fell. He
raised the Räkñasa up with his two mighty arms and dashed him to the ground.
Bhéma pounded his fallen foe into a lifeless lump of flesh. With his bare hands
he tore off the demon’s head and threw it aside. That blood-smeared head, with
wide-open eyes and bitten lips, rolled away like a huge jackfruit.
Spattered with the demon’s blood, Bhéma came to Yudhiñöhira and bowed
before him with folded hands. Yudhiñöhira and his brothers praised Bhéma,
271

even as the Maruts praise Indra in heaven.
The brothers then returned to the äçrama.
***
It was almost five years since Arjuna had departed. Lomaça told the Päëòavas
that they could expect him to return shortly. He thus instructed them to go to
a higher part of the mountain to meet him. Taking up their few possessions,
and with Dhaumya, Lomaça and a handful of other Brahmins accompanying
them, the Päëòavas climbed to a high plateau on Gandhamädana. As the
celestial voice had predicted, they came to the ashrams of the royal sage
Våñaparvä and the great Åñi, Ärñöiñeëa. Remaining with them for some time,
the Päëòavas received spiritual instructions from them.
Ärñöiñeëa told them that it would not be possible for them to go further up the
mountain. “Above here lies the path to the higher planets. No man can go
there unless he is entirely pure and sinless. Along that path you will find the
gods’ sporting ground. Even from here we can hear the sound of their
kettledrums, tabors and véëäs.”
Ärñöiñeëa told the brothers that he had been to the mountain’s summit and
seen the gods for himself. He’d also seen the Gandharvas, Vidhyadaras,
Kimpuruñas and other heavenly beings consorting with the Apsaräs. The great
lord of wealth Kuvera could often be seen there being worshipped by the best
of the Yakñas. “At that time, this entire region resounds with the melodic
chanting of the Sämaveda. Daityas, Dänavas and Siddhas alike join in the
worship of that illustrious Lokapäla, Kuvera.”
The åñi suggested that the brothers should reside peacefully at his äçrama until
Arjuna returned. Looking especially at Bhéma he said, “Do not be restless here.
Rather, live at ease. Be peaceful. The time will come soon enough for you to
display your strength. Without doubt you will crush your enemies and govern
the earth.”
Surveying the region, the Päëòavas felt as if they had already gone to the
heavenly planets. Every kind of tree was present, all of them blossoming and
bending with the weight of ambrosial fruits. Sweetly singing birds played in the
lush foliage while peacocks, with their tails outspread, appeared like the trees’
crowns. The lakes teemed with waterfowl and were adorned with lotuses, and
the air rang with the hum of maddened bees who drank the nectar falling from
the lotus cups. The brothers were fanned by a balmy breeze that carried
272

celestial fragrances and fine drops of cooling spray. There were countless
varieties of animals, all of them peaceful and harmless.
One day, as the Päëòavas and Draupadé were seated on the shore of a lake,
they saw the great eagle Garuòa descending toward its waters. The bird blazed
with a golden effulgence. His huge wing-beats created a wind that tossed the
forest and sent showers of blossoms to the ground. Trees closest to the lake
were crushed by the force of his descent and the mountain trembled. He flew
with the speed of the wind and before the Päëòavas’ eyes carried away a
mighty Näga serpent who lived in the lake. Having taken hold of the Näga in
his talons, Garuòa rose high into the sky above the mountain and disappeared
into the distance.
As the eagle went north, the wind from his wings blew many flowers from the
mountaintop down to where the Päëòavas sat. Seeing the celestial flowers of
five colors, Draupadé said to Bhéma, “O best of the Bharatas, see here the
exquisite blossoms which have fallen from the mountain peaks. Surely they
have come from Kuvera’s abode. O hero, how I wish to see that heavenly place!
But it is heavily guarded by Räkñasas, Yakñas and other powerful beings. If only
Arjuna were here! When Agni burned the Khäëòava, your invincible brother
held at bay the entire host of gods with their celestial army.”
In this way, Draupadé playfully taunted Bhéma. Bhéma frowned as Draupadé
went on, “Surely you too are capable of standing against any foe, human or
celestial. O Bhémasena, send all the Räkñasas fleeing to the ten directions by
the mere force of your arms. Let all of us approach this mountain peak without
fear. I have cherished this thought in my mind for some time. Protected by
your prowess, I long to see this mountaintop.”
Bhéma looked like a wounded bull. He could not stand Draupadé’s words.
Without delay, he rose up, took his weapons, and made his way up the
mountainside. Moving with the gait of a lion, that mighty man––as tall as a
young sal tree, having a complexion of burnished gold, with broad shoulders
and a neck like a conch shell––rushed with full force toward the sheer rock
face which led to the mountain summit.
Quickly, Bhéma found a narrow passage by which he could scale the mountain,
which was inaccessible to ordinary men. Grasping hold of creepers and crevices
in the rocks, he climbed swiftly. As he reached the summit he came to a vast
plateau where he beheld Kuvera’s abode. It was adorned with glowing golden
and crystal buildings of celestial design. The heavenly mansions were
273

surrounded by high golden walls encrusted with gems of every color.
Bhéma leaned on the end of his bow and gazed in wonder at the city. Ramparts
and towers stood all around it and it was graced by huge gates and rows of tall
flagstaffs, their colorful pennants fluttering in the wind. In the gardens outside
the city lay heaps of gems, and along its walls garlands were hung. The trees
were beyond human imagination, and around them Bhéma saw many beautiful
Apsaräs dancing to the strains of heavenly music.
The sight of Kuvera’s opulence sorrowed Bhéma as he remembered the wealth
Yudhiñöhira had once possessed. Then he again became angry as he
remembered Duryodhana’s crimes. He took out his conch shell and blew it
with the full force of his lungs. The sound echoed around the mountain
summit and struck terror into the hearts of all creatures.
From the ramparts the startled Yakña and Räkñasa guards saw Bhéma standing
with his bow, sword and mace. They swarmed out in the thousands and rushed
him, shouting in anger. Their upraised clubs, maces, swords, javelins, spears
and axes seemed to blaze up as they advanced. Bhéma shot numerous arrows at
them, cutting off their weapons and striking down the Räkñasas who were on
the ground and in the sky.
The Yakñas hemmed Bhéma in on all sides. He now appeared like the sun
enveloped by clouds. Without fear, he took out his sword and severed the arms,
legs and heads of his assailants. As he fought with the roaring Yakñas, he was
drenched in showers of blood. Although they attacked him from every side, the
celestial fighters did not see Bhéma flinch or become discouraged. Mangled by
his weapons they fell back in fear, uttering frightful cries of distress. They
dropped their weapons and fled in all directions.
The commander of the Yakña army, Maëimän, addressed his fleeing troops
angrily. “How will you tell Vaishravana that a single man has routed vast
numbers of Yakñas?” The powerful Maëimän, armed with darts, clubs, javelins
and maces, stood as firm as a mountain. His voice boomed out like a drum. “O
human, stay and fight! Having come to the lord of wealth’s abode, you shall
now be able to also see Yamaräja’s abode.”
With a terrible yell Maëimän rushed Bhéma, who instantly released three
arrows, each of which pierced Maëimän in the side. Maëimän then hurled his
mace at Bhéma and it flew toward him like a flash of lightning. Bhéma fired
arrows which struck the mace with force but were unable to stop it. Quickly,
Bhéma raised his own mace and smashed the Yakña’s mace, as it fell toward him
274

with the force of a thunderbolt. Seeing his mace broken, Maëimän threw an
iron club. As the golden-handled club shot through the air, it roared and sent
forth bright orange flames and showers of sparks. Bhéma moved aside, but the
club caught him on the arm, wounding him severely.
Maëimän shouted triumphantly as Bhéma fell back for a moment, but Bhéma
soon recovered and again raised his mace, the Shaika. He rushed at Maëimän
with a tremendous cry. The Yakña hurled a huge dart and it screamed through
the air, glowing like the sun. Bhéma whirled his mace and knocked the blazing
dart away.
Bhéma then resolved to kill his adversary without further delay. He whirled the
Shaika over his head and rushed toward the Yakña. With a shout that
reverberated around the mountain, Bhéma hurled his mace at Maëimän. It
struck him full on the chest with a fearful crash and split his heart in two. The
Yakña fell to the ground like a palm tree flattened by a hurricane.
Seeing their commander lying dead, the surviving Yakñas and Räkñasas fled.
Bhéma stood alone on that mountain plateau, looking around for further
attack.
The sound of the battle had reached Yudhiñöhira. Hearing the mountain caves
resound with loud war cries and other sounds, the Päëòava and his brothers
became anxious. They learned from Draupadé that Bhéma had again gone up
the mountain. Yudhiñöhira took the twins and quickly went after him. They
ascended the mountain and came to the plateau where Bhéma was standing.
The Päëòava stood looking like Indra after he had slain all the Dänavas in
battle. He was surrounded by the dead bodies of numerous Yakñas and
Räkñasas. Many others lay on the ground still moving, their limbs smashed by
Bhéma.
Yudhiñöhira and the twins ran over to their brother and embraced him. The
four Päëòavas then sat down on the mountaintop. Looking around at the
celestial region, Yudhiñöhira said reprovingly, “O son of Kunté, there is no
excuse for your actions here. One should never offend the king or the gods. We
are living in Kuvera’s domain and you have surely given him offense by your
rashness. Such behavior is as unworthy of you as untruth is of the ascetics. If
you have any regard for me, then do not commit such acts again.”
Bhéma looked down in shame. It pained him to see his brother so upset.
Yudhiñöhira pondered what to do. Kuvera was the powerful lord of the Yakñas
and a universal guardian. If he had taken offense, then their position would be
275

precarious indeed. They could not avoid the all-knowing god, and there was no
question of facing him in battle. Better that they try to pacify him in some way.
No doubt he would make his appearance to survey the damage. The four
Päëòavas sat in silence, looking themselves like gods descended to the
mountain summit.
In the meantime, the defeated Yakña and Räkñasa soldiers had run to Kuvera
and informed him of what had occurred. Hearing that his commander and
friend Maëimän had been killed, along with numerous other fighters, the god
became angry. He then ordered his attendants to yoke his chariot.
Kuvera’s servants immediately fetched his chariot drawn by a hundred horses
the color of dark clouds, each adorned with golden garlands and gems. The
horses neighed loudly and moved their heads upwards as the divine Kuvera
ascended the chariot, eulogized by Gandharvas and Cäraëas. A thousand
principal Yakñas, looking like so many mountains wearing gold armor and
equipped with weapons, followed Kuvera as his chariot moved off through the
skies.
The celestial chariot seemed to swallow up the atmosphere and draw down the
sky as it ranged across the firmament. As he traveled, the lord of wealth
pondered Bhéma’s second assault on the celestials. How dare this human act so
insolently toward the gods! But Bhéma, of course, was no ordinary human. He
was Yudhiñöhira’s brother, and Yudhiñöhira was Dharmaräja himself. He and
his brothers had all taken birth only to fulfill the gods’ purpose. Kuvera then
recalled a curse uttered long ago by the powerful Åñi Agastya. Of course! How
else could the mighty Maëimän have been killed? Bhéma had become the
instrument of Agastya’s imprecation. Kuvera’s frown changed to a smile as he
approached the summit where the Päëòavas were seated.
The Päëòavas saw the celestial chariot approach. Their hair stood on end and
they rose quickly with folded palms to greet Kuvera. The chariot stayed in the
air near the Päëòavas, who stood looking apprehensively upward. The Yakñas
who accompanied Kuvera alighted on the mountain summit like so many great
birds. Seeing the brothers looking across at him with reverence, Kuvera was
pleased. The Yakña warriors saw Kuvera’s mood and stood with indifference,
their weapons lowered.
The four brothers approached Kuvera and bowed before him. Thousands of
Räkñasas, with huge bodily structures and ears like javelins, then approached
and surrounded Kuvera. Kuvera appeared like a fresh youth. He wore a chaplet
276

and garlands of celestial flowers. In his hands he held a noose and a sword. A
large bow hung over his shoulder. Bhéma, still clutching his mace, gazed at him
without fear. Kuvera smiled at him. Then he turned to Yudhiñöhira and said,
“O Pärtha, we are well aware that you are always thinking of the welfare of all
creatures. Therefore dwell on this mountain peak without fear. Nor should you
be angry toward Bhémasena. His killing of the Yakñas and Räkñasas has been
ordained by destiny. Indeed, realizing this I have become pleased with Bhéma
rather than angry.”
Kuvera looked at Bhéma and said with a smile, “O child, O best of the Kurus, I
am not angry with you. Put down your weapons. For Draupadé’s pleasure you
have acted rashly and disregarded the gods, relying only on the strength of
your arms. Nevertheless, I am pleased with you. Today you have delivered me
from Agastya’s terrible curse. That you should insult me in this way was
foreordained. Therefore I attach no blame to you.”
Yudhiñöhira’s curiosity was aroused and he asked Kuvera to explain the curse.
“I am surprised that having angered the glorious Agastya you were not
immediately burned to ashes.”
Kuvera told Yudhiñöhira how he had once been traveling through the skies
toward Kushavati where an assembly of the gods was to take place. Hundreds
of thousands of Yakñas accompanied him, headed by Maëimän. As they crossed
the Yamunä river, they saw the effulgent Agastya sitting on its banks
practicing asceticism. Out of sheer arrogance and foolishness, Maëimän spat
on his head. Kuvera immediately went before the åñi to apologize, but Agastya
was burning with anger and uttered a curse: “Since this evil-minded one has
insulted me in your presence, he will meet with his end along with his forces at
the hands of a man. You shall be grieved by this, but you will be absolved of the
sin when you see that man.”
Kuvera said that having seen Bhéma he was now free from Agastya’s curse. He
invited Yudhiñöhira to remain for some days in his abode on the mountain
summit, and he gave the Päëòavas news of Arjuna in heaven, saying that he
would soon be returning. Turning again to Bhéma he said, “O Yudhiñöhira, you
should ensure that this brother of yours does not give way to rashness too
often. If you do not check his impetuosity, it will sooner or later bring you
trouble.”
Bhéma lowered his weapons and bowed before Kuvera, who then blessed him,
“May you destroy the pride of your enemies and enhance the joy of your
277

friends.”
Kuvera took his leave from the Päëòavas as his chariot carried him high into
the sky. His Yakña and Räkñasa attendants followed him, some flying and
others riding conveyances covered with finely embroidered cushions and
adorned with gems. The bodies of the warriors Bhéma had slain were removed,
and the five brothers stayed on the mountaintop, served and honored by the
Yakñas.

Chapter 29
Arjuna Returns
Although offered every kind of enjoyable thing by their celestial hosts on
Gandhamädana, the Päëòavas thought only of Arjuna. They could not wait to
see him again, and the days passed slowly as they expected his return at any
moment. The Yakñas brought Dhaumya and Draupadé to the mountain summit
to be with the Päëòavas and to greet Arjuna when he arrived.
On the seventh day from the battle, the Päëòavas saw in the sky Indra’s
brilliant chariot approaching the mountain, resembling a meteor emerging
from the clouds. Upon it they saw Arjuna seated like Indra himself. He was
wearing glowing silk robes and was adorned with celestial ornaments and
garlands, a brilliantly jeweled coronet on his head.
The Päëòavas stood to receive him. All of them felt the greatest happiness as
the chariot slowly descended, drawn by its ten thousand steeds. As it reached
the ground, Arjuna got down and bowed at Dhaumya’s feet, then at
Yudhiñöhira and Bhéma’s. The twins then bowed to him and he greeted
Draupadé with gentle words. He handed her a number of celestial gems of sunlike splendor which Indra had given to him.
Yudhiñöhira also greeted and worshipped Mätali as if he were Indra himself. He
inquired from him about the gods’ welfare. Mätali spoke affectionately to the
Päëòavas as a father might speak to his sons. Then he ascended the chariot
and returned to Amarävaté.
Arjuna sat amid his brothers while they asked him to tell them all about his
adventures. He narrated everything he had experienced, beginning from his
278

first meeting with Indra in the form of a Brahmin up to his departure from
heaven. Arjuna told them that after he had received his training from Indra,
he had to offer him dakñiëa. Indra had said to Arjuna, “There is nothing in the
three worlds which you cannot now achieve. You are master of all the divine
weapons and have no equal in warfare. I desire that you destroy my enemies,
the Nivätakavacas, a race of fierce Dänavas who dwell in the womb of the
ocean in great forts. By killing these demons you will fully gratify me, O hero,
and repay your debt to me.”
Indra then allowed Arjuna to use his chariot and gave him a suit of
impenetrable armor. He had also placed upon his head the coronet, saying, “Be
victorious!”
Blessed by the celestials, Arjuna then set out on Indra’s chariot. As he was
leaving, the gods presented him with a conch shell called the Devadatta, whose
sound could disperse his foes. Mätali drove the chariot and they soon
approached the ocean. Arjuna described the ocean to his brothers. “That
dreadful and inexhaustible lord of the waters was covered by swelling waves
that dashed against each other, appearing like moving hills. I saw ships full of
gems sailing the sea, as well as whales, timiìgilas, serpents and other fierce
aquatics. Through the waters I could see submerged shells and heaps of
precious stones. They appeared like stars on a night covered with light clouds.”
Arjuna described how Mätali had steered the mystical chariot, which could
travel anywhere in the three worlds, through the ocean toward the Dänavas’
city. As it entered the nether regions and approached the city it made the
whole region resound with the fearful clatter of its wheels. Hearing the
thunderous sound, the Dänavas considered that Indra must be approaching to
do battle with them.
“They closed the city gates and manned the ramparts. I saw thousands of
demons standing with bows, swords, javelins, axes, maces and clubs, their
hearts filled with fear and their limbs trembling. Taking out the Devadatta, I
let out many mighty blasts which made all creatures hide in fear. The
Nivätakavacas then poured out of their city by the tens of thousands. They
were clad in shining mail and they clutched maces, spears, clubs, sabers,
hatchets, rockets, guns and swords ornamented with gold and jewels.
“Mätali maneuvered the chariot skillfully and baffled the demons’ advance.
Indeed, he moved the chariot so swiftly that I could perceive nothing at all. My
enemies sounded their strange musical instruments, creating a discordant blare
279

that filled the battlefield and stupefied the minds of all beings.
“As the Dänavas rushed at me releasing hundreds of thousands of arrows, I saw
in the sky the åñis who had come to witness the fight. They eulogized me with
select Vedic prayers and thus inspired me. I was surrounded and enveloped by
sheets of fierce-looking shafts, but I countered the demons’ arrows and the
downpour of spears, maces and clubs.
“The chariot moved with the speed of the wind. Freed from the assault, I
counterattacked the Dänavas. With straight-coursing arrows I drove them
back, piercing each demon with a number of deadly shafts. At the same time,
Mätali urged my ten thousand steeds toward the enemy and trampled vast
numbers of them. He drove the chariot with such dexterity that it seemed as if
it was being drawn by only one horse.
“Firing my arrows with unerring accuracy, I cut off the outstretched arms of
the demons, which fell to the ground still clutching their weapons. Their
helmeted heads rolled on the earth like so many ripe fruits shaken from trees.
The Dänavas came at me in wave after wave. I charged my arrows with the
Brahmä mantras and cut them down as they rushed upon me, but so great was
their number that I became sorely oppressed on all sides. I then took up Indra’s
weapon, the mighty thunderbolt, and hurled it against the demons. It threw
them away from the chariot and smashed all their weapons to pieces. I quickly
followed this move by shooting ten arrows at each of my assailants.
“Seeing shafts leaving my bow like rows of black bees, Mätali praised me. The
arrows, inspired by mantras, drove back the enemy and mangled the soldiers.
Blood was flowing like rivulets during the rainy season.
“The infuriated demons then began to fight by using illusions.
“Instantly the Dänavas vanished and rocks showered from the sky. Aiming
upward and whirling quickly about, I checked the rocks with crescent-headed
arrows, smashing them to pieces. Then the demons sent down torrents of rain,
accompanied by a fierce wind. The whole area was flooded and no difference
could be perceived between earth and sky. There seemed to be an endless sheet
of water covering everything. Struggling to keep my mind controlled, I invoked
the flaming Visoshana weapon, which Indra had also given me. It immediately
dried up the waters and the air was filled with a massive cloud of steam.
“I could hear the demons’ terrible shouts, although they remained invisible.
They sent tongues of fire at me and a screaming hurricane. I countered the fire
with a celestial water weapon and stopped the wind with a mountain weapon.
280

Then they caused a fearful darkness so that I could see neither Mätali nor my
own hands wielding the bow. A shower of iron clubs fell from above and the
Dänavas let out horrible screams on all sides. The steeds drew back and Mätali
dropped his whip and cried out, ‘Where are you, Arjuna? What has happened?’
“Both of us were struck with terror. Mätali said, ‘O sinless Arjuna, although I
have accompanied Indra in many encounters with the demons, I have never
been confounded in this way and lost control of the horses. It seems that this
battle has been ordained by the creator himself, who now desires the
destruction of the universe. Surely no other outcome is possible from such a
terrible fight.’
“I stood silent for some moments to gain control over my mind. Then I replied,
‘Be at ease, charioteer. See now the prowess of my arms and my weapons. I
shall counter these illusions with the Gäëòéva bow.’
“I then invoked astras capable of stupefying the enemy and the Dänavas’
illusions were dispelled. They again appeared before me. Without delay, they
produced more illusions that stunned my mind and senses. At one moment the
earth seemed covered by darkness, then it seemed to be submerged in water,
then it disappeared completely so that my chariot appeared as if suspended in
space.
“I released the Shabdavedi weapon and dispelled that illusion, whereupon
Mätali again steered the chariot toward the enemy. The demons flew toward
me in a rage. I cut them down remorselessly with great volleys of razor-faced
arrows. Then they vanished again, continuing to fight invisibly. By using
celestial weapons capable of seeking them out, I continued to slay them.
“The Nivätakavacas then gave up their illusions and retreated into their city.
At once everything became visible. I saw the ground covered with their
mangled bodies, their weapons, ornaments, armor and limbs. It was impossible
for the horses even to step. Mätali urged them upward and the chariot sprang
into the sky.
“Seeing my foes retreat I relaxed, but the next moment the demons invisibly
attacked me again. A thick shower of mountain crags rained down upon me.
From beneath me I felt the Dänavas grasping hold of the horses’ legs and
pulling them down. So many rocks were falling that it seemed as if my chariot
was in a cave. Again I was gripped by fear. Seeing this Mätali said, ‘O Arjuna,
take heart. Use Indra’s thunderbolt weapon. It will destroy these rocks.’
“I chanted the mantras to invoke Indra’s weapon while placing iron darts on
281

the Gäëòéva. Charged with the power of Indra’s Vajra, the darts sped toward
the crags and smashed them to powder. The darts also dispelled the demons’
illusions and struck them down from the sky. They fell screaming on all sides
like huge meteors dropping from the heavens. Many of them fled and entered
the bowels of the earth, while others vanished into the sky.
“Realizing that the demons had been defeated, I told Mätali to drive the
chariot into the city. He gazed about the battlefield in amazement and said, ‘I
have never witnessed such prowess, not even from the gods. These demons
have until now been impossible to conquer, even by the combined efforts of
the gods.’
“Mätali drove the chariot toward the city gates and I reflected on the battle.
Although hundreds of thousands of Dänavas, each like a mountain, lay dead,
neither Mätali nor myself had been injured. This was wonderful. Without
doubt it was Kåñëa’s potency alone that had protected us and enabled me to
defeat the gods’ mighty foes.
“We entered the Dänavas’ city and saw thousands of wailing women. They fell
back in fear as we passed, terrified by the chariot’s thunderous rattle. The clash
of their jewels and ornaments as they fled resembled the sound of hail falling
upon a mountain. I saw the ladies quickly disappear into their golden palaces,
which were bedecked with countless gems.
“Astonished to see the city’s opulence, I said to Mätali, ‘This place appears
superior to Amarävaté. How is it that the gods do not reside here?’
“Mätali replied that the city had once been Indra’s residence, but the demons
gained possession of it after pleasing Brahmä through asceticism. Brahmä gave
them boons which rendered them invincible to the gods. Indra had then gone
to Çiva and asked his assistance, whereupon Çiva replied, ‘You shall regain this
city in the future when you assume a different body.’”
As Arjuna spoke his brothers looked at him in amazement. His prowess in
battle now exceeded even that of his illustrious father, the lord of the gods.
Arjuna continued: “I then left the Dänava city and headed back toward
Amarävaté. On the way back, the chariot passed another great city which
floated in the sky and shone like a second sun. It was full of trees made of
jewels and adorned with golden towers and palaces. Four impregnable gateways
stood on each side of the city, studded with iridescent gems that radiated
countless hues. I have never seen anything like them.
“Mätali told me that this was the city of the Kalakanyas, a class of fierce
282

Daityas. It was called Hiraëyapura, and even the gods could not conquer it.
Therefore the demons dwelt there without fear. The Kalakanyas were destined
to be killed by a mortal by Brahmä’s arrangement. Thus Mätali urged me to
rush upon the Daityas and please Indra.
“I replied, ‘Take me there at once. The gods have no enemies whom I do not
also consider my enemies.’
“As we approached the city, the demons charged out in a body, thinking that
Indra had come to fight. Without a second’s delay, they rained weapons upon
me––arrows, maces, swords, axes, darts and lances. I countered their attack
with mighty volleys of shafts from the Gäëòéva. Mätali drove with such skill
that the Daityas were bewildered and they fell upon one another in their
attempts to attack me.
“Realizing that I was a formidable enemy, the Daityas retreated into their city,
which then began to move in all directions. Sometimes it appeared in the sky,
then under the ocean, then it disappeared altogether. Then it suddenly
reappeared in front of me, shot upward, and made various curving motions
through the air. Although I found it difficult to follow its movements, I
managed to check its progress with straight-coursing arrows inspired by
mantras. I released so many shafts that the city was torn to pieces and it fell to
the ground in flames.
“The Daityas rose into the sky and continued to fight. Mätali then brought us
down to earth and I was immediately hemmed in by more than fifty thousand
chariots. I fought them with celestial weapons, but the powerful Daityas
gradually repelled my missiles. The mighty demons stood before me encased in
brilliant golden armor, wearing helmets and celestial garlands, and with
chariots decorated with rows of flags. My mind was attracted by the sight of the
Daityas in battle array and I struggled in vain to overpower them.
“I was sorely oppressed by their weapons. Sinking in the ocean of the
Kalakanyas, I suddenly remembered Çiva’s weapon. Mustering up my courage, I
uttered the mantras sacred to the three-eyed deity. At once there appeared
before me a huge personality with three heads, nine eyes, six arms, and hair
blazing like fire. His clothes consisted of great serpents whose tongues darted
back and forth.
“I shook off my fear and bowed to that awful form of the eternal Çiva. Then I
fixed on my bow the Rudra-astra and, continuously chanting the mantras,
released it to destroy the Daityas.
283

“Thousands of diversely shaped missiles spread out across the battlefield as the
weapon was fired. Some resembled lions, some tigers, and others bears and
buffaloes. There were serpent-shaped missiles and others shaped like elephants,
bulls, boars and cats. Simultaneously, the battlefield filled up with Çiva’s
followers––innumerable Guhyakas, Yakñas, Piçäcas, Bhütas, and other ghostly
beings. All of them rushed toward the Daityas with frightening roars.
“As the Rudra-astra wrought havoc among the enemy, I fired a ceaseless
shower of arrows glaring like fire and made of the essence of rocks. The Daityas
were routed and the few that survived fled in fear. Seeing that my victory was
due only to Çiva’s weapon, I bowed down to him right on the battlefield. Mätali
praised me and we then returned to Indra’s abode.
“When Indra heard of my achievement he was pleased and blessed me that I
would always remain cool-headed in battle and would always discharge my
weapons unerringly. He also said that no celestial fighters, ––whether
Dänavas, Daityas, Nägas, Gandharvas, Suparëas, or Yakñas––would be able to
overcome me. He told me that I would conquer the earth and hand it to
Yudhiñöhira. He gave me this impenetrable armor I now wear and fixed this
coronet upon my head. He also presented me with the Devadatta; then he
brought me back to this mountain.”
As Arjuna ended his narration, Yudhiñöhira was awestruck. He said, “O
Dhanaïjaya, it is fortunate indeed that you have met the most powerful gods
and received from them all the divine weapons. I consider the earth already
conquered and Dhåtaräñöra’s sons subdued. O Bharata, I should like to see the
weapons with which you defeated the demons.”
Arjuna assented to his elder brother’s request and prepared to display the
weapons. With the earth as his chariot, the Päëòava stood holding the
Gäëòéva and recalled the mantras to invoke the various missiles. In his celestial
armor and diadem, he faced east and silently concentrated his mind on the
prayers.
Just as he was about to exhibit the weapons, the earth trembled and the
mountain seemed ready to split. The sun was covered and the wind ceased to
blow. Brahmins found themselves unable to recite the Vedas and all creatures
felt oppressed. Suddenly, the Päëòavas saw in the sky the powerful four-headed
Brahmä surrounded by all the gods. The Gandharvas and Apsaräs also
appeared, dancing and singing on the mountainsides. A shower of flowers fell
upon Arjuna as he looked about in amazement. Before him appeared the divine
284

sage Närada, sent by the gods.
Närada said, “O hero, do not discharge the celestial weapons for no purpose or
they will destroy the three worlds. These weapons should only be used against
powerful foes in battle. Do not be so rash.”
Närada turned to Yudhiñöhira, “O Ajätaçatru, you will see all the weapons
when Arjuna uses them in the war against the Kauravas.”
The brothers bowed to Närada and he departed, along with all the gods.

Chapter 30
Kåñëa Visits the Päëòavas
The Päëòavas continued to dwell in Kuvera’s abode for four more years. In
that celestial atmosphere they hardly felt the time at all. One day Arjuna and
Bhéma approached Yudhiñöhira and spoke with him privately. Bhéma said, “O
king of the Kurus, in order to make good your vow, we have restrained
ourselves and not killed Dhåtaräñöra’s sons. Rather, we have lived for eleven
years in the forest, deprived of our inheritance. These past four years have not
been difficult, but the time is now approaching when, in accordance with your
promise, we will need to enter some habited region and live incognito. Let us
therefore leave this mountain and descend again to earth.”
Bhéma said that both he and Arjuna were determined to punish Duryodhana,
but feared that if they remained on the high plateaus of the heavenly
Gandhamädana, they might forget the miseries the Kauravas had inflicted
upon them. This would weaken their determination. “Therefore, we desire to
leave now. We brothers, assisted by the infallible Kåñëa, will surely help you
regain your kingdom. We all desire your welfare and long to encounter your
enemies in battle.”
Yudhiñöhira agreed that it was now time to depart. Along with Draupadé the
brothers visited the various groves and lakes of Kuvera’s abode one last time,
offering their respects and saying farewell. Yudhiñöhira then prayed to
Gandhamädana Mountain, “O lord of mountains, we are ready to depart.
Please grant that after we have conquered our enemies and recovered our
kingdom, we may again see you at the end of our lives.”
285

Yudhiñöhira was thinking of the time when after ruling the kingdom, they
would finally retire to perform asceticism and gain spiritual emancipation.
Surrounded by his brothers and the Brahmins, he then began the march down
the mountainside. Bhéma summoned Ghaöotkaca and his followers and they
again carried the Päëòavas’ party over the difficult mountain passes. The
Päëòavas were sorry to leave Kuvera’s abode, but as they gazed back at its
sublime beauty, their minds were delighted.
The brothers soon arrived at Badarékä Äçrama. After being greeted by the
sages there, Yudhiñöhira dismissed Ghaöotkaca, choosing to continue the
downward journey on foot. After remaining a month with the Badarékä sages,
they set off toward Subahu’s country. They met Subahu and spent a night with
him there before proceeding toward the forest Vishakayapa.
As they traveled, followed by their porters and servants, they saw charming
woodlands, lakes, rivers and fields. They stopped each evening at dusk and
camped wherever they were, preparing a meal from simple forest fare.
Gradually they reached Vishakayapa, still within the Himälayan range, just as
the monsoon season was approaching. They decided to remain in Vishakayapa
until the rains passed, and then return to Kämyaka.
On the first day of their stay at Vishakayapa, Bhéma went to explore the area.
Armed with a bow and sword he wandered at his pleasure through the woods,
which were frequented by Gandharvas and Siddhas. The trees rang with the
sounds of exotic birds and bore fruits and blossoms in all seasons. Bhéma saw
clear rivulets flowing from the mountains, creating large, transparent lakes
filled with lotuses.
Wild boars rushed at the Päëòava and he killed them each with a slap. He also
slew numerous buffaloes and deer, piercing them with his sharp arrows. Bhéma
possessed the strength of ten thousand elephants, and he sportingly uprooted
and broke many large trees, clearing areas where åñis could later dwell and
perform sacrifices. He struck his arms and roared exultantly as he roamed
about. Elephants and lions fled in fear as they heard his roars.
The ever-proud Bhéma, devoid of fatigue, filled the skies with his shouts. He
crushed mountain peaks by kicking them. Ranging along the mountain side, he
saw large serpents retreat into caves as they heard him approach. Bhéma
pursued them along the rocky plateaus. Suddenly, he came upon a terriblelooking serpent resembling a hill. It lay coiled at the mouth of a great cave,
entirely blocking its entrance. Its skin was yellow with black spots, and inside
286

its yawning mouth were four fangs. As the snake glared about with its coppercolored eyes, its forked tongue licked the corners of its mouth.
Bhéma stopped and gazed at the serpent. It looked like a grim destroyer as it lay
hissing as if to reprimand him. As Bhéma came closer, the snake suddenly
seized him and entwined its coils around him. Bhéma felt his strength draining
from his body, and despite his efforts, he was unable to extricate himself. He
trembled and fell unconscious for several minutes.
As he returned to consciousness he considered his predicament. Who was this
being? How had it succeeded in overpowering him? Bhéma again exerted
himself but found that he was unable to move. Clearly this was not an ordinary
snake. He decided to ask the creature its identity.
“O best of serpents, kindly tell me who you are and what you will do with me? I
am Bhémasena, Päëòu’s son and Dharmaräja’s brother. With my bare hands
alone I have slain in battle countless lions, tigers, buffaloes and elephants. Not
even the celestials can stand against me. How is it, then, that you have
succeeded in overpowering me? Is it by virtue of a particular science or boon
that you possess such power?”
The serpent’s voice was solemn. “O mighty-armed one, I have been hungry for
a long time. Therefore, it is my good fortune that you have arrived here. You
must be the food ordained for me by the gods. Now listen as I explain how I
came to live in a serpent body.
“My name is Nahusha, and I am a royal sage. After attaining heaven I was
cursed by Agastya Åñi and fell to earth as a snake. Thus you are my descendent,
O hero, but that will not stop me from eating you. Whatever falls within my
grasp during the middle of the day, be it a cow, a buffalo, or even a human,
becomes my next meal.
“Agastya promised that whomever I seize will lose his strength. Thus you have
been overcome by virtue of that sage’s power. Agastya also told me that I would
be freed from his curse when someone could answer my questions about the
relationship between the soul and the Supreme Being.”
Thinking of Kåñëa, Bhéma replied, “O mighty creature, I am neither angry nor
do I blame myself for this calamity. Sometimes a man may succeed in his
endeavors for happiness and sometimes he may fail. Certainly the results are
not in his hands and therefore he should not lament his misfortune. Who
could ever be superior to destiny? Destiny is supreme and exertion made for
material gains is useless.”
287

Bhéma said he did not grieve for his own impending death, but he felt sad for
his brothers and mother. They depended on him and would surely be deprived
of strength and energy when they discovered what had happened. And
Duryodhana would rejoice.
Back at the Päëòavas’ camp, Yudhiñöhira was perceiving ill omens. Jackals
howled and the dreadful Värtika bird, with its one leg, one wing and one eye,
circled overhead. It screamed and vomited blood. The wind blew furiously and
the four directions seemed to be ablaze. Yudhiñöhira felt his left eye and arm
trembling and his heart palpitating. He looked about the äçrama and, not
seeing Bhéma, asked Draupadé, “Where is my powerful brother?”
Draupadé replied that he had been long out. Alarmed, Yudhiñöhira decided to
go after him personally. After instructing Arjuna to guard Draupadé and the
twins and to protect the Brahmins, he began to search for Bhéma in the forest.
Following his footprints he soon found the smashed trees and the beasts that
Bhéma had slain. He also saw a trail of bushes which had been blown over by
the wind coming from Bhéma’s body as he ran after game in the forest.
Yudhiñöhira moved as quickly as he could and soon came to a rough place
where Bhéma’s tracks seemed to end. The ground was dry and full of thorn
bushes, stumps and gravel. Strong winds gusted around tall, leafless trees.
Yudhiñöhira began to make his way up the steep incline toward the plateau
above. He sensed that his brother was nearby, and he scrambled up the slope.
Soon he came to the serpent’s lair. There at the entrance to the cave,
Yudhiñöhira found Bhéma wrapped in the serpent’s coils.
Yudhiñöhira was amazed to see Bhéma held by a snake, and he asked, “Who is
this best of serpents with a body as big as a mountain? How have you fallen
into its clutches, O son of Kunté?”
“This is the royal sage Nahusha in serpent form. O worshipful brother, he plans
to eat me.”
Yudhiñöhira addressed Nahusha, “Kindly release my brother, O energetic one.
We shall satisfy you with some other food.”
Nahusha moved slightly. “I have obtained this son of a king for my food and
will not release him. You should leave this place or else I will eat you tomorrow.
The sage Agastya has granted me a boon that whoever comes within my reach
will become my food. You are also within my reach. I have not eaten for a long
time and will not give up your brother. Nor do I want any other meal.”
Feeling pain to see Bhéma’s plight, Yudhiñöhira thought carefully. This being
288

was not actually a snake but a great king and an ancestor of the Päëòavas.
Yudhiñöhira had heard of Nahusha many times. He had performed numerous
sacrifices and become the emperor of the earth before finally going to heaven.
After ascending to the higher regions, he must have been cursed to fall down
again. Perhaps there was some condition to the curse. If Nahusha could be
freed from his serpent form, then Bhéma could be released.
“O snake, under what conditions will you free my brother?”
“Intoxicated with the pride of wealth and power I insulted the Brahmins,”
replied Nahusha. “I was thus cursed by Agastya and brought into this miserable
state. But the sage stipulated that I would be released when I found a man
capable of answering my questions on spiritual subjects. This, then, is the only
way by which your brother can be freed. Answer my questions, O sinless one,
and free both Bhéma and me.”
“Ask whatever you will, O serpent. I will try my best to answer.”
Yudhiñöhira was always glad to have the opportunity to speak about spiritual
matters. For him, this forest exile had provided a welcome opportunity to hear
from the åñis and engage in a deep study of scripture, free from the pressures of
state affairs. He had acquired an almost unrivalled knowledge of the Vedas. He
listened attentively as Nahusha began to speak.
Fixing his narrow eyes upon Yudhiñöhira, the serpent said, “How can we
recognize a true Brahmin, O King, and what is the highest object of
knowledge?”
“A Brahmin is characterized by the qualities of honesty, purity, forgiveness,
self-control, asceticism, knowledge and religiosity. The highest object of
knowledge is the Supreme Brahman, which can be known when one has
transcended all duality.”
“The qualities you have attributed to Brahmins are also found in other classes
of men,” Nahusha replied doubtfully, “and how can anyone exist without
experiencing happiness and distress, the basis of all duality?”
Yudhiñöhira smiled. It seemed the snake was already quite knowledgeable and
was testing him. “If one finds these qualities in any man, then he should be
known as a Brahmin no matter what his birth may have been. Happiness and
distress in relationship to material objects can be transcended while still being
experienced in relation to the Supreme. Material emotions are perverted
reflections of original spiritual feelings.”
Nahusha was satisfied with Yudhiñöhira’s answer and he asked him to elaborate
289

further. What was the use of dividing society according to caste if such
divisions meant nothing? In reply, Yudhiñöhira explained that due to the
intermixture of social classes, it had become difficult to ascertain a man’s class.
Only by examining his actual qualities could a man’s class be known. Thus
society should be divided on that basis only, not on the basis of birth.
Nahusha said, “O King, you are clearly acquainted with knowledge. How then
can I devour your brother?”
It was obvious to Yudhiñöhira that Nahusha was himself highly learned. After
all, he had once ruled the earth and ascended to heaven after being instructed
by the sages. He thought it would be worth making inquiries from such a
personality. Folding his palms and standing before Nahusha, Yudhiñöhira said,
“I too regard you as one possessed of superior knowledge. Please instruct me, if
you will. By what acts can one attain heaven?”
“In my opinion, O Bharata, one can reach heaven by giving charity to
Brahmins, by being kind and gentle in speech, by truthfulness, and by
remaining nonenvious toward all living beings.”
“Which of those acts do you consider the best, and what constitutes nonenvy?”
“Each of these items can be considered superior or inferior depending upon
circumstance. One must therefore understand life’s ultimate goal in order to
know how to act properly at all times. This you have already explained, O
King. All acts and knowledge should be aimed at achieving the Supreme.
“Non-envy means always desiring the welfare and advancement of all living
beings rather than to exploit them for one’s own pleasure. In particular, one
should desire the spiritual progress of others and act to assist them in that
progress.”
“How does the soul accept a material body, O Nahusha?”
“The soul, or atman, receives bodies according to his own behavior. Thus he
transmigrates life after life, impelled by his sinful and pious acts, sometimes
going to heaven and sometimes moving about in the body of an animal. Final
liberation is attained when one comes to know Brahman, the Supreme
Absolute.”
Yudhiñöhira nodded. The snake’s answers were in accord with what he had
learned from the åñis. Clearly Nahusha had deep spiritual realizations. How
then had he become a snake?
Nahusha replied, “By sacrifice and asceticism I became so powerful that I
290

coursed through the heavens on a golden chariot. I became emperor of the
wide earth and even the Gandharvas, Yakñas, Räkñasas, and all the inhabitants
of the three worlds––even the åñis––payed me taxes. Such was my power that I
withdrew the energy of anyone simply by looking at them. Then my pride
overwhelmed me and I lost my good sense. My knowledge became covered by
the ignorance born of pride. I ordered the Brahmin sages to draw my chariot
and thus offended them.
“One day while in heaven, I touched Agastya Åñi with my foot. The sage
cursed me and I fell to earth, my body changing into that of a serpent.
“In accord with Agastya’s words, however, you have now freed me from that
curse. My discussion with you has reawakened my knowledge. I now realize
that my real interest lies in cultivating Brahminical qualities and spiritual
knowledge, not in material status or opulence.”
Nahusha released Bhéma and the serpent body immediately died. From out of it
the two brothers saw a glowing celestial figure emerge wearing golden
ornaments and beautiful garlands. He bowed before the Päëòavas and then
rose into the sky and disappeared.
Yudhiñöhira and Bhéma returned to the äçrama and recounted the incident to
the others. When Yudhiñöhira had finished, the Brahmins reprimanded the
now sheepish Bhéma for his rashness in having challenged the serpent and
warned him not to be so foolish again.
***
Within days of their arrival at Vishakhayapa, the monsoons arrived. They set
up their camp on high ground and watched as the rains fell and flooded the
earth. They could no longer see the sun. Bolts of lightning lit the forest, while
streams of frothing water rushed across the earth, hissing like flights of arrows.
All the forest creatures became delighted and frolicked in the rain-soaked
woods.
Gradually the season turned to autumn. The clouds dispersed and the sky was
lustrous. The days were warm and the nights cool. The Päëòavas surveyed the
refreshed forest scenery and decided that it was an auspicious time––the
sacred month of Kärttika––to return to Kämyaka.
A few days after their arrival, Kåñëa and Satyabhämä came to visit. Kåñëa
knew they had returned to the Kämyaka by His inconceivable powers.
The Päëòavas were overjoyed to see their well-wishing friend. With tears in
291

their eyes they rose up to greet Him. Kåñëa got down from His chariot and
bowed at Yudhiñöhira and Bhéma’s feet, as well as the feet of Dhaumya and the
Brahmins. He embraced Arjuna and accepted the twins’ obeisances.
Satyabhämä embraced Draupadé and when she and her husband were
comfortably seated among the Päëòavas, they all began to converse.
Arjuna told Kåñëa of everything that had transpired with him since their last
meeting. He then inquired after Kåñëa and His family’s welfare, asking
especially about his wife Subhadrä and their son Abhimanyu. Kåñëa assured
him that all was well. Turning to Yudhiñöhira He said, “O King, the wise assert
that righteousness is superior to winning kingdoms, and to cultivate
righteousness, asceticism is necessary. In strict obedience to truth you have
performed your duties and you have thus conquered both this world and the
next. You are not addicted to sensual pleasures, nor do you act out of
selfishness. Although you have won opulent kingdoms and been surrounded by
luxury, you have not swayed from your practices of charity, truthfulness,
asceticism, religion, forgiveness and patience.”
Yudhiñöhira bowed his head modestly as Kåñëa continued. “Who but you, O
Dharmaräja, could have tolerated the outrage toward Draupadé, so very odious
to virtue? There can be no doubt that you will recover your kingdom in due
course. When your vow is fulfilled and the thirteen years have passed, we shall
do everything in our power to chastise the Kauravas.”
Kåñëa spoke kindly to Draupadé, saying that it was by good fortune she had
obtained such virtuous men as her husbands. He gave her news of her sons,
who were staying in Drupada’s kingdom and who also spent time in Dwärakä
where Subhadrä showered them with motherly love. Kåñëa’s own son
Pradyumna was instructing all the Päëòavas’ sons in the martial arts.
When Kåñëa fell silent, Yudhiñöhira said, “O Keçava, there is no doubt that
You are our highest refuge. We are always under Your protection. When the
time comes, You will surely do everything to restore to us our kingdom.”
Then they saw Märkaëòeya Åñi approaching. That immortal sage, who
appeared like a youth of no more than sixteen years, was cheerful, dressed only
in a loincloth and holding a water pot. The Päëòavas, Kåñëa, and all the
Brahmins stood to offer respect, then offered Märkaëòeya a seat of honor.
After he had been worshiped with arghya and presented with sweet water and
forest fruits, Kåñëa said, “We all wish to hear your most excellent words. Kindly
narrate to us the ancient histories of virtuous kings and åñis, replete with moral
292

and spiritual instruction.”
At that moment, Närada also arrived and was received. He too wished to hear
Märkaëòeya speak in Kåñëa’s presence. With those two personalities sitting
amid the Päëòavas and the numerous Brahmins, it seemed as if the sun and
moon were seated together in the presence of the planets. Everyone waited for
Märkaëòeya to speak. They all knew that the sage had lived since the
beginning of the material creation and was therefore acquainted with
countless histories of great sages and kings. The Supreme Lord Näräyaëa had
personally instructed him and thus he possessed profound spiritual
understanding.
Yudhiñöhira asked, “Please tell me, O highly learned one, how a man receives
the results of his own deeds. I am mystified upon seeing how I have been
deprived of my kingdom while Dhåtaräñöra’s sinful sons prosper. Does one
receive the results of his actions during the same life, or do they visit him only
in a later existence? How do the results of a man’s acts follow him after death?
Where do they repose when he gives up his body?”
Märkaëòeya remained silent for a moment. He looked around at the concourse
of people assembled in the forest clearing. It seemed as if Yudhiñöhira were still
in Indraprastha, seated in his assembly hall. Raising his right hand, the sage
then replied, “The embodied soul travels from life to life as a result of his own
acts, good and bad. At no time is the soul without a body as long as he remains
within this world trying to enjoy his senses. The soul is covered first by a subtle
body made of mind, intelligence, and false ego. The subtle body carries the
recollection of every experience the soul has ever had, and thus assumes
various gross material forms. Yamaräja controls all of this. Indeed, Yamaräja
keeps track of every soul within the material universe. He is empowered by the
all-knowing Supreme Soul who resides in the heart of every living being. Thus
does Yamaräja award all beings their just desserts. He never makes a mistake in
this regard.”
Märkaëòeya paused to allow his listeners to absorb what he was saying. “Some
men enjoy in this life but not in the next, some in the next but not in this, and
others in both. Some men enjoy neither in this life nor in the next.
“A wealthy man who spends this life in pleasure will suffer in the next; an
ascetic who forgoes pleasure in this life will enjoy in the next; those who marry
and live pious lives as householders, performing sacrifice and giving charity,
enjoy both in this life and the next; but the foolish man who follows no
293

scriptural injunctions suffers continuously life after life.
“As far as you brothers are concerned, you are virtuous and have been born
only to fulfill the gods’ purposes. You are great devotees of the Supreme Lord
and thus cannot be affected by karmic reactions. Your apparent setback will
ultimately lead to your everlasting fame and happiness. You will be glorified in
the world of men, and at the end of your lives, you will attain the highest
abode.”
Yudhiñöhira reflected on the sage’s reply. Then he asked, “O learned sage, in
this world our lives are dedicated to the Brahmins. If it pleases you, kindly tell
us about a Brahmin’s greatness and glory.”
In response the åñi recounted numerous ancient histories. His audience was
rapt in wonder. He also described the creation of the universe, which he had
personally witnessed, and the nature of the destruction that occurs at the end
of Brahmä’s day, a period of millions of years. He described how he had floated
on the causal water out of which creation occurs, as it rose and covered the
lower and middle planets. At the end of that inundation, he had seen a
wonderful child lying on a banyan leaf.
“I was struck with amazement. I could not understand how a child could have
survived when the entire universe was destroyed. The boy was effulgent and
His face was as beautiful as the moon. His eyes resembled full-blown lotuses
and His body was a blackish color. He lay there smiling and sucking His toe.
Then on His chest I saw the mark of çrévatsa and thought that it must be
Viñëu, although I could not be sure. As I approached Him He said, ‘My child, I
know you are eager to rest. O Märkaëòeya, enter My body and rest awhile. I am
pleased with you.’
“When the boy addressed me I lost all sense of my identity and forgot my
material designations. He opened His mouth and I felt myself drawn into it.
Suddenly entering His stomach I beheld the whole earth with all its cities and
kingdoms. I wandered about for some time, seeing all the familiar sights,
including the Ganges and her tributaries, the Himälayas, and the forests in
which I had performed ascetism. I also saw the race of celestials headed by
Indra, as well as the races of kñatriyas, vaiçyäs, and çüdras.
“Although I wandered about within that boy’s body for a long time I never did
find its limit. Confused, I began to worship the Supreme Lord with my
thoughts and words. Suddenly, I found myself emerging again and once more I
saw Him lying on the banyan leaf. I worshipped that immeasurably powerful
294

being who had swallowed up the entire universe, and I placed my head at His
feet. I asked Him who He was and about His purpose. Why was He lying there
with the universe held in His body?
“The child spoke in such a way that my material illusions were completely
dispelled. He told me that He was the original Supreme Person from whom
everything emanates and into whom it enters at its end. I was amazed to hear
Him speak of His own glories. He is known as Viñëu, Näräyaëa and Hari, but
He possesses innumerable other names. That all-knowing personality then told
me that I should remain within His body until Brahmä again awoke and
recreated the universe. He disappeared from my sight and I found myself back
within the varied creation I had seen within Him.”
Finishing his narration, Märkaëòeya looked across at Kåñëa. “King
Yudhiñöhira, that lotus-eyed boy whom I saw at the end of the creation has now
appeared as Kåñëa. He has become your relative and friend. Without doubt you
should know Him to be the ancient Supreme Person, the inconceivable Hari,
and the original Personality of Godhead. He granted me the boon that my
memory would never fail and that my death would come only when I wanted it.
Seeing Kåñëa sitting here wearing a yellow silken garment, I am remembering
that boy. Do not doubt that it was He whom I saw in the waters of devastation.
O hero among men, this entire creation rests within Him even as air rests
within ether. Take refuge in Kåñëa, for there are none superior to Him.”
Hearing the åñi’s words, the Päëòavas bowed down before Kåñëa. Kåñëa smiled
gently and spoke comforting words to them. He glanced affectionately at
Märkaëòeya, who gazed back at Kåñëa with love.
Yudhiñöhira then asked Märkaëòeya to describe the future. Kali-yuga, the
darkest age was approaching. Yudhiñöhira wanted to know what would happen
to the world at that time. Märkaëòeya told him in detail how everything would
become more and more degraded. People would become irreligious and would
thus be oppressed by misery. The age would culminate in the appearance of
Kalki avatära, who would restore order to the world and bring about Satyayuga, the golden age.
Yudhiñöhira and Märkaëòeya discoursed for hours and the audience remained
fixed on hearing Märkaëòeya’s detailed responses, replete with accounts of the
different kings, sages, and the celestials who had lived throughout the ages. As
evening approached, Yudhiñöhira finally stopped asking questions. Along with
his brothers he worshipped Märkaëòeya. Then the åñi took his leave. Närada
295

also left at that time, ascending into the skyways.
When Märkaëòeya was gone, Kåñëa spent a little more time talking with the
Päëòavas. Satyabhämä took the opportunity to speak with Draupadé and ask
her how she was able to serve and satisfy five husbands. Kåñëa’s wife wanted to
learn from the Païchäla princess, who was famed for her chastity and womanly
skills, so that she might improve her own service to Kåñëa. Draupadé told her in
detail about the many ways she served her husbands.
Draupadé said, “Abandoning vanity and subduing desire and wrath, I serve my
husbands with attention, along with their other wives. I do not feel my
position of servitude to be a degraded one, and I restrain jealousy by remaining
devoted. I neither bathe, sleep, nor eat before my husbands, or even before our
servants and followers. At no time do I allow my mind to dwell upon another
man or any celestial. My heart never sways from my husbands. The minute I
see them I rise up and greet them, offering them a seat and water. I always keep
our living quarters clean and fragrant, and all the household items and food
well-ordered.”
Satyabhämä, herself a great favorite of Kåñëa’s, listened attentively. Draupadé
described how she would never enjoy anything her husbands did not enjoy, nor
would she perform any act disagreeable to them. When they went away, she
renounced her ornaments and cosmetics and practiced asceticism. She tried
always to assist her husbands as they performed sacrifices and other religious
practices.
“I am the first to rise from bed and the last to take rest. I am ever attentive to
my duty and never give way to sloth. In my opinion, service to the husband is
the eternal virtue of women. The husband is the wife’s god and her sole refuge.
By serving him, she pleases even the Supreme Lord Himself and thereby
attains to the highest destination.”
When Draupadé finished, Satyabhämä embraced her. She heard Kåñëa calling
her and so took her leave, promising to come to Indraprastha after the
Päëòavas had regained their kingdom.
Kåñëa bid farewell to the Päëòavas and was ready to depart. He and
Satyabhämä mounted the chariot, which was yoked with Çaibya and Sugréva.
Seeing Draupadé standing before him so meekly, Kåñëa said, “O Draupadé, do
not be in anxiety. Before long you will be the wife of kings––after your
husbands have crushed their enemies and won back the earth. O black-eyed
beauty, ladies such as yourself, possessed of all auspicious marks, can never
296

suffer for long. The Kauravas will soon reap the results of their sins against
you. When they have been destroyed, you will see their wives despairing, even
as you despaired upon leaving Hastinäpura.”
Kåñëa once more assured Draupadé that her five sons were flourishing and that
she would soon see them grown up, powerful heroes. Then, saluting the
Päëòavas and bowing to the Brahmins, Kåñëa urged on His horses and left the
forest.

Chapter 31
The Fight with the Gandharvas
Early in the Päëòavas’ twelfth year of exile, a Brahmin who was journeying to
Hastinäpura stopped to see them. He spent a few days with them before
continuing to the city, where Dhåtaräñöra then received him. The old king was
always anxious about the Päëòavas and he wanted to hear about them from the
Brahmin. When he heard how their bodies were emaciated by their spare diet
and constant exposure to the elements, he felt pain. Dhåtaräñöra was especially
distressed to hear how Draupadé was now pale and thin. He lamented openly in
the presence of his ministers.
Knowing himself to be the cause of the Päëòavas’ suffering, Dhåtaräñöra cried,
“Alas, how is it that Yudhiñöhira, who has no enemy on earth, now lives in a
lonely forest and sleeps on the bare ground? How is the ever-wrathful Bhéma
able to tolerate the sight of Draupadé clad in barks and lying upon the earth?
Surely he restrains himself only out of devotion to his elder brother. Arjuna,
seeing Draupadé and the twins in such misery, must be breathing the hot sighs
of an angry serpent. All those heroes and their wife should not be suffering
such pain. Duryodhana’s cruel words at the dice game must burn them day and
night, and I can imagine Bhéma’s anger increasing day by day like fire fed by
ghee.”
Dhåtaräñöra’s anguish echoed around the assembly hall. Vidura and Bhéñma
both sat nearby, but they remained silent. The king continued, “Alas my sons,
along with Çakuni and Karëa, saw only the honey at the top of the tree but not
the fall. By robbing the Päëòavas they have acted sin-fully. I am also sinful for
297

having allowed it. Surely the Kurus will soon be destroyed. Perhaps all these
events have been ordained by all-powerful destiny. Nothing can overpower
fate. Driven by his own unseen destiny, a man acts in ways he later regrets.
Hence I am now left lamenting for the inevitable. After hearing that Arjuna
has gone in his own body to heaven and received the celestial weapons, what
can I expect for my sons?”
Dhåtaräñöra’s voice trailed off into sobs. He raised his hand and dismissed the
assembly. Çakuni left the hall and went immediately to speak to Duryodhana.
He found him sitting with Karëa. The three friends had enjoyed the past
twelve years, free finally of the Päëòavas. Although his father occupied the
throne, Duryodhana was actually the ruler. He tended to all affairs of state.
Dhåtaräñöra spent most of his time alone, regretting his actions toward the
Päëòavas. Duryodhana had steadily increased his strength by forming
diplomatic alliances all around the world. He was ready for the Päëòavas to
return from exile. That was, of course, if they ever came back.
The Kaurava prince folded his palms and bowed slightly as his uncle entered
the room. After taking his seat, Çakuni said, “O ruler of men, having exiled the
Päëòavas by your own prowess you now enjoy this earth. Indeed, you have no
rivals. The prosperity Yudhiñöhira once possessed is now yours. That great
wealth which was formerly the cause of your grief is now your happiness. You
have achieved everything by the force of intellect alone. All the world’s kings
are subservient to you, and you are adored by countless Brahmins.”
Çakuni smiled slightly as he saw Duryodhana listening to his own praises with
relish. Pressing his fingertips together he went on, “Why not pay a visit to the
Päëòavas, who have never accepted your rule? Surrounded by the Kurus even
as Yamaräja is surrounded by the Rudras, go and scorch the Päëòavas with the
sight of your splendor. That prosperity which is seen by both friend and foe is
real prosperity. Let the wives of the Kurus accompany you in their finest dress
and look upon Draupadé clad in barks. What greater happiness could you
experience?”
Karëa voiced his approval with a laugh, but Duryodhana appeared pensive. “I
am not sure. I don’t think Father will allow me to go to the Dwaitavana. My
motives would be too obvious to him. Indeed, the old man is grieving for what
we have accomplished, and he considers that they have become more powerful
by their ascetic practices.”
As he thought of the Päëòavas in the forest, Duryodhana smiled. It would
298

certainly be enjoyable to see their poverty and suffering while displaying his
own wealth. Gradually, his malice overshadowed his doubts.
“Nevertheless, your suggestion finds favor with me, O hero. What could be a
greater delight than to see the Päëòavas sunk in misery? Perhaps we can devise
some means by which the king can be convinced to let us go. If Dharmaräja,
Arjuna, and especially Bhéma, were to see me graced with their wealth, then
the goal of my life would be attained.”
The three Kurus agreed that some feasible reason for their going had to be
found. Pondering the problem, they each left for their own abodes. The next
morning, Karëa said to Duryodhana, “O King, I think I have found a plan that
will work. I have learned that our cattle herds are now in the Dwaitavana.
They need to be checked and counted, and it is always proper for this to be
overseen by the kñatriyas. If you tell your father that you wish to do this
service, he will surely give his permission.”
As they were speaking, Çakuni arrived and said the same thought had occurred
to him. They felt certain that this was the perfect pretext and they laughed
together and shook each other’s hands. They decided to go that day to see the
king.
Coming before Dhåtaräñöra, they inquired about his welfare and in return he
blessed them with affectionate words. As they sat together a cowherd, whom
Duryodhana had instructed beforehand, came into the room and spoke to
Dhåtaräñöra about his cows. Taking the opportunity, Karëa then said, “O King,
the cattle are now in a charming woodland and the time for marking the calves
has come. This is also an excellent season for your son to go hunting. Why not
have him go to the Dwaitavana to check the cattle? Çakuni and I will
accompany him there.”
The king looked doubtful. “O child, although hunting and seeing the cattle are
both proper acts for rulers, I have a concern. The Päëòavas are reported to be
living somewhere in that region and thus I feel you should not go there. You
have defeated them by deceitful means, and thus they are living exiled in the
forest. Although Dharmaräja will never become angry, the same cannot be said
for Bhéma. And Draupadé is effulgence herself; she is endowed with great
ascetic merit and capable of consuming you by her curse. Full of pride and folly
as you are, you will surely offend her and thus be reduced to ashes.”
Dhåtaräñöra continued, his heart burning as he again remembered Päëòu’s sons
and their chaste wife. “Perhaps the Päëòavas themselves will consume you
299

with the fire of their weapons. Or if from the force of numbers you seek to
injure them, then that would be improper––and I know you can never succeed.
The mighty-armed Arjuna has returned from heaven and now possesses all the
celestial weapons. Even without those weapons he was capable of conquering
the earth. Why then will he not now kill you all? I suggest that you order some
trusted men to go there in your place. Leave well enough alone and do not
disturb the Päëòavas, who are like sleeping lions.”
Çakuni rubbed his chin. “O descendent of Bharata, the eldest Päëòava is
dedicated to virtue and cannot possibly harm us while he is fulfilling his vow in
the forest. His brothers are obedient to him and will do likewise. Nor do we
wish to see the Päëòavas; we shall not even approach them. You need not fear
any misconduct on our part.”
Although the king was hardly convinced by Çakuni’s words, being repeatedly
requested he finally agreed to let Duryodhana go. The prince quickly assembled
a large force of men. With all his brothers and thousands of women, they soon
set off for the forest. Eight thousand chariots, thirty thousand elephants, nine
thousand horses, and many thousands of infantry accompanied them.
Carriages, shops, pavilions, traders, bards, and men trained in hunting followed
them. As the procession moved off, it resounded like the deep roar of the winds
during the monsoon season.
Arriving at the Dwaitavana, Duryodhana camped about four miles from the
lake. His many attendants built him a house surrounded by fruit trees near a
good water supply. Separate houses were constructed for Karëa, Çakuni, and
Duryodhana’s brothers.
Duryodhana then went to see the large herd of cattle. He examined their limbs
and supervised their counting and marking by the herdsmen. When all the
work was done, the Kuru prince wandered cheerfully throughout the region,
enjoying himself with his friends and the women. His entourage roamed about
the woodlands at pleasure, like the celestials enjoying themselves in the
Nandana groves. The herdsmen, who were expert at singing and dancing,
entertained their royal guests, who in turn distributed first-class food and
drinks to the herdsmen.
After the entertainment, Duryodhana decided to go hunting. Attended by his
followers he went about the forest killing hundreds of bison, buffaloes, boar,
deer, bears and gavayas. The hunting afforded him the opportunity to see the
delightful regions in the forest, which resounded with the sweet notes of
300

peacocks and swarmed with bees intoxicated by the honey of fragrant flowers.
As the prince went through the forest like Indra amid the gods, he gradually
came to the Dwaitavana lake.
On the opposite shore of the lake Yudhiñöhira was performing the sacrifice
known as Rajaåñi. Guided by the Brahmins he sat with Draupadé making
offerings into the sacred fire. Duryodhana, desiring to display his opulence
before the Päëòavas, instructed his men to build pleasure houses along the
lakeshore. They immediately went toward the lake and looked for a suitable
site, but as they came close to the lakeside they heard a voice calling, “Stop!
Who are you and why have you come to this place? Know me to be Citrasena,
the Gandharva king. This lake and its surrounding woodlands belong to me.”
Duryodhana’s soldiers looked around and saw the Gandharva surrounded by
other celestials and Apsaräs. He was sporting in the lake and he told the
soldiers to go back to wherever they had come from.
The soldiers returned to Duryodhana and gave their report. Duryodhana then
detailed a number of his most powerful generals to drive the Gandharva and
his followers away. The generals went before Citrasena and said, “The
powerful son of Dhåtaräñöra, King Duryodhana, has come here to sport.
Therefore, you should leave this place immediately.”
But the Gandharvas simply laughed. Citrasena’s reply was harsh: “Your
wicked-minded Duryodhana has little sense, or how could he command we who
dwell in heaven? We are not his servants. You are fools to bring us such a
message and to thus meet your own deaths. Go back to where you came from or
find yourselves in Yamaräja’s abode today.”
The soldiers again returned to Duryodhana and told him that if he wished to
use the lake, he would have to fight with the Gandharvas. Duryodhana’s anger
rose. How dare anyone oppose him. He was the ruler of the earth. He would
teach these Gandharvas a lesson. He barked out orders to his men. “Go and
chastise these wretches who have so displeased me. Even if it were Indra
sporting with the celestials I would not tolerate it.”
Knowing the Gandharvas to be formidable fighters, Duryodhana’s generals
took thousands of heavily armed soldiers and returned to the lake. They filled
the woods with their loud roars and crushed everything as they advanced.
The Gandharvas again forbade their approach, but the soldiers disregarded
them and came onto the shores, their weapons uplifted. Enraged, Citrasena
ordered his followers, “Punish these wicked wretches.”
301

Thousands of Gandharvas rushed at Duryodhana’s men. The soldiers panicked
and fled. Karëa alone stood his ground. He checked the Gandharvas with his
arrows. Displaying his lightness of hand, he struck down the enemy by the
hundreds, lopping off their heads and limbs. Gradually, he forced the
Gandharva army back.
But they regrouped and came again in even larger numbers. The Suta’s son
fought furiously and the earth was quickly covered with the bodies of slain
Gandharvas.
Hearing the clamour of battle, Duryodhana, Dushashana and their other
brothers raced to assist Karëa. The clatter of their chariot wheels as they
charged into battle resembled Garuòa’s roars. A fearful fight ensued, and
gradually the Gandharva warriors were overpowered. They retreated to
Citrasena and the Kurus sent up a loud victory shout.
Seeing his army so afflicted, the Gandharva king mounted his chariot and
rushed toward the Kurus. He knew all the methods of warfare and he fought
with mystical weapons. The Kuru heroes were rendered senseless by
Citrasena’s illusions. It appeared that every one of them was surrounded and
attacked by Gandharvas. They cried in fear and fled panic-stricken from the
fight. Only Duryodhana, Karëa, Dushashana and Çakuni remained fighting,
although they were all severely wounded.
The Gandharvas concentrated on Karëa, surrounding him and raining down
showers of weapons. With swords and axes they cut down his chariot and slew
his horses and charioteer. Karëa leapt down with a sword and shield in his
hands and mounted Vikarëa’s chariot. Urged on by Karëa, Vikarëa
immediately fled from the battlefield in fear for his life.
Then only Duryodhana and his brothers remained. They hurled their weapons
at the Gandharvas, but the celestials closed in on them. They smashed
Duryodhana’s chariot and he fell stunned to the ground. Citrasena
immediately jumped down and seized the prince with such force that it seemed
as if he would kill him. The other Gandharvas took Duryodhana’s brothers
prisoner, and others ran into their camp and seized their wives. Hundreds of
Kurus were taken prisoner by the Gandharvas, who bound them with chains
and herded them together.
Some of the Kuru soldiers had escaped. They ran around to the other side of
the lake and approached Yudhiñöhira. Falling before him they implored him to
help. “The Gandharvas have captured Dhåtaräñöra’s mighty-armed son. His
302

brothers and women are also being held prisoner. O son of Kunté, please save
them.”
Bhéma looked at his cousin Duryodhana’s crying followers and laughed. “What
we would have had to achieve with great effort on the battlefield the
Gandharvas have easily done for us. It is fortunate for us that there are still
those in the world who would do us good. Plainly Duryodhana came here with
evil intentions, but he has been overtaken by unforseen consequences. This is
surely what he deserves for his sinful motivations. No doubt the evil-minded
one wanted to gloat over us in our misery. Well, he deserves to suffer.”
Yudhiñöhira stopped Bhéma’s sarcastic words. “This is not the time for cruelty.
O child, why do you speak so harshly to these Kurus who are frightened and
have come seeking our protection? Can we let our family disputes come in the
way of honor? Among ourselves we are five and they are a hundred, but when
an enemy of the Kurus has come, we are a hundred and five brothers. The
wretched-minded Gandharva knows we are living here, but disregarding us, he
has insulted the ladies of our family.”
Yudhiñöhira looked around at his other brothers. “O foremost of men, arm
yourselves for battle. Go at once and rescue Duryodhana and his brothers and
wives.”
The Kuru soldiers had arrived in great war chariots. Yudhiñöhira pointed to the
chariots and said, “Mount these golden chariots and rush upon the
Gandharvas. Even an ordinary kñatriya would try his best to protect one who
seeks protection. What then shall I say to you, O Våkodara? Indeed, what could
give us more happiness? The bestowal of a boon, the birth of a son and
sovereignty are sources of joy, but the happiness of saving an enemy in distress
is equal to all three. Dear Bhéma, your sworn enemy Duryodhana now depends
upon you for his life. Could anything give you more pleasure than to protect
him?”
Yudhiñöhira said that he would have gone himself, but he was bound by the
vow of the sacrifice he was performing. Therefore, he was asking his brothers
to go in his place and then to liberate the prisoners. Hearing Yudhiñöhira’s
command, Arjuna vowed, “If the Gandharvas do not release the Kauravas,
then the earth shall drink their blood.”
When they heard Arjuna’s vow, the Kuru soldiers were encouraged. They
handed over their chariots; and the four brothers, after donning armor,
mounted them. Headed by Bhéma they raced to the other side of the lake,
303

appearing like four blazing fires. When the other Kurus saw them arrive ready
for battle, they shouted in joy. Hearing their shouts, the Gandharvas, who were
preparing to depart with their prisoners, turned and saw the Päëòavas
approaching.
The Gandharva warriors immediately took up their battle formation. A
skirmish ensued as they released arrows at the Päëòavas and the Päëòavas
countered the attack. Arjuna, hoping that they may be able to convince the
Gandharvas without bloodshed, raised his bow and called out, “O Gandharvas,
let go of my brother, the king Duryodhana.”
The Gandharvas laughed. “We obey only one person’s order. Under his rule we
pass our days free from misery. O descendent of Bharata, we are always
obedient to his command alone.”
Angered by their disregard, Arjuna answered, “Contact with others’ wives and
fighting with ordinary men are not proper behaviors for celestials. At
Dharmaräja’s command you should release the Kauravas and their women.
Otherwise, I will have to rescue them by force.”
Arjuna could see that the Gandharvas were ignoring him. He immediately
fired fierce arrows at them. The Gandharvas turned and swiftly responded
with their own blazing shafts. They quickly surrounded the Päëòavas, sending
arrows, axes, maces and swords at them by the thousands. The brothers, facing
the four directions, countered the weapons while simultaneously attacking the
Gandharvas. An extraordinary battle took place, with thousands of
Gandharvas fighting against the four humans. The Gandharvas tried to
destroy the Päëòavas’ chariots as they had destroyed the chariots of Karëa and
Duryodhana, but they were checked by the Päëòavas arrows and could not get
close enough to do any harm.
Arjuna was enraged. He began to invoke celestial weapons. He threw the
Ägneyastra which slew thousands of Gandharvas. Bhéma’s forceful arrows
killed innumerable other Gandharvas, while the sons of Mädré, fighting with
prowess, attacked and killed hundreds of others.
The Gandharvas rose up to the sky, taking with them their prisoners, but
Arjuna released arrows by the tens of thousands and created a net over the
Gandharvas. They then angrily attacked Arjuna by throwing down maces,
darts and swords. Checking their weapons, Arjuna fired crescent-headed shafts
which tore off the Gandharvas’ heads and limbs. They tried overcoming him
with a fearful shower of celestial weapons, but Arjuna held off all those missiles
304

with his arrows. By invoking various mystical weapons, Arjuna created havoc
among his foes and they screamed in terror.
Citrasena could see that his followers were being routed by the Päëòavas. He
rushed at Arjuna with his mace held aloft. With swift arrows Arjuna cut his
iron mace into seven pieces. The Gandharva king resorted to illusion and
appeared to attack the Päëòavas from all sides. Arjuna invoked the
Shabdavedi weapon, which destroys illusion. Citrasena disappeared from sight,
continuously raining down weapons of every description, but Arjuna attacked
him with arrows capable of striking an unseen enemy.
Citrasena, who had fought the Päëòavas only to protect his honor, then
appeared in front of Arjuna and said, “Behold, it is only your friend fighting
with you.”
Seeing Citrasena approaching in peace, Arjuna withdrew his weapons and his
brothers did the same. The Gandharva king and Arjuna inquired after each
other’s welfare, and Arjuna said, “O hero, what purpose do you serve by
punishing the Kurus? Why do you persecute Duryodhana and his followers?”
Citrasena smiled. “O Dhanaïjaya, I knew long ago the real purpose for
Duryodhana’s coming here. He wanted to mock you in your adversity and
flaunt his own wealth. Understanding this, Indra ordered me to capture the
wretch and his followers and to bring them before him in chains. Allow us to
carry them away.”
Arjuna shook his head. “If you want to please me, then let them go.
Dharmaräja has commanded it. They are our kinsfolk.”
“The sinful Duryodhana is full of vanity. He does not deserve to be freed. He
has deceived and wronged your brother and grievously offended your wife. O
Arjuna, he came here to add insult to injury. Yudhiñöhira did not know his
reason for coming. Therefore, let us explain it to him and see what he decides
after that.”
Arjuna agreed and they all went to Yudhiñöhira to inform him of what had
transpired. Yudhiñöhira said, “Dear sir, it is fortunate for us that although you
possess great prowess you did not slay Dhåtaräñöra’s wicked sons. Our family
honor has thus been saved and it will be further saved if you release them. I am
pleased to see you. Please tell me if there is anything I can do for you and then
return in peace to your own abode.”
Citrasena was delighted at Yudhiñöhira’s words. “I am satisfied simply to see
you, great one. We shall free the Kurus.”
305

The Gandharva brought his captives into the Päëòavas’ presence. Indra then
appeared and sprinkled celestial nectar on the Gandharvas who had been slain.
They all regained their lives. Headed by Citrasena, they rose up to the skies
and vanished.
In an affectionate voice, the ever-compassionate Yudhiñöhira said to
Duryodhana, “O child, never again commit such a rash act. A rash man never
becomes happy. O Kuru prince, be blessed with all your brothers. Go home
now and do not be despondent.”
But Duryodhana was devastated. His heart was splitting in two. He had
achieved the opposite of what he had intended. Instead of humiliating his
enemies, he had himself been shamed. As he made his way back to the city, he
moved as if he were unconscious and without will. He said nothing to anyone.
Leaving the Päëòavas to worship the sacred fire and the Brahmins, he hung his
head.
The Kaurava prince could not stop thinking of his defeat. After he had gone
about ten miles back through the forest, evening fell and he ordered his party
to stop for the night. They set up camp on a grassy bank of a nearby river.
Duryodhana entered his tent. Sitting on a bedstead as bright as fire, he looked
like an eclipsed moon. Unable to sleep, he remained lost in painful thoughts.
Just before sunrise, Karëa came to see him. Having fled far from the battlefield
when defeated by the Gandharvas, he had not witnessed the Kauravas’
capture. When he returned no one had been able to tell him how his friend
had been humiliated. He had therefore assumed that the prince had
overpowered the Gandharvas by his own might.
Praising Duryodhana’s strength and prowess, Karëa said, “O descendent of
Kuru, it is indeed fortunate that you are alive and we have met again. By good
luck you have defeated the Gandharvas, who possess great might as well as the
powers of illusion. I was forced to flee for my life, my body mangled by arrows.
It is a great wonder that I see you and your brothers and wives here safe after
that superhuman battle. What man could have done what you did today?”
Karëa’s words only increased Duryodhana’s grief. He replied in a choked voice,
“O Radheya, you do not know what happened, so I am not angry with you.
Although you think I overcame the Gandharvas, in fact my brothers and I
were all defeated. After a furious battle we were taken prisoner and carried
through the skies.”
Karëa was amazed. Duryodhana related to him how the four Päëòavas had
306

come to rescue them on Yudhiñöhira’s order, and how the Gandharva king had
revealed to Yudhiñöhira the Kurus’ real purpose in coming to Dwaitavana.
“When I heard Citrasena speaking in the Päëòavas’ presence, I felt like
entering the earth. Alas what greater sorrow could be mine than to be bound
by chains and offered as tribute to Yudhiñöhira in the sight of all our women? I
have always persecuted those brothers. They are my enemies and will always be
so. Yet it was they who released me from captivity. I am indebted to them for
my life. I would have preferred to die in the battle than to suffer such a fate.”
Duryodhana began to cry and Karëa tried to console him. After some time the
prince managed to regain his composure. His voice was grave. “Listen, friend. I
will now remain here and fast until death. Let all my brothers and other
relatives return to the city. I have been insulted by my enemy. I can never
return to Hastinäpura. I, who was respected and feared by my enemies and who
enhanced the respect of my friends, have now become a source of joy to my
enemies and of grief to my friends. If I return to the city, what could I say to
my father? What could I say to Bhéñma, Droëa, Kåpa, Açvatthämä, Vidura, and
the other Kuru chiefs?”
In his suffering Duryodhana realized his foolishness. What madness had driven
him to come out to this forest? He recalled the many times Vidura had tried to
counsel him. He had never paid even the slightest regard. Surely he was now
reaping the results of his own stupidity. It was unbearable. Death was the only
recourse.
Looking at Karëa, his eyes filled with tears, he said, “Men like me, puffed up
with vanity and insolence, are never blessed for any length of time even if they
obtain prosperity and knowledge. Alas I have been wicked. Now I suffer. Leave
me here to die. I can no longer continue to live. What man could be rescued by
his enemies and then drag on in his miserable existence? Proud as I am, the
enemy has laughed at me, finding me deprived of my prowess.”
Duryodhana asked Karëa to bring Dushashana to him. When the prince
arrived, Duryodhana said, “O descendent of Bharata, hear my words. I order
you to be installed in my place as the earth’s ruler. Become the refuge of your
friends and relatives and the terror of your enemies. Always bestow charity
upon the Brahmins and cherish your gurus. As Viñëu protects the celestials, so
you should protect your dependents.”
Duryodhana clasped his brother’s shoulders. “Go, dear brother, and rule this
wide earth. I shall end my life here.”
307

Dushashana was grief-stricken. He lowered his face and said, “O brother, please
give up your determination to die. It can never be. Do not accept such a path.
How can I become king in your place? The earth may split, the heavens may
fall, and the sun may lose its heat, but I can never rule the earth without you.”
Crying out, “Relent, relent,” again and again, Dushashana fell at his brother’s
feet. “You alone shall be the king for one hundred years and I shall be your
servant.”
Then Karëa said, “O heroes, what will all this achieve? Weeping does not drive
away grief. Summon your patience. Do not grieve and thus give more joy to
your enemies.”
Resting his hand on Duryodhana’s shoulder, Karëa continued, “The Päëòavas
only did their duty when they rescued you, for it is always the duty of subjects
to do what is good for their king. Under your protection, the Päëòavas happily
reside in your dominion. They are dependent upon you, O King. It is not
otherwise. Do not indulge in sorrow like an ordinary man. O Duryodhana, we
are all suffering to hear you speak of dying. Be blessed. Rise up and return to
your city! Console your relatives.”
Karëa tried his best to convince his friend to change his mind. He pointed out
that although he had subjugated and even enslaved the Päëòavas, they had not
resolved to die. It was not wonderful that they had rescued him. There were
many instances where a mighty king had somehow been overpowered by his
enemies and been rescued by his troops. The fortunes of war were
unpredictable. Sometimes one gained victory and at other times he was
defeated. A warrior had to learn how to tolerate life’s reverses if he wanted to
ultimately gain success.
Karëa, who was covered in wounds from the battle, laughed as he continued.
“Therefore, O King, rise up. Do not become the butt of jokes for other kings by
dying like this. Go forth and earn everlasting fame. Put this setback behind
you. Victory will surely attend you.”
Although he was repeatedly beseeched by both Dushashana and Karëa,
Duryodhana did not rise up. He had decided to die.
Çakuni had entered the tent and heard Karëa and Dushashana’s attempts to
encourage Duryodhana. Seeing Duryodhana’s resolution, and knowing that he
was incapable of tolerating any insult, he said, “O descendent of Kuru, you
have heard Karëa’s speech. It is full of wisdom. Why then are you foolishly
throwing away the wealth which I won for you? This is childish and
308

unnecessary. It seems you have never waited upon your elders and learned selfcontrol. As an unfired earthen pot leaks when it is filled with water, so one
without self-control is lost when grief or joy arises. This is no occasion for grief.
The Päëòavas have helped you. Now you should not indulge in grief––reward
them instead.”
Çakuni had always recognized that the Päëòavas were superior in strength.
Thus he had advised Duryodhana to defeat them at dice rather than to face
them in battle. He also recognized that the five heroes were devoted to virtue
and truth. They posed no threat to the Kauravas at all. Whatever enmity and
antagonism there was between the two families came only from the Kauravas.
But it seemed as if there was no way to overcome the Päëòavas. Perhaps it
would be better to accept that fact with good grace rather than to be
annihilated in some final confrontation.
Thinking in this way, Çakuni continued. “Your behavior makes no sense, O
King. You owe it to the Päëòavas to repay them for their favor. Do not
undermine what they have done for you by lamenting. Rather, go to them with
a cheerful heart and return their kingdom. You will thereby win both virtue
and renown. Establish brotherly relations with the Päëòavas and then you will
be happy.”
Çakuni thought that now would be an opportunity for Duryodhana to display
his nobility. By going to the Päëòavas and offering them their kingdom in
return for being saved, he would reverse the situation. Instead of appearing
foolish, he would appear generous and upright. The Päëòavas would also
appear the recipients of his mercy.
Duryodhana bent down and lifted the weeping Dushashana. After hearing
Karëa and Çakuni speak, he was overwhelmed by shame. Despair overtook him
completely. “I have nothing more to do with virtue, friendship, wealth,
renown, sovereignty or enjoyment. Do not oppose me. Leave me––all of you. I
am resolved to abandon my life! Go back to the city and, on my behalf, worship
my gurus with respect.”
Karëa said, “O king of kings, how can we leave you here? Your way is our way.
We are all united in happiness and distress. Give up this resolve or we too shall
die.”
Still, Duryodhana did not waver in his determination. He spread kusha grass
on the ground, took off his royal garments and put on rags, purified himself by
touching water, and sat down in a yogic posture. With a desire to attain
309

heaven, he began to observe the Praya vow of fasting until death. He stopped
speaking, and ceasing all other external activities, half-closed his eyes. Soon he
was meditating.
In the nether regions, the Dänavas and Daityas became aware of Duryodhana’s
resolve. The celestial beings, who had been defeated in a war with the gods,
were depending upon Duryodhana to oppose the gods’ purpose on earth. Many
of the demons had even incarnated upon earth as kings and warriors with the
hope of overthrowing the pious kings who made sacrifices to the gods. Fearing
that their party would not succeed without Duryodhana, the celestial demons
began a fire sacrifice. They employed Brahmins to chant mantras which had
the power to summon to their presence a man from another planet.
As the Brahmins offered ghee into the fire while reciting hymns from the
Atharva Veda and the Upanishads, a strange, effulgent goddess rose from the
fire and asked, “What shall I do?”
Pleased, the demons commanded her, “Bring Duryodhana, the son of
Dhåtaräñöra, here. He is engaged in a vow of fasting.”
“So be it,” she said, and vanished. She went immediately to the place where
Duryodhana sat. Unseen, she took him in his subtle body and brought him
before the demons in the nether region.
As if in a dream, Duryodhana found himself standing in an assembly of
Dänavas. Their leader, his eyes wide with delight, said, “O king of kings, O
perpetuator of the Bharata race, you are always surrounded by heroes and
illustrious men. Why then have you undertaken such a rash vow? Suicide
always leads to hell. One who kills himself is reviled on earth and he attains no
auspicious destination. Intelligent men like you never engage in acts that go
against their best interest. O King, give up your resolve to die! Such a resolve is
destructive to morality, profit, happiness, fame, prowess and energy. If you
commit suicide, you will enhance your enemy’s joy. Listen now as we tell you
the truth of your position, your celestial origins, and your power. Then you
may decide what you wish to do.”
The Dänava then described how Duryodhana had been born as a result of the
demons’ austerities. They had obtained him as a boon from Çiva. His body was
made of thunder and was virtually invincible. He was being supported by the
kings who were themselves powerful Dänavas incarnated on earth. United in
battle, he would doubtlessly destroy his enemies. Other great demons would, at
the time of the battle, possess the hearts of Bhéñma, Droëa, Kåpa, and others.
310

Thus the Kuru chiefs would cast aside restraint and compassion and kill
anyone who opposed them, even their brothers, sons, friends, fathers,
disciples––even children and old men. Blinded by ignorance and wrath, they
would show no mercy and would slay hundreds of thousands on the battlefield.
As Duryodhana listened in amazement, the Dänava continued, “O hero, you
should not fear Arjuna. We have already decided how he will die. The soul of
the powerful Naraka, who Viñëu himself slew, has taken birth as Karëa.
Remembering his former enmity, he will kill both Kåñëa and Arjuna. Knowing
this, the wielder of thunder, Indra, will try to divest Karëa of his natural armor
and earrings––both of which render him invincible. We have therefore also
arranged that hundreds of thousands of mighty Daitya warriors, now present
on earth in the form of the Samsaptakas, will fight Arjuna. If Karëa does not
slay Arjuna, these warriors will. Therefore, do not grieve. You will rule the
earth without a rival. Go back and give up your vow. You are our refuge and we
are there to assist you in every way.”
The Dänavas and Daityas came forward and embraced Duryodhana. They all
spoke encouragingly and cheered his mind. Finally, they said, “Go and attain
victory!” Then they commanded the goddess to return him to his body.
After being returned to his seat on the kusha grass, Duryodhana opened his
eyes. He recalled his meeting with the Daityas as if it had been a dream. The
prince was not certain if it had actually occurred, but it had changed his mind.
Whether or not he had met the celestial beings was unimportant. He took
their predictions seriously. Surely their words would come to pass and he would
defeat the Päëòavas. Karëa and the Samsaptakas would kill Arjuna, and
thousands of other kñatriyas would assist him in the war to come.
While Duryodhana sat ruminating on the Dänavas’ words, Karëa came before
him. Duryodhana immediately decided not to tell anyone what had happened.
Seeing that he had stopped his meditation, Karëa said, “It is good to see that
you are restored to your senses, O King. A dead man can never conquer his
enemies. This is not the time to grieve. Why do you wish to die so
ignominiously? O hero, rise up and kill your foes. Go out and attain victory and
immortal fame. I swear that when the Päëòavas emerge from exile, I will
conquer them and bring them under your subjugation.”
To the delight of his brothers and Karëa, Duryodhana replied, “So be it.” He
stood up, still reflecting on the Dänavas’ speech. He then took his place at the
head of his army and started back for Hastinäpura, his mind set upon amassing
311

his army for war.

Chapter 32
Sage Durväsä
When Bhéñma heard of the events at Dwaitavana he decided to speak to
Duryodhana. Finding the prince seated with Çakuni in his majestic palace,
Bhéñma approached him and said, “O child, I have repeatedly requested you not
to maintain enmity with the Päëòavas. You were advised not to go to the
forest, but still you went. Now you have clearly seen the Päëòavas’ prowess,
and also that of Karëa. In your presence he fled the battlefield. It was then left
to the Päëòavas to rescue you. O King, in either martial skills, heroism or
morality, Karëa is not even a fourth of any one of Päëòu’s sons. Make peace
with the brothers––for your good and for the good of our race.”
Bhéñma knew that most of Duryodhana’s hopes of defeating the Päëòavas
rested on Karëa. Ever since Karëa had appeared at the martial arts
demonstration and challenged Arjuna, Duryodhana had seen him as the only
way to conquer Arjuna. Now it should be obvious that Karëa was no match for
Arjuna.
Bhéñma looked hopefully at the prince, but Duryodhana, remembering the
Dänavas’ words, laughed. What did this old man know? The Päëòavas were in
for a surprise. Bhéñma himself would be a part of that surprise when the demons
took hold of him.
Duryodhana did not bother to reply. He stood up suddenly and walked out of
the room. Bhéñma could only shake his head sadly. He was not surprised to see
Duryodhana’s arrogance. It now seemed that the Kurus’ destruction was
imminent. Bhéñma returned slowly and sadly to his own chambers.
After he left Bhéñma, Duryodhana was joined by Karëa, Çakuni and
Dushashana. The prince looked around at his counselors and asked, “What
remains to be done? How can I secure my good fortune? Let us fix on some
plan.”
Duryodhana told them what Bhéñma had said and Karëa became
uncomfortable. The Kuru grandfather was always berating him. He did not
312

seem to like him. Karëa felt he was as much a well-wisher of the Kurus as was
Bhéñma himself. Maybe it was time to prove Bhéñma’s assessment of him wrong.
Wringing his hands he said, “O mighty king, Bhéñma blames us and praises the
Päëòavas. It is clear that he favors them over you. Because he bears you ill will,
he abuses me too. I cannot bear to hear his words any longer. O King, give me
an army and I shall single-handedly conquer the world for the Kauravas, just as
the Päëòavas did before the Räjasüya sacrifice. Let the wicked-minded wretch
of the Kurus, the senile Bhéñma, see it and regret how he has treated me.
Simply command me and I shall leave at once.”
Duryodhana slapped his friend on the back in delight. “I am blessed because
you have favored me, O hero. What more could I want than to see your mighty
self-interest in my welfare? Surely my life has borne fruit today. Go out, dear
friend, and vanquish my foes. May good come to you! Just ask and I shall do
whatever I can to help.”
Karëa at once began to make arrangements for his expedition. Duryodhana
amassed a vast army with a year’s supplies. After consulting with Brahmins and
gaining Dhåtaräñöra’s permission, he selected a favorable day to depart. Bhéñma
and Vidura, however, did not approve of Karëa’s plan, but they chose to
remain silent. Perhaps the fool would be defeated somewhere and his pride
would be curbed. At least while he was gone, he would not be influencing
Duryodhana toward yet another rash scheme.
Blessed by the court Brahmins, who uttered prayers for his victory, Karëa went
out of the city followed by thousands of troops. He first attacked King
Drupada’s beautiful city. Drupada did not pay allegiance to the Kauravas. Like
many of the kings who had accepted Yudhiñöhira’s rule, Drupada was not
inclined toward Dhåtaräñöra. In the end, however, Drupada was overpowered
by the superior force brought from Hastinäpura and obliged to offer
Dhåtaräñöra tribute.
Karëa then moved north, subjugating all the kings in that region. He
vanquished Bhagadatta as well as all the Himälayan mountain kings. Traveling
east, he overcame many tribes. None were able to defeat him in battle as he
rained down fierce arrows. Sürya’s son was a peerless fighter whom few on
earth could face, especially when he was joined by the Kuru army. He soon
defeated all the kings in the south and made his way west, conquering and
subjugating all in his path.
Well within a year Karëa had accumulated a huge amount of wealth from his
313

conquests. He carried it back to Hastinäpura in a long line of chariots and
oxen. Duryodhana and his father and brothers greeted him as he entered the
city. They congratulated Karëa and embraced him. Duryodhana said, “What I
have not received even from Bhéñma, Droëa, Kåpa, or any other, I have
received from Karëa. O mighty-armed hero, in you I have my protector. All
the Päëòavas and other kings are nothing compared to you.
Seeing Karëa successful, some of the citizens were pleased while others,
favorable to the Päëòavas, lamented or remained silent. Dhåtaräñöra was
overjoyed and embraced Karëa with affection, considering him his own son.
From that day on, Duryodhana, seeing Karëa’s prowess, considered the
Päëòavas defeated. The prince was encouraged and began to think about
performing the Räjasüya sacrifice. Now that the world had been brought under
his control, he wanted to equal the Päëòavas in every way. If he could preside
over the Räjasüya, then all his desires would be fulfilled.
But when the prince approached his chief priest and requested him to perform
the sacrifice, he was told it was not possible. “As long as Yudhiñöhira lives,” the
priest said, “no man on earth can perform the Räjasüya. It is only possible for
one monarch to perform that sacrifice at any one time. Nor can a man perform
the sacrifice in his father’s presence.”
Then the priest explained that there was another sacrifice, resembling the
Räjasüya, which Duryodhana could perform. It was called the Vaiñëava
sacrifice. No person other than the immortal Viñëu had ever performed it, and
it was equal to the Räjasüya in every way. “O King, using the gold offered as
tribute by the kings of the world, make a golden plow. With this plow you
should prepare the ground, and upon that spot I shall begin the sacrifice.”
Duryodhana immediately discussed the sacrifice with his father and counselors,
who all expressed approval. He then appointed people to the various posts
required for the sacrifice and instructed artisans to make a golden plow. All the
Kuru elders were delighted to see Duryodhana performing a sacrifice, an act
which they hoped would increase his piety and the glory of the Kuru race.
Swift messengers were dispatched to invite the kings of the world.
Dushashana asked messengers to go to the Dwaitavana and invite the
Päëòavas so they could see the Kurus’ power. When Yudhiñöhira heard the
invitation he replied, “It is indeed fortunate that Duryodhana is perfuming
such a great sacrifice. I should very much like to attend, but it will not be
possible. I cannot leave the forest until my vow is completed. Duryodhana will
314

see me in Hastinäpura only when the thirteen years of exile are over.”
Bhéma, however, glared at the messenger. “King Yudhiñöhira will go when we
are ready to put Duryodhana into the fire kindled by weapons. Repeat this
message to Duryodhana: ‘When thirteen years are complete, Dharmaräja, the
lord of men, in the sacrifice of battle, will pour onto the sons of Dhåtaräñöra
the ghee of his anger.’ That is when we shall come.” The other brothers said
nothing.
When Duryodhana heard the messages, he simply smiled.
Thousands of Brahmins and kñatriyas arrived in Hastinäpura. They were
warmly greeted and offered food and drink and appropriate accommodation.
Vidura took charge of receiving the guests, ensuring that they were satisfied in
every way. Once they had been properly refreshed, he showed them to the
sacrificial compound outside the city. The visiting kings brought tribute and
Duryodhana and his brothers offered the Brahmins charity.
At the end of the sacrifice, Duryodhana re-entered his city surrounded by his
brothers and eulogized by bards and singers. His friends and relatives glorified
him, saying that this sacrifice had surpassed all those performed by his
ancestors, all of whom had gone to heaven.
However, some fearless citizens said that the sacrifice did not compare with
Yudhiñöhira’s Räjasüya. Although Duryodhana heard what was being said, he
did not respond. He knew it was true. The Räjasüya had been the most opulent
and splendid ceremony he had ever witnessed. His had come nowhere near its
magnificence.
Karëa saw his friend becoming pensive. Placing his arm around the prince he
said, “O foremost of the Bharatas, by good fortune your sacrifice has been
successful. This is only the beginning. When the Päëòavas are slain in battle,
you will then complete the Räjasüya. I look forward to again glorifying you at
that time.”
Duryodhana embraced Karëa and thought of the Räjasüya. “O Kurus,” he said,
“when shall I celebrate that best of sacrifices, the Räjasüya, after killing the
wicked-minded Päëòavas?”
Karëa stopped walking and spoke gravely. “Hear my words, O King. As long as
I have not killed Arjuna, I will not taste meat or accept luxuries. I will give to
anyone anything they ask of me. When asked for something in charity, I will
never say, ‘I cannot give it.’”
Dhåtaräñöra’s sons cheered to hear Karëa’s vow. They considered the Päëòavas
315

already slain. As the handsome Karëa strode powerfully into his palace, even
as Kuvera enters his abode, the Kauravas all praised him.
***
The Päëòavas also heard about Karëa’s vow. Bhéma and Arjuna sneered, but
Yudhiñöhira was alarmed. Thinking of Karëa’s impenetrable natural armor, he
knew Karëa could not be slain. Yudhiñöhira brooded on the situation. He had
brought on all their hardships and dangers. Out of their devotion for him his
brothers now accepted miseries they did not deserve. Soon they would face
great danger in the battle with the Kuru heroes, who would be assisted by
Karëa and the other powerful warriors.
Yudhiñöhira fell into anxiety day and night. Remembering the gambling match
and the harsh words of Karëa and Duryodhana, he felt as if his heart had been
pierced by a lance. His brothers and Draupadé, seeing his condition, also felt
pained. Enraged at the Kauravas, they longed for the time when they could at
last confront them in battle. Each day the brothers practiced rigorous physical
exercises, keeping themselves fit for fighting and giving vent to their wrath.
In the final months of their stay in the forest, Vyäsadeva again came to see
them. Yudhiñöhira worshipped him with devotion and then sat before him to
hear his words.
Seeing the Päëòavas lean and anxious, the sage was moved to compassion. In a
voice choked with tears he said, “O foremost of men, no man can ever
experience unmixed happiness. Everyone experiences happiness and distress in
due course. A wise man therefore becomes neither joyful or grief-stricken. He
does not indulge in happiness or give way to sorrow when each arrive. Rather,
he practices asceticism to attain the eternal happiness born of spiritual
realization. From asceticism comes the greatest happiness, not from improving
our material circumstances. Foolish persons, seeking material enjoyments by
any means, obtain births as beasts in their next lives. They never enjoy
happiness. O King, your practice of asceticism, although difficult, will lead to
your ultimate welfare.”
After describing the many qualities a man would develop from asceticism––
truthfulness, freedom from anger, self-control, non-violence––Vyäsadeva went
on to speak of charity, which Yudhiñöhira always practiced when he had
wealth.
When Vyäsadeva fell silent, Yudhiñöhira asked, “O great Åñi, which is better:
316

asceticism or charity? Which produces a better result and which is more
difficult to practice?”
Vyäsadeva replied, “O child, there is nothing more difficult to practice than
charity. Men thirst for wealth and obtain it only after great effort. Risking
their lives, they enter the depths of the sea and the forest in their search of
wealth. There is nothing they will not do to become rich. Therefore, it is
extremely difficult to part with hard-earned wealth.
“But, O hero, properly earned wealth should be given away with an open heart
to worthy persons. Ill-gotten wealth, however, even if given away, will not free
its owner from degradation in the next life.”
Yudhiñöhira asked Vyäsadeva to speak more about the benefits of giving
charity and the sage told him an old history. There had been a poor man
named Mudgala who had attained the supreme spiritual abode simply by his
practice of giving charity to Brahmins. The Päëòavas were fascinated. Finally
the sage said, “O son of Kunté, do not grieve. Happiness and distress revolve
around a man one after the other as if on a wheel. You will surely recover your
father’s kingdom at the end of your exile. By your asceticism and charity you
will attain all auspiciousness. Be at peace. I am going.”
The Päëòavas offered their obeisances as the åñi rose to leave and felt
comforted by his words.
***
Duryodhana thought continuously of ways by which he might harm the
Päëòavas. He consulted with his brothers and Karëa, trying to devise a means
to overcome the brothers before they returned from the forest. While he was
considering different plans, the ascetic Durväsä happened to visit the city. He
had with him ten thousand disciples and he came to the royal palace asking for
food for all of them. The sage was famous for his anger; if he were not served
properly, he would quickly curse the offender. He would also test his hosts to
the limits of their patience, wanting to see if they adhered to their religious
obligations under all circumstances. Fearing that his curse would be brought
upon them by some incompetent servant, Duryodhana served Durväsä
personally. With all the humility and gentleness he could muster, he carefully
ministered to the sage’s every request, acting just like a menial servant.
Durväsä was unpredictable. Sometimes he would demand that a meal be
prepared immediately, but when it was fetched he would go away to bathe. He
317

would then return after a long time and say, “I will not eat now. I am no longer
hungry.” He would rise at midnight and call for food and other attentions,
often criticizing the food and service he received. Duryodhana served him
without complaint and remained attentive to the åñi’s every wish. Durväsä was
pleased with the prince. Just before leaving he said, “You have served me well. I
will grant you a boon. Ask from me whatever you desire. If it is not opposed to
religion, I will satisfy you at once.”
Duryodhana felt as if he had received new life. He had already conferred with
his counselors as to what boon he should request if Durväsä should ask him.
Thus he replied, “O Brahmin, just as you have been my guest, so you become
the guest of Yudhiñöhira in the forest. He is accomplished and well-behaved
and he is a great king, the best and eldest of our family. He therefore deserves
to receive your blessings. You should go to him when his entire family has
finished eating and are preparing to rest. You will then be well-received by
those pious men.”
Durväsä replied, “I will do as you ask.” He then left with his disciples, heading
for the Kämyaka.
Duryodhana punched the air in joy. The Päëòavas would never be able to
receive Durväsä and his many disciples properly after Draupadé had eaten.
They would have no way to feed ten thousand Brahmins without the magic
plate they had received from Sürya. Surely they would be cursed by Durväsä,
and a åñi’s curse could never fail.
Duryodhana ran to his friends. “Our plan has succeeded!” he cried. “The
Päëòavas are doomed.” He embraced Karëa, who said, “By good fortune you
have fared well and fulfilled your desire. By good fortune your enemies are cast
into an ocean of misery, difficult to cross. Through their own fault they now
face great danger.” Laughing and clasping each others’ hands, Duryodhana and
his counselors rejoiced.
***
Some days later, Durväsä arrived at the Päëòava camp just after Draupadé had
eaten. Leaving his disciples on the outskirts of the camp, he walked in alone
and appeared before the brothers. They all immediately stood with joined
palms. Seeing the famous åñi standing before them, they fell to the ground in
respectful obeisance. Yudhiñöhira offered Durväsä an excellent seat and
worshipped him with all attention. Durväsä then said, “I am here with my ten
318

thousand disciples and we need to eat. We have been walking all day and are
hungry. O King, please arrange for our food. We shall first take our bath and
then return for the meal.”
Yudhiñöhira said, “So be it,” and Durväsä left for the river with his disciples.
After he had gone, Yudhiñöhira expressed his alarm. How could he possibly
feed that many people? Draupadé had already eaten and the mystical plate
would not yield more until morning. Yudhiñöhira asked his wife if she could do
anything. Draupadé, who always thought of her husbands’ welfare, began to
contemplate the problem. Her only hope was prayer. The princess thought of
Kåñëa and prayed, “O Kåñëa, Lord of the universe, O destroyer of Your
devotees’ difficulties, O unlimited and all-powerful one, please hear my prayer.
You are the refuge of the helpless, the giver of endless boons to all beings, the
unknowable and all-knowing Supreme Person. Kindly protect me. I seek Your
shelter. O Lord, as You formerly saved me from Dushashana in the assembly, so
please save me now from this difficulty.”
Kåñëa was in His palace at that time, lying on His bed with Rukméëé. That
mysterious person, whose movements are unknown to all, heard Draupadé’s
prayers. He immediately rose from His bed and, leaving His wife, ran from the
palace. Within a few moments He was standing before Draupadé, who fell at
His feet with tears in her eyes. “O Kåñëa, we face a great danger from Durväsä’s
curse. What can be done?”
Kåñëa smiled. “I will do whatever can be done, but I too am hungry. Please feed
Me first and after that I shall do whatever is required.”
Ashamed, Draupadé replied, “My lord, the vessel given by the sun remains full
until I have eaten. I recently took my meal and now it will not give more food.”
“This is no time for joking,” said Kåñëa. “Quickly fetch the vessel and show
Me.”
Draupadé brought the dish before Kåñëa and He examined it closely. In one
corner He found a particle of rice and vegetable stuck together, and He ate it
at once, saying, “May Lord Hari, the soul of the universe, be satisfied with this
food and may the Lord of all sacrifices be pleased.”
Kåñëa then turned to Sahadeva and said, “Go quickly and bring the ascetics
here and feed them.”
The Päëòavas looked around fearfully. There was no sign of food. But they had
faith that Kåñëa would not let them down. Sahadeva left for the river to find
Durväsä and his disciples.
319

At the river the innocent Durväsä was expecting Yudhiñöhira to have prepared
a meal for him and all his followers, but suddenly he felt as if he had just
consumed a large meal. He looked at his disciples. They too appeared full and
were rubbing their stomachs and belching. Looking at each other, the ascetics
realized that none of them felt like eating at all!
Durväsä said to his disciples, “We have uselessly made Yudhiñöhira prepare a
meal for ten thousand men and done him a great wrong. Will not the Päëòavas
destroy us by looking upon us with angry eyes? O Brahmins, I know
Yudhiñöhira to be possessed of great powers. He is devoted to the feet of Lord
Hari and I fear such men. They can consume us with their anger as fire can
consume a bale of cotton. Let us therefore depart quickly from this place before
they see us again.”
Although he was a powerful mystic yogé, Durväsä knew that his power was
nothing compared to that of those devoted to the Supreme Lord. He recalled a
previous incident when he had upset another devotee of the Lord. At that time
he had been placed in great difficulty and had almost lost his life.
Without another word Durväsä came out of the river and walked swiftly away
from the Päëòavas’ camp. His disciples fled away in all directions, keeping well
clear of the Päëòavas.
When Sahadeva arrived at the river he found no one there. A few water pots
and pieces of cloth were lying around, but there was no sign of the ascetics. He
searched around and came across other Brahmins who informed him that
Durväsä and his followers had left suddenly. Sahadeva went back to his
brothers and gave them his report. Yudhiñöhira was worried. “The ascetics will
come back in the dead of night and demand their meal,” he said fearfully.
“How can we escape from this great danger created by destiny?”
Kåñëa smiled. “O Yudhiñöhira, you need not fear. Durväsä and his disciples
have fled, afraid of your ascetic power. Those who are always virtuous need
never fear danger. With your permission I shall now return to My home.”
Yudhiñöhira replied, “O Kåñëa, as persons drowning in a vast ocean are saved
by a boat, so we have been saved by You. Be pleased to go now as You desire.”
Kåñëa left and the Päëòavas surrounded their chaste wife, thanking her for her
presence of mind in praying to Kåñëa. They discussed the incident among
themselves. The incident seemed to have been arranged by the Kauravas.
Fortunately, Kåñëa was always there to save them no matter what danger they
faced. Thinking of their friend from Dwärakä, the brothers entered their
320

thatched cottages and rested for the night.

Chapter 33
Jayadratha Kidnaps Draupadé
About a month after the incident with Durväsä, the Päëòavas were out
hunting together. They had left Draupadé at the hermitage under Dhaumya’s
care. While they were gone, the king of Sindhu, Jayadratha, passed that way
while traveling to Salva’s kingdom. Seated upon a royal chariot, he came to the
outskirts of the Päëòavas’ äçrama and saw Draupadé gathering flowers. The
king at once fell in love. The beautiful Draupadé, her dark complexion framed
by bluish curls, shed luster on the woodlands. As she bent over to gather the
wild forest flowers, Jayadratha was captivated. He said to his son Kotika, “Go
and ask this lady her name. Find out if she is an Apsarä or a daughter of some
god.”
Jayadratha was on his way to marry King Salva’s daughter, but upon seeing
Draupadé he lost all interest in that other princess. No other woman could ever
match the beauty of this forest lady.
“Go, Kotika, and find out why this lady loiters in the forest full of wild beasts
and thorns. If she will have me as her lord, then I will consider my life
successful.”
The prince jumped down from the chariot. As a jackal approaches a tigress, he
went up to Draupadé and asked, “O fair one, who are you who stands here
leaning on the branch of a kadamba tree, looking like a brilliant flame? Why
do you feel no fear in this forest? Are you a goddess or the daughter of a
celestial? Perhaps you are the wife of a Lokapäla. Tell me, gentle lady, who and
whose you are, what is your race and why are you here?”
The prince introduced himself and then, pointing to his father, said, “That one
there, shining like a sacrificial fire, is the king of Sindhu. Surrounded by
powerful kings he is traveling at the head of six thousand chariots and many
elephants, horsemen and infantry. Like Indra amid the Maruts, he is
journeying amid his friends. He is gazing upon you, O thin-waisted one.”
Draupadé stepped back and pulled her cloth over her head. “O prince, it is not
321

proper for me to speak to you here. The ordinance dictates that a woman
should never be alone with any man other than her husband. Under the
circumstances, however, I will tell you who I am. I am the daughter of King
Drupada and the wife of the five heroic Päëòava brothers. My husbands are
now out hunting, but they will return soon. You should tell your father to
dismount from his chariot and wait for them. Yudhiñöhira is fond of guests and
will doubtlessly offer you a fitting reception.”
Draupadé turned and walked back toward her cottage, leaving Kokita standing
by the kadamba tree. Kokita then returned to his father and told him what she
had said. The king replied, “Why have you returned unsuccessful? I must have
that woman. Now that I have seen her, all other women seem to me like
monkeys. My mind was entranced the moment I saw that princess.”
“You will have to take her by force, dear father. She will surely not come
willingly.”
Jayadratha got down from his chariot and went with his son and several other
kings toward the Päëòavas’ hermitage. Like a pack of wolves entering a lion’s
den they went into the äçrama and saw Draupadé standing there. In a silky
voice Jayadratha said, “Is all well with you and your husbands, O queen?”
Draupadé answered that everything was well, then said, “Is all well with your
kingdom, treasury and armies? Are you justly ruling the prosperous countries of
Sindhu, Sauvéra, and all others brought under your sway? Yudhiñöhira will soon
return and offer you refreshments. For now, please accept this water to wash
your feet and be pleased to wait for my husbands.”
Draupadé pointed toward several large pitchers of water standing by her
cottage. Jayadratha smiled. “All is well with us, O fair-faced one, but we have
no interest in food and water.” He stared at Draupadé as he continued to speak.
“I wish to take you with us. Why do you remain attached to Kunté’s wretched
sons? They have lost all their prosperity and are forced to dwell in the forest. A
woman of good sense does not devote herself to a fallen husband. Your
husbands have fallen from their dignity and have lost everything. You need
not share the Päëòavas’ miseries. O you of beautiful hips, renouncing them,
become my wife and share with me the kingdoms of Sindhu and Sauvéra.”
Draupadé frowned and retreated a few steps. She felt pained to hear
Jayadratha’s speech. “Are you not ashamed to speak in this way?” she retorted.
“How dare you address me thus!”
Draupadé’s face flushed and her eyes turned crimson. Her voice rose to an
322

angry shout. “O fool, how dare you insult the illustrious Päëòavas, each of
whom is like Indra himself. They all abide by their duties and never waver in
battle even with the celestials. The wise never criticize men who practice
devout penances, even if they are impoverished. Only dogs speak like that. I do
not see anyone here who can save you from the pit you have dug under your
own feet. By expecting to defeat the pious Yudhiñöhira you hope to separate
with a stick a Himälayan elephant from his herd. Out of childishness you are
rousing a sleeping mountain lion to pluck a hair from his face. You will have to
flee with all speed when you see the furious Bhéma. When Arjuna returns you
will not know which way to turn. Your inviting these two heroes to an
encounter is like a fool trampling on the tails of two enraged and venomous
cobras. As a bamboo bears fruit only to perish, or as a crab conceives only to
die, so shall you meet your end when you lay your hands upon me.”
Jayadratha laughed, enchanted by the sight of the furious Draupadé. “I know all
this, O Päïcälé,” he replied derisively. “You cannot frighten me with your
threats. I am born in a royal line endowed with opulences and qualities. I
consider the Päëòavas inferior. Therefore mount my chariot and come with
me. Do not speak so boastfully.”
Draupadé was horrified. “Why does this fool take me to be powerless?” she
cried. “Even Indra could not abduct me. Even if he tried, Arjuna and Kåñëa,
riding upon the same chariot, would follow and destroy him. What then of a
weak human? O King, when Arjuna releases his deadly arrows, you will see
your entire force destroyed as dry grass is consumed by fire. Beholding Bhéma
rushing at you with his upraised mace, and the twins ranging on all sides
vomiting forth their anger, you will then be sorry. As I have never proven false
to my husbands even in my thoughts, so those men will destroy you. I do not
fear you, wretch.”
Draupadé looked away from Jayadratha. She knew that by her own ascetic
powers she could reduce him to ashes, but she did not want to be drawn to
violence by Jayadratha. Her husbands would deal with him soon enough.
Jayadratha stepped forward and seized the princess by her arm. She cried, “Do
not pollute me by your touch!” and called out for Dhaumya. Jayadratha took
hold of her upper garment, but she pushed him back with such force that he
fell to the ground. Then Jayadratha was angry. He grabbed Draupadé and
dragged her to his chariot.
Dhaumya suddenly appeared and rebuked Jayadratha. “You cannot seize this
323

lady without defeating the Päëòavas, O King. You should observe the kñatriyas’
ancient custom. Truly you will reap the results of this wicked act when the
heroic Päëòavas return.”
Jayadratha ignored Dhaumya. He placed Draupadé on his chariot and sped
away, followed by his army. Dhaumya entered among the king’s troops and
stayed close behind, continuously reprimanding him with strong words.
The Päëòavas were some distance from the äçrama. As they went through the
dense forest, Yudhiñöhira began noticing inauspicious signs. He said, “Do you
see how these birds and animals flee toward the sun and pass excrement? This
indicates that the forest has been invaded by enemies. Let us return to the
äçrama. My heart seems to be aching for some reason, and my mind is clouded.
I feel as if I were about to fly out of my body.”
The five brothers immediately started back. As they raced through the trees
and bushes with their weapons flying behind them, they saw a jackal yelling
hideously. Yudhiñöhira became still more concerned and urged them on.
Suddenly they burst into the clearing where they were camped. There on the
ground they saw Dhätreyikä, Draupadé’s maid, weeping loudly. The Päëòavas’
ever-present servant and charioteer, Indrasena, dismounted and went over to
her. “Why do you weep? I hope no ill has befallen the princess Draupadé. Could
anyone have been fool enough to snatch away that incomparably beautiful
lady? Dharma’s son has become so anxious that he is ready to go after her even
if she has entered the earth, soared to the heavens, or gone to the bottom of
the sea. Who today will fall to the earth with his body pierced and torn by
arrows? Do not weep, gentle girl, for Päïcälé will come back this day and be
reunited with her lords.”
Rubbing her face, the maid said, “Disregarding her five Indra-like husbands,
Jayadratha has carried Draupadé away by force. See there the trail left by that
wretch and his followers. It happened not long ago. He cannot have gotten
very far.”
Dhätreyikä looked up at the Päëòavas and said, “Quickly give chase, my lords,
lest Draupadé be violently overpowered and, being beside herself, gives up her
person to an unworthy man, even as the sacrificial oblation might be thrown
onto ashes. Do not let the ghee be poured onto an unigniting fire of chaff, or
the sacred garland thrown into a crematorium. Let no mean man touch with
his lips your wife’s brilliant face, as the Soma juice might be licked up by a dog
through the priest’s inattentiveness.”
324

Yudhiñöhira said, “Go to your hut, gentle woman, and govern your tongue.
Kings and princes who are puffed up with their power soon come to grief.”
The brothers immediately went after Jayadratha. They twanged their bows and
breathed the hot sighs of furious serpents. Soon they saw the dust raised by
Jayadratha’s army. Coming near the soldiers they saw Dhaumya wailing.
Urging Bhéma to go after Jayadratha, Yudhiñöhira consoled the åñi and said,
“Go back now, O priest. This low-minded one will soon be punished.”
Like hawks swooping on prey, the Päëòavas rushed upon Jayadratha’s army
with fierce cries. Seeing the Sindhu king in the distance with Draupadé on his
chariot, their anger increased like a fire fed with ghee. They called out to him
to stop and fight. Upon hearing their thunderous shouts, Jayadratha’s soldiers
lost their senses and were seized by terror.
Jayadratha looked back and saw the Päëòavas’ five chariots racing toward him.
He said to Draupadé, “Five great heroes approach, O princess. I think they are
your husbands. Tell me which of them rides which chariot?”
Draupadé snorted angrily. “After committing an act which will end your life,
fool, why do you ask such a question? Still, as you are on the point of death, it
behooves me to answer. Seeing Dharmaräja here with his brothers, I have not
the slightest fear.”
Draupadé pointed to the foremost of the five chariots. “Do you see that car
upon which there is a staff with two celestial drums that are always being
beaten? There you can see a lean man the color of pure gold, with large eyes
and a high nose. That is Yudhiñöhira. He is merciful even to an enemy who
seeks his shelter. Therefore, put down your weapons and fall at his feet if you
wish for your own safety.”
The princess then indicated the chariot to Yudhiñöhira’s right. “The one seated
on that car, who has long arms and is as tall as a sal tree, who is biting his lips
and contracting his brow––that is Våkodara. His strength is superhuman and
the earth knows him as Bhéma. Those who offend him cannot live. He does not
forget an enemy but always takes revenge, and even then he is not pacified.”
Draupadé went on to point out Arjuna, who rode by Yudhiñöhira’s left. “He
who blazes like fire, who is always firm in battle, who never commits a cruel
deed, who never relinquishes virtue out of fear, lust or anger, and who can face
any enemy––that is my husband Dhanaïjaya.
“Behind Yudhiñöhira you see the twins on golden chariots. Here comes the
religious Nakula who is loved by his brothers as if he were their own life. He is
325

an expert swordsman and today you will see him cut your troops down like
wheat. By his side is Sahadeva, the youngest and favorite of all the Päëòavas.
His wisdom and eloquence are without comparison. That intelligent hero, so
dear to Kunté, would rather enter fire than say anything against religion or
morality.”
Jayadratha looked alarmed. Draupadé laughed. “Now you will see your army like
a ship with its cargo of jewels wrecked on rocks. If you escape unharmed from
the Päëòavas, you will have a new lease on life.”
Jayadratha shouted commands to his generals, quickly arraying his forces for
battle. The Päëòavas left off the infantry soldiers, who were begging for mercy,
and made straight for the chariot fighters surrounding Jayadratha. As they
charged into battle, they darkened the sky with a thick shower of arrows.
Seeing them advance like dreadful tigers, the fighters in Jayadratha’s army lost
heart.
Raising his mace, Bhéma flew toward Jayadratha with a roar. Kotika and the
other charioteers came quickly to protect their king. They rained down arrows,
darts and clubs upon Bhéma, but he careered on without flinching. With a
single blow from his mace he slew a great elephant with its driver that was
fighting in front of Jayadratha. With a few more blows he mowed down
fourteen foot soldiers. At the same time he fended off all the weapons hurled
at him.
As Bhéma moved closer to the Sindhu king, Arjuna killed five hundred
warriors who stood before him. Yudhiñöhira himself slew hundreds more and
Nakula went about with a sword, scattering the heads of the soldiers fighting in
the rear of the army like a cultivator sowing seeds. From his chariot Sahadeva
released fierce iron arrows which cut down many warriors fighting on the
backs of elephants; they fell like birds dropping from a tree.
A powerful king named Trigarta, fighting against Yudhiñöhira, suddenly
descended from his chariot and slew the Päëòava king’s four horses with his
mace. Yudhiñöhira pierced Trigarta’s breast with a sharp-pointed arrow and he
fell to the earth vomiting blood. Yudhiñöhira, with his charioteer Indrasena,
then leapt onto Sahadeva’s chariot.
Nakula was assailed by Suratha, a mighty elephant fighter. The elephant
crushed his chariot and dragged it across the battlefield. Nakula jumped down
with his sword and shield and fearlessly faced his foe. Suratha goaded his
elephant toward him and the infuriated beast rushed at Nakula with a scream.
326

Nakula swung his sword and severed the elephant’s trunk and tusks. The beast,
which was clad in golden mail, fell headlong to the earth, crushing its rider.
Nakula quickly jumped onto Bhéma’s chariot.
Bhéma released arrows with deadly accuracy. With a crescent-headed shaft he
slew Kokita’s charioteer and his chariot flew about pell-mell on the battlefield.
As the confused Kokita tried to restrain his horses, Bhéma shot a beautifully
plumed arrow and severed the prince’s head. At the same time, Arjuna killed
twelve other princes fighting by Kokita’s side. Thousands of other warriors
were slain by the Päëòavas. The battlefield was now strewn with the bodies of
men and animals. Many chariots with tall standards lay smashed on the
ground, along with armor, helmets, swords and severed limbs. What was left of
Jayadratha’s army fled. Many ravens, crows, falcons and jackals––all crying out
in joy––came to feast on the flesh of the dead warriors.
Jayadratha was now terrified. He quickly put Draupadé down from his chariot
and fled into the woods. Yudhiñöhira had Sahadeva take Draupadé up onto his
chariot, while Bhéma continued to slay fleeing soldiers. Arjuna, however,
checked his brother. “What will you gain by killing these poor soldiers? They
are afraid for their lives and running here and there. Leave off and chase
Jayadratha.”
Bhéma agreed. Turning to Yudhiñöhira he said, “O King, the army has been
routed and its leader has fled. If you wish, go with the twins and take Draupadé
back to the hermitage. Arjuna and I will deal with Jayadratha. He will not
survive even if he goes to Indra for protection.”
Yudhiñöhira replied, “O mighty-armed one, you should remember that he is the
husband of our sister Dusshala, Gändhäré’s daughter. Therefore, do not kill
him.”
Draupadé became agitated to hear Yudhiñöhira’s words, and she said to Bhéma,
“If you wish to please me, then do not spare that infamous and despicable
Sindhu king. An enemy who carries away one’s wife or who wrests his kingdom
from him should never be forgiven in battle, even if he begs for mercy.”
Yudhiñöhira consoled Draupadé and returned with her to the hermitage. Bhéma
and Arjuna at once headed into the forest after Jayadratha.
The Sindhu king had already gone about two miles. Arjuna took out four
arrows and began uttering mantras as he placed them on his bow. Pulling back
the Gäëòéva into a full circle, he fired the arrows. They sped through the air
over the tops of the trees, covering the full two miles and killing Jayadratha’s
327

four horses. The king fell from his chariot in fear. Getting to his feet he
stumbled through the undergrowth deeper into the forest.
Quickly catching up to him, Arjuna shouted, “O Sindhu king, with what
prowess did you dare take away our wife? Stand and fight. It does not become
you to flee, leaving your followers to face the enemy.”
Jayadratha did not look back. Bhéma jumped down from his chariot and
bounded after him, his eyes red with fury. He quickly caught the terrified king
and seized him violently by the hair. Arjuna called out, “Don’t kill him,” and
Bhéma, who was about to deliver a powerful blow, pulled back his fist. He
dashed Jayadratha to the ground and kicked him in the head. As the dazed
king staggered to his feet, Bhéma knocked him about, striking his head and
chest with his fists and knees. Jayadratha fell unconscious to the ground and
Bhéma dragged him to Arjuna.
Through clenched teeth Bhéma said, “This one committed a heinous crime and
does not deserve to live, but because Yudhiñöhira has commanded us, what can
we do? The king is always merciful and forgiving.”
Bhéma looked contemptuously at Jayadratha, who was returning to
consciousness. The Päëòava considered how best to punish him. He took from
his quiver a razor-headed arrow and shaved off Jayadratha’s hair, leaving only
five tufts. For a kñatriya, such treatment was tantamount to being killed. It
meant that he had been defeated and humiliated at the hands of a more
powerful enemy, but left with his life. It was better to die in battle than to
suffer such humiliation, and Jayadratha was consumed by shame. Bhéma threw
him to the ground and said, “Fool, if you wish to live then listen to my words.
From now on, wherever you go you must announce yourself as the Päëòavas’
slave. This is the accepted custom.”
Jayadratha sat on the ground with his head bowed. “So be it,” he replied,
trembling.
Bhéma pulled the king up and pushed him toward Arjuna’s chariot. “Get
aboard,” he ordered. “We will take you to Yudhiñöhira to receive his
command.”
They rode back to the hermitage and found Yudhiñöhira seated amid the
Brahmins. Bhéma dragged Jayadratha down from the chariot and had him bow
before Yudhiñöhira. “Here is the wretch who offended Draupadé. You may tell
the princess that this vile man has now become our slave.”
“Let him go,” Yudhiñöhira said with a smile.
328

Draupadé came out of her hut and saw the bedraggled Jayadratha on the
ground in front of Yudhiñöhira. The soft-hearted princess, thinking of her
cousin Dusshala, said, “Yes, we should spare him. Bhéma has punished him
sufficiently and he has now become our slave. Set him free.”
Bhéma told Jayadratha to go. The Sindhu king, beside himself with anguish and
shame, bowed before Yudhiñöhira and the Brahmins and then stood up to
leave. Yudhiñöhira said, “You are a free man. I will release you this time, but do
not commit such a vile act again. Although weak and powerless, you tried to
abduct another’s wife by force.”
Seeing Jayadratha’s piteous condition, Yudhiñöhira was moved to compassion.
He held up his hand in blessing and said, “May your heart grow in virtue. Go
now in peace with your followers. Never again contemplate such impiety.”
Jayadratha walked away from the hermitage sorrowfully. He thought only of
how to avenge himself on the Päëòavas. Realizing that he would never be able
to overcome them in battle, he decided to accept a vow of asceticism to please
Çiva. If he was empowered by that great deity, then surely he would be able to
defeat any enemy, even the mighty Päëòavas. The Sindhu king made his way
to the bank of the Ganges and sat down in meditation.
For a long time Jayadratha practiced severe austerities, eating only leaves and
remaining rapt in prayer to Çiva. Eventually, the god came before him and
said, “What do you desire?”
The delighted king replied, “May I be able to vanquish in battle all five
Päëòavas, seated on their chariots.”
Çiva smiled. “This cannot be. The Päëòavas are unconquerable because they
are protected by Kåñëa. Even I cannot slay them. Therefore, your desire is
impossible to fulfill. But I will grant you this: with the exception of Arjuna,
who is the invincible Nara incarnate, you will be able to check all of them in
battle one time only.”
After granting this boon Çiva vanished, leaving Jayadratha to return to his
own kingdom, wondering when the day would come when he would be able to
use his boon.

Chapter 34

329

The Lake of Death
As the Päëòavas passed their twelfth year in the Kämyaka, Indra thought of
how he might do them good. The king of the gods knew that Yudhiñöhira was
afraid of Karëa, especially because his divine armor and earrings afforded him
supernatural protection from weapons. Indra decided to disguise himself as a
Brahmin and beg the armor from Karëa.
Divining Indra’s intention, the sun-god appeared before Karëa in a dream in
the form of a handsome Brahmin. Gently, the day-maker said, “O mighty hero,
my son, I have come to advise you for your everlasting good. Listen carefully.
Indra will come before you disguised as a Brahmin in order to beg from you
your armor. He is aware that you have vowed never to refuse charity. You must
somehow resist his request. Offer him anything else in its place. If you part
with your armor and earrings, which are made of the essence of celestial
nectar, you will die in the battle. Possessed of your armor and earrings,
however, not even the gods can slay you.”
In his dream Karëa asked, “Who are you who cares so much for my welfare?”
“I am the god of limitless rays. I advise you out of affection. You should heed
my words.”
Karëa did not know that the sun-god was his father. He replied, “I am
fortunate that the lord god of all splendor, whom I worship daily, desires my
welfare. Out of my love for you I say this: please do not prevent me from
observing my vow. Such dishonor would be worse for me than death. O Sürya,
all the world knows I will part with my life if a Brahmin begs for it. Should
Indra come to me as a Brahmin, I shall not be able to refuse him whatever he
may ask.”
Fame was everything to Karëa. He would never do anything that would lead to
infamy. He added, “If I give my armor to Indra, I shall win great fame in this
world, while Indra will become infamous. Fame prolongs life and leads to
heaven. A famous man lives even after his death, while those who are
infamous are as good as dead even though they still breathe. O Sürya, I will
preserve my fame even at the cost of my life.”
Sürya replied, “Dear child, a wise man does not do anything that will injure
himself or his dependents. There is no doubt that the everlasting fame you
330

desire will cost you your life. Therefore, what profit is there in sacrificing your
body for fame? Only while you are alive can you use the fame you accrue. Fame
is useless to a dead man. It is a garland around a corpse. Because you worship
me, I speak for your good. If you use reason, you will be able to distract Indra
from his purpose. If you wish to face Arjuna in battle, you must not give up
your earrings and armor. You will not be able to stand against Arjuna without
them.”
Karëa was still not convinced. “O god of brilliant rays, you are dearer to me
than my wife, sons, friends, and even my own self. Please cherish me as a
devoted worshipper and allow me to do as I please. I cannot embrace falsehood;
death would be preferable. With bowed head and repeated prayers I implore
you to forgive me, for I cannot do as you say. I do not fear Arjuna. Paraçuräma
has given me powerful weapons. I will defeat Arjuna in the battle when the
time comes. Please permit me to observe my vow when Indra approaches me.”
Sürya could see that Karëa would not change his mind. It was as the god had
expected and he had already considered an alternative. He continued to
address his son in gentle tones.
“O powerful one, if you must give your armor and earrings to Indra, then you
should ask him something in return. Worshipping him with pleasing words,
you should offer him your armor only in exchange for the infallible dart he
possesses. That weapon can destroy any enemy. If you possess that weapon, you
will remain invincible. Ask him for it. It is called the Çakti.”
Suddenly, Sürya vanished and Karëa awoke, thinking about his dream. After
bathing he went before the rising sun with folded palms. He told the sun
everything that had occurred in his dream. From the heavens a voice echoed:
“This is all true.” Amazed, Karëa returned to his palace, expecting Indra’s
arrival at any time.
A few days later, Karëa entered the Ganges at noon to perform his daily
worship of the sun-god. Each day at the end of his worship, the Brahmins
would come to beg charity. He never refused anyone anything. Now Indra
came to him, dressed as a Brahmin. Seeing the effulgent ascetic standing before
him, Karëa said, “You are most welcome. What can I offer you? If you like, I
can bestow upon you villages, cows, and beautiful damsels adorned with gold.”
“I do not desire any of these things,” the Brahmin replied. “You may give these
to others who beg for them. O sinless one, if you are true to your vow, then cut
from your body your armor and earrings and give them to me. This is all I
331

desire.”
Realizing that this was Indra, Karëa replied, “I will gladly give you whatever
you wish, but why ask only for my armor? Take from me instead enough wealth
to maintain you and all your dependents for as long as you live.”
Karëa tried in various ways to distract Indra from his goal, but the god made it
clear that he wanted only the armor. Finally Karëa said, “Divested of my
natural armor and earrings, which were created from celestial nectar, I shall
die in battle. That is why I am reluctant to part with them. Still, I know you
are Indra and that you are here to help the Päëòavas. As the lord of the gods, it
is you who should be bestowing boons upon me. Therefore, O Deva, please
consider offering me a boon in exchange for my armor.”
Indra replied, “Before I came here, Sürya divined my intentions. No doubt he
has told you all. Let it be as you desire. With the exception of my thunderbolt
weapon, ask from me what you wish.”
Karëa asked for the Çakti dart Sürya had mentioned. Indra reflected for a
moment and replied, “I have invoked the weapon and will give it to you as soon
as you give me your armor, but I do so under one condition. When I release this
dart, it kills hundreds of my enemies and returns to my hand. However, you
will be able to release it but once to kill one powerful enemy. When your
enemy has been slain, it will return to my hand––not yours.”
Karëa was grave. “I desire to kill only one mighty foe.”
“I know your desire. But the one you wish to kill is protected by a high-souled
being. The great Lord Kåñëa, who is the inconceivable Näräyaëa, protects
him.”
“Be that as it may, give me your weapon, for it will surely be capable of slaying
any human enemy. I shall then cut my armor from my body. But I ask that you
prevent my body from becoming disfigured.”
“So be it. Because you desire to adhere to truth, you will not be scarred. You
will be restored to your present handsome and shining complexion.”
With a sharp sword Karëa immediately began to cut away his armor. Seeing
Karëa smiling through the pain, the gods and demons roared like lions and
beat celestial drums. A shower of heavenly flowers fell upon Karëa as he took
off the armor and earrings and handed them, wet with blood, to Indra. Then
Indra gave Karëa his weapon, saying, “Do not use this unless you face the
gravest danger. Otherwise it will fall upon you.” The god then soared into the
sky, feeling he had accomplished the Päëòavas’ purpose.
332

***
The Päëòavas stayed in the Dwaitavana for the final part of their exile in the
forest. Only a short while remained before they had to disguise themselves and
hide for the thirteenth year. They wondered where they should go. One day, as
they sat discussing in the company of åñis, a Brahmin in obvious distress came
before Yudhiñöhira. He explained that a deer had caught hold of the sticks he
used to light his sacred fire and taken them into the forest. “The sticks, along
with my ladle and other paraphernalia, were tied in a bundle. Somehow the
deer caught them on his horns. O hero, I must have them back so that my
sacrifice may not be stopped.”
Yudhiñöhira reassured the Brahmin and stood up at once with his brothers.
Taking up their bows, they went in pursuit of the deer. Although they shot
many arrows at it, however, they could not catch the animal. It bounded
swiftly away and vanished into the woods. The brothers became tired and
disappointed and, coming to a large banyan tree, they sat down in its shade.
With a heavy heart Nakula said to Yudhiñöhira, “In our race, virtue has never
been sacrificed and we have never been idle. Nor have we ever refused
anything to any creature. How, then, has this calamity befallen us, O King?”
Yudhiñöhira placed his large bow on the ground. “There is no limit to
misfortunes in this world, dear brother. We cannot always ascertain their
causes because it is the great god Dharma who distributes the fruits of both
virtue and sin.”
Bhéma frowned. “We have met with this disaster because I did not slay
Dushashana when he dragged Draupadé into the assembly hall.”
“I too am to blame for our present misfortune in that I did not retaliate when
Karëa uttered his cruel words that day,” Arjuna added.
“And I too am to blame,” said Sahadeva. “I should have slain Çakuni at the dice
game as soon as he cheated you, O King.”
Yudhiñöhira turned to Nakula. “It is certainly hot in this forest. Quickly climb
a tall tree and look around for a lake. Your brothers are tired and thirsty.
Having refreshed ourselves, we can then decide what to do next.”
Nakula climbed a nearby tree and gazed around. “There seems to be water not
far away,” he called. “I see what appears to be a lake and can hear the cries of
cranes.”
As Nakula slid down the trunk, Yudhiñöhira said, “O handsome brother, go and
333

fetch water for us all.”
Nakula emptied the arrows from a couple of quivers and left his brothers. He
soon arrived at a large, clear lake covered with lotuses and lilies. Kneeling
down on the shore, he was about to drink when he heard a voice from the sky
saying, “O child, do not drink this water. This lake is mine and no one may
drink its water without first answering my questions.”
Nakula looked around. He could not see anyone. His thirst was intense. Not
caring for the voice he cupped his hands and drank the water. As soon as it
passed his lips he fell down dead.
After some time, Yudhiñöhira became anxious. Nakula had not returned. He
asked Sahadeva to look for him. Sahadeva followed his brother’s path and also
came to the lake. Seeing Nakula lying dead on its shore he was grief-stricken.
He touched his brother, looking for signs of life. Nakula seemed to be buried in
a deep slumber. He had not lost his bodily luster, but there was no pulse and he
was not breathing. Sahadeva stood up, perplexed. Feeling an unbearable thirst
he went to the water’s edge to drink. As he knelt down he heard the same
voice from the sky. “Do not drink the water of my lake. First of all answer my
questions and then you may drink.”
Sahadeva was unable to heed the words. His thirst was oppressive. He took a
swallow of the cool water and, like his brother, fell dead.
Seeing that neither of the twins had returned after nearly an hour,
Yudhiñöhira told Arjuna to go and see what had happened. With his bow at the
ready and his sword unsheathed, Arjuna proceeded with caution. Finding the
twins lying on the water’s edge, he was seized with pain. He ran over to them
and knelt by their sides. There were no signs of life. Arjuna was amazed. Who
could have killed them? There was no indication of a fight. Arjuna looked
around but saw only the trees moving in the breeze and the water birds on the
surface of the lake. He went down to the water’s edge to slake his thirst and
again the voice resounded from the sky. “O Pärtha, do not attempt to drink
this water by force. It is mine and you may only take it after answering my
questions.”
Arjuna shouted up to the skies. “Come into my presence and prevent me. You
will not speak in this way again when you are riven by my arrows.” He
immediately released countless arrows which, empowered by mantras, were
capable of hitting an unseen object. Arjuna filled the sky with arrows, darts
and javelins. Again the voice spoke. “Your exertions are useless, Arjuna.
334

Answer my questions––or, if you drink the water––you will die.”
Disregarding these words, Arjuna took a sip of water and fell dead alongside his
brothers.
Almost another hour had passed. Yudhiñöhira felt increasing anxiety. He now
sent Bhéma. “O tormentor of foes, we have been seated here for a long time
awaiting our brothers. I think you should find them and bring them back. I
shall wait here.”
Bhéma nodded and rose, running quickly along the path to the lake. When he
saw his three brothers lying there he was astonished. Surely this was the work
of a powerful Räkñasa. It seemed hardly possible that any being could have
slain Arjuna and the twins. Bhéma considered that he would soon have to face
a formidable enemy. He had best drink some water and overcome his fatigue in
preparation for the fight.
The Päëòava ran down to the water and again the celestial voice resounded in
the heavens. “O child, do not attempt to drink from my lake. First answer my
questions.”
Bhéma thought that the voice must have come from whomever had killed his
brothers. He looked around angrily. That wicked being would soon repent his
vile act. Not caring for his warning, Bhéma plunged his face into the water and
drank. Like his brothers, he fell to the ground, dead.
Alone, Yudhiñöhira waited; but when Bhéma didn’t return, his mind was filled
with foreboding. He thought it impossible that Bhéma and Arjuna could be
overcome in battle. Where were they? Perhaps they had found celestial
delights by the lake and were enjoying them together. No, they would surely
not neglect their duty. They had received his order and knew he was waiting.
The Brahmin’s paraphernalia also still had to be recovered. Something must
have happened to prevent them from returning. Apprehensively, Yudhiñöhira
set off along the forest path.
Passing by trees covered in blue and red blossoms, Yudhiñöhira approached the
lake. The warbling of birds and the hum of bees resounded in his ears as he
moved quickly through the woods. Within a short time he came to the lake,
which seemed to him as if it had been transported from Indra’s abode. It was
covered with lotuses and surrounded by blossoming trees and varieties of wild
forest flowers. By the side of the delightful lake, however, Yudhiñöhira saw his
four brothers fallen to earth, resembling the four Lokapälas fallen from the
heavens at the end of an age.
335

Yudhiñöhira ran to his brothers and fell to the ground by their side. Breathing
heavily he shed tears of grief. He lamented loudly, his voice echoing from the
tall trees around the lake. “O mighty-armed Bhéma, you swore you would break
Duryodhana’s thighs in battle. Of what value is that promise now? O Arjuna,
how are you lying here today? Human promises may prove false, but how can
those of the gods? We heard all the celestials proclaim your glories and declare
that you would win back our lost kingdom. ‘None will be able to vanquish him
in battle,’ was Indra’s prophesy. How has this come to pass? Surely my heart is
made of stone because it does not shatter upon seeing such a sight.”
As he looked at his motionless brothers Yudhiñöhira was beside himself with
grief. He cried for some time, his mind utterly confused. Gradually, he
managed to control himself and ponder the situation. Who could have slain
these great warriors? There were no signs of battle––their bodies were
unmarked––and they seemed to have dropped to the earth in some deep,
dreamless sleep.
Yudhiñöhira looked carefully at the lake. Perhaps Duryodhana had made it and
filled it with poison. But no poison could kill Bhéma. Maybe the Kauravas had
conspired with the Asuras to bring about the Päëòavas’ death. But again, what
Asura could face Arjuna, who had single-handedly overpowered the
Nivätakavacas?
Yudhiñöhira looked around. He could see no footprints. Arjuna’s arrows were
scattered here and there, but there was no blood. It was unimaginable that
Arjuna would not have hit his enemy. He never discharged his arrows
uselessly. Yudhiñöhira considered that some mighty being without a material
body must have overpowered his brothers. He examined them closely.
Although they appeared dead, they had not lost their color and their features
were unchanged. Their souls were surely still present, although the symptoms
of life were gone. It seemed that their life-force had been removed by the god
of death himself, acting from within them. Convinced of this, Yudhiñöhira
thought he would discover the truth if he entered the lake. It was because of
this lake that his brothers had met their death.
Yudhiñöhira went down to the water and, throwing off his armor, plunged in.
Immediately he heard the same voice that had spoken to his brothers: “O child,
do not take this water. This lake belongs to me and if you want to drink, you
must first answer my questions.”
Yudhiñöhira gazed around. “Who are you?” he shouted.
336

“I am a crane living on moss and fish. Your younger brothers, disregarding my
warning, have been brought by me under the control of death. O King, if you
do not answer my questions, then you shall become the fifth victim.”
Yudhiñöhira looked about in astonishment. He saw the crane on a tree bough
near the lake. “Are you Çiva or the foremost of the Vasus? Or are you a Marut?
It is not possible for a bird to have killed these four mountain-like heroes. O
strongest of all those endowed with strength, you have achieved what even the
gods, Gandharvas and Asuras could not do. I do not know who you are or what
is your intention, but I am curious to know these things––and I am also
terrified. My heart is troubled and my mind confused. Please tell me why you
stay here and what you desire.”
Yudhiñöhira then saw the crane transform into a huge, fearful-looking being.
His large red eyes were pointed and he blazed like the sun. Roaring like a
thundercloud, he said, “I am a Yakña, not a bird. Hail to you! It was I who killed
your energetic brothers for their own faults. Although forbidden to drink, they
disregarded me. If one loves life, he should not attempt to take this water by
force. The lake is mine and one may take its water only after answering my
questions.”
“O Yakña, I do not wish to take what is yours. I shall try to answer your
questions to the best of my ability. Please ask me what you will.”
The Yakña began to place questions before Yudhiñöhira:
“What makes the soul rise out of his entanglement in matter? Who keeps him
company, who is his guide on that spiritual journey, and on what is he
established?"
“It is knowledge of the Supreme Lord which makes the soul rise. Godly
qualities are his companions, dharma is his guide, and he is established on
truth.”
“What makes one learned? How does one attain to that which is most exalted?
How does one acquire a second self, and by what, O King, does one become
wise?”
“One becomes learned by studying the Vedas. By asceticism one attains what is
most exalted. Intelligence is like a second self, and serving one’s elders makes
one wise.”
The Yakña then asked about all kinds of subjects, ranging from worldly wisdom
to knowledge of religion to spiritual matters. Yudhiñöhira answered them all
without hesitation. Finally the Yakña said, “I am satisfied. Answer my last four
337

questions and I will restore one of your brothers to life. Who in this world is
happy? What is the most wonderful thing? What are the tidings of this world,
and how can one find the eternal path of religion?”
With folded palms Yudhiñöhira replied, “He who is neither in debt nor exiled
and who lives simply, eating simple food in his own home, is happy. The most
wonderful thing is that although every day innumerable creatures go to the
abode of death, still a man thinks he is immortal. The tidings are that in this
world––which is like a cauldron with the sun as its fire, days and nights as its
fuel, and months and seasons as its wooden ladle––all creatures are being
cooked by time. The eternal religious path is found only in the heart of great
mystics.”
The Yakña smiled. “You have rightly answered every question. Tell me which
of your brothers you wish to have restored to life?”
“O Yakña, let Nakula, as tall as a sal tree and endowed with a broad chest and
long arms, be brought to life.”
The Yakña was surprised. “Bhémasena is surely more important to you than
Nakula, O King, and Arjuna is your chief support. Why do you ask for Nakula
to be revived?”
“He who sacrifices virtue is himself destroyed,” replied Yudhiñöhira, “and he
who preserves virtue is in turn preserved by it. I am therefore careful to always
observe virtue. For me, great virtue lies in refraining from cruelty; it is superior
to all worldly gain. Thus I ask for Nakula. Both Kunté and Mädré are the same
to me. In myself Kunté still has one son, but Mädré now has none. With a desire
to behave equally toward my two mothers, I ask for the life of Nakula.”
“Since, O Päëòava, you consider abstention from cruelty superior to both
profit and desire, then let all your brothers be restored to life.” As the Yakña
spoke, the four brothers rose from the ground as if from a sleep. They felt
refreshed and free from hunger and thirst.
Yudhiñöhira then asked the Yakña, “Who are you, O great being, who assumes
the form of a crane? Tell me in truth your identity. Are you a god? Perhaps you
are my father himself.”
Yudhiñöhira had guessed correctly and the Yakña replied, “I am indeed your
father, O best of the Bharatas. Know me to be Dharma. I have come here with
the intention of meeting you. Fame, truth, self-control, purity, simplicity,
charity, modesty, steadiness, asceticism and celibacy are my limbs. I am reached
by abstention from cruelty, impartiality, peacefulness, asceticism, purity and
338

humility. You possess all these qualities, dear son. By good fortune you have
conquered your mind and senses and practice virtue. I wanted to test you and I
am fully satisfied. Ask me for boons and I will bestow them. Those who are
ever devoted to me need never experience misfortune.”
Yudhiñöhira bowed respectfully before his father and said, “My first desire is
that the Agnihotra of the Brahmin whose fire-sticks were lost not be
destroyed.”
“O son of Kunté, it was I in the form of the deer who carried away those sticks.
I shall return them to you. Ask for some other boon.”
Yudhiñöhira thought carefully and said, “The twelve years of our forest life are
now complete. For the thirteenth year we must live incognito. Please grant
that no man will recognize us during that time.”
“So be it. Even if you wander about in the world as your actual selves, you will
not be recognized. Through my favor you will lead a secret, incognito life in
the city of Virata. Now take these fire sticks and ask from me another boon. I
am not satisfied with conferring only these two favors. O Yudhiñöhira, you
should know that I begot you. Vidura, your friend and well-wisher, is also a part
of myself.”
Dharma handed the sticks to Yudhiñöhira, who replied, “O god of gods, it is
enough for me that I have seen you. To please you, however, I will accept one
further boon. O lord, grant that I may always overcome avarice, folly and
anger, and that my mind be always inclined toward charity, asceticism and
truth.”
Dharma smiled and said, “By nature you are gifted with these qualities, O
Päëòava. You are already the embodiment of virtue. But I grant your desire.”
The god then disappeared, leaving the five Päëòavas standing together on the
shore of the lake. In wonder they returned to their hermitage with the
Brahmin’s fire-sticks.

Chapter 35
Into Virata
As the rainy season came and went, Dhaumya determined by astrological
339

calculation that the thirteenth year of exile was about to commence. The
brothers discussed their strategy. Encouraged by Dharma’s boon, they were
hopeful. Although Duryodhana would undoubtedly send hundreds and
thousands of spies all over the world to search for them, he would not find
them. But they did not want to take any chances. Thus they considered how
best to conceal themselves.
Yudhiñöhira spoke to Arjuna. “O ruler of men, what is your view? How shall we
remain incognito?”
“By virtue of Dharma’s boon we shall be able to go about without being
discovered. I have no doubt about that. But let us consider carefully the places
where we could reside peacefully. I shall name them.”
Arjuna listed a number of countries where their allies lived and asked
Yudhiñöhira which he felt was most suitable. Yudhiñöhira thanked his brother
for his suggestions and replied, “Dear brother, what Dharma has said must
come to pass. We shall reside in Matsya, the kingdom of Virata. That aged king
is powerful, charitable, of a righteous disposition, and always favorably disposed
toward us. Let us go there as his servants. Tell me, O sons of Kunté, how we
should each present ourselves to the king.”
Arjuna replied doubtfully, “O virtuous one, how will you become the servant of
the king? You are like a god among men and have always been the lord of
others. How will you submit yourself to a lesser man?”
Yudhiñöhira reassured Arjuna. “There will be no problem. I shall become the
king’s dicing partner and friend. Presenting myself as Yudhiñöhira’s former
personal servant and close friend Kaìka, an expert at gaming, I will offer him
and his ministers various kinds of pleasing service. Now, O Våkodara, tell me
in what capacity you will enter Virata’s city?
Bhéma had already decided. “O Bharata, I will present myself as a cook named
Vallabha. I will say that I formerly worked in Yudhiñöhira’s royal kitchens. I am
an expert in the kitchen business and will prepare fine dishes for the king’s
table. I will also please the king by feats of strength and by wrestling. I will
overpower elephants and bulls, and throw down the best of Virata’s wrestlers
without killing them. O King, do not fear for me. I will take care of myself.”
Yudhiñöhira nodded approvingly and turned to Arjuna, “What work will
Dhanaïjaya––who possesses invincible power, who is the joy of the Kurus, and
before whom the god Agni appeared as a Brahmin begging a favor––accept? As
the sun is the foremost of all planets, the Brahmin the best of all men, and the
340

thunderbolt the best of all weapons, so Arjuna is the best of all archers. What
humble office can he accept, having gone to heaven and obtained all celestial
weapons after pleasing the god of gods, Maheçvara? I think Kåñëa’s friend does
not deserve to be reduced to such a plight.”
Arjuna then remembered Urvaçé’s curse and Indra’s subsequent instruction. “O
ruler of the earth, I shall become a member of the third sex: a eunuch. In order
to conceal the scars the bowstring has made on my arms, I will wear numerous
bangles. With bright gold earrings and braided hair I will go before the king as
Båhannala and offer to instruct his ladies in singing and dancing. I have
acquired proficiency in these skills from the Gandharvas. Living in the king’s
seraglio, I will act as a female and please the king and his women by my services
and by reciting many stories. On being asked for my background, I will say that
I was formerly a waiting maid in Yudhiñöhira’s palace. O King, hiding myself in
this way, as fire is concealed by ashes, I will pass my days during this last year.”
Yudhiñöhira looked in wonder at Arjuna. A eunuch! How astonishing were the
movements of destiny.
He turned to Nakula and asked him how he planned to appear before Virata.
Nakula replied, “I shall be a keeper of horses known as Granthika. I am
thoroughly acquainted with all aspects of horsemanship and enjoy that work.
O King, horses are as dear to me as you are. I will tell Virata that I was
previously in charge of Yudhiñöhira’s horses.”
Yudhiñöhira finally asked Sahadeva what disguise he would assume. The
youngest Päëòava replied that he would become a cowherd. “This work pleases
me, O King. I possess the skills of taming, milking and breeding cattle. I can
recognize all the signs and characteristics of different kinds of cows and bulls.
Known as Tantripala, I shall thus render service to Virata, telling him that I
used to work in that capacity for Yudhiñöhira.”
Yudhiñöhira looked across at Draupadé, who sat near the brothers. “Here is our
beloved wife. She is dearer to us than life. Like a mother she is to be cherished
and like an elder sister respected. How will she appear before Virata? She is not
accustomed to the position of servant and has been accustomed from birth to
royal opulence.”
Draupadé replied, “O Bharata, there is a class of maid known as Sairindhré who
serves others. It is understood that no respectable lady would accept such
service, so I will conceal myself in that guise. Saying that I was formerly
Draupadé’s waiting maid, I will serve Sudeñëa, the king’s esteemed wife. By my
341

expert service of dressing hair and ornamenting the queen, I will please her.
Do not be anxious for me, O King.”
Yudhiñöhira looked at his devoted wife. She was prepared to undergo any
austerity to serve her husbands. Although she was energetic and accomplished,
it would not be easy for her to accept the position of menial servant to
someone inferior, and her stay in Virata would be fraught with danger from
lusty men who thought she had no protector. “You have spoken well,”
Yudhiñöhira said. “Devoted as you are to piety and chastity, O Queen, you are a
stranger to sin. You should behave yourself in Virata in such a way that no
wicked man might become attracted to you.”
The Päëòavas had discussed their plans for the final year in a secluded place.
They did not want to risk disclosing their whereabouts even to their friends
and servants. When they had decided upon their disguises, they went back to
the hermitage. Yudhiñöhira then said to Dhaumya, “O learned Brahmin, if it is
agreeable to you, please go to Drupada’s city. There you may live in peace and
preserve our Agnihotra fires.”
Yudhiñöhira ordered his servants, headed by Indrasena, to go to Dwärakä and
live with the Yädavas. “Upon arriving there you should tell everyone that you
were left alone by the Päëòavas at Dwaitavana. You have no idea of their
whereabouts or intentions.”
Dhaumya made all arrangements for the Päëòavas’ journey. He lit the sacred
fire and offered oblations on their behalf, invoking auspiciousness upon them
and blessing them that they would achieve victory. The brothers and Draupadé
then walked around the sacred fire and, after bowing before the Brahmins, left
the hermitage.
Lean and bearded after their long stay in the forest, the five brothers, clad in
deerskins and carrying their weapons, seemed like five powerful åñis as they
made their way on foot toward the river Kälindé. As they passed through
various countries, staying sometimes in the wild and at other times in
inhabited regions, they presented themselves as hunters.
Bhéma carried Draupadé and they moved quickly toward their destination.
After many days of travel they finally arrived in the Matsya’s expansive
country. They saw the well-laid roads and paths that led from the forest into
the capital.
When the Päëòavas reached the outskirts of the city, Yudhiñöhira sat them all
down in a grassy clearing and said, “O best of men, although you are all
342

acquainted with the science of diplomacy and policy, it still behooves me to
advise you. We should conduct ourselves carefully in Virata’s presence. Kings
are always to be feared as one fears a deadly snake. The protectors and
cherishers of all beings, they are deities in human form and are like great fires
equipped with all weapons. One should always act with the utmost caution
when in a king’s presence. He who acts falsely with a king is killed by him––of
this there is no doubt.”
Yudhiñöhira spoke for some time, giving detailed instructions about all aspects
of behavior with kings. He did not want his brothers to make any mistakes now
that they were so close to completing their vow. Just one more year and they
would be able to reclaim their kingdom.
After finishing his instructions, Yudhiñöhira led them toward the city. As they
walked on he said to Arjuna, “If we enter Virata with our weapons, we will
frighten the citizens and be quite conspicuous. Indeed, your Gäëòéva is famous
throughout the world. If we are discovered by anyone, then we will have to live
a further thirteen years in exile.”
Yudhiñöhira had faith in Dharma’s boon, but he did not want to take
unnecessary chances. The Päëòavas decided to conceal their weapons near the
city. After looking around they came upon a huge sami tree near a cremation
ground. The area was dismal and deserted, far from the road and close to the
forest. Arjuna suggested they wrap their weapons into a cloth bundle and place
them high in the tree. Anyone seeing that bundle by the crematorium would
assume it to be a corpse and leave it alone. Agreeing to the suggestion, the
brothers unstrung their bows and placed them upon Bhéma’s large deerskin
garment. They wrapped and tied the bows, swords, quivers and arrows. Nakula
ascended the tree with the bundle and secured it to a high branch, which he
felt offered sufficient shelter from the rain.
The Päëòavas then made their way toward the city. They passed some cowherd
men and told them that they had just placed their mother’s body on the tree.
“This is our ancient custom,” Yudhiñöhira said. “We have placed our old
mother’s body high in the tree. May she attain to the blessed heavenly
regions.”
As they reached the city gate Yudhiñöhira prayed to Goddess Durgä. Seeing her
as Kåñëa’s divine energy whose service it was to conceal the Lord’s identity
from the atheists, he asked for her protection. Pleased by his prayer the goddess
appeared before the Päëòavas. “O heroes, you will soon attain victory in battle.
343

After slaying your enemies you will again enjoy the earth. Through my grace,
neither the Kurus nor the inhabitants of Virata will recognize you until the
final year has expired.”
The goddess disappeared and the Päëòavas entered the capital, Virata.
Yudhiñöhira went first, but before parting from his brothers he gave each of
them a secret name by which they could call each other if the need arose. He
was called Jaya, and the others were Jayanta, Vijaya, Jayatsena and Jayatbala.
Yudhiñöhira then strode into the city like a mighty lion. He went directly to
the king’s court. The king saw him enter like the moon emerging from clouds.
Turning to his counselors he asked, “Who is this man who walks into my court
as if he were a king? He cannot be a Brahmin. I think he is a lord of the earth,
although he has neither a slave nor any other attendants with him. He shines
like Indra and approaches me as fearlessly as an elephant might approach a
lotus.”
Yudhiñöhira came up to Virata and said, “O sinless one, know me to be a
Brahmin who has lost everything and now seeks your service. I wish to live
with you and accept you as my master.” Joyful at having acquired such an
obviously qualified man, Virata replied, “O worshipful one, I bow down to you.
You are most welcome. I will give you the post you desire. Which country are
you from and what is your name? Do you possess any particular skills?”
“I was formerly a friend of Yudhiñöhira and my name is Kaìka. I am expert in
casting dice and can entertain and please you in that way.”
The king smiled without thinking for a moment that the so-called Brahmin
before him might actually be Yudhiñöhira himself. Although he felt the
newcomer to be extraordinary, he accepted his explanation. He felt an
immediate affinity for Kaìka, whose expressions and bodily movements were
gentle and pleasing. If he was Yudhiñöhira’s friend, then he was surely of the
highest character and worthy of his respect.
“Live with me in peace,” Virata said cheerfully. “This kingdom is as much yours
as it is mine. I am always pleased by expert dicers.”
Yudhiñöhira asked that he not be called to play with low-class people or
involved in disputes or fights over the game. The king replied, “I will kill
anyone who does you any wrong. If the wrongdoer is a Brahmin, I will banish
him from the kingdom. Let all my subjects hear my proclamation: this Kaìka is
as much the lord of this dominion as myself.”
Turning to Yudhiñöhira the king continued, “You shall be my friend. You will
344

ride on my chariot, wear the best clothes, and enjoy the finest dishes. My door
will always be open to you, and you will become my closest advisor and
counselor.”
Yudhiñöhira was then shown to his quarters in the king’s palace and he began
to live there happily and undetected by anyone.
The following day Bhéma entered the city. He went down the main road
toward the king’s palace, appearing like a powerful lord of elephants. In his
hands he held a ladle and a cooking spoon, as well as a shining, unblemished
sword, azure in color. Dressed as a cook he went before the king, illuminating
the royal court with his bodily effulgence. Virata looked at him in amazement
and asked his counselors, “Who is this young man, exceedingly handsome and
with the shoulders of a lion? Although he is new here, I feel as if I have always
known him. I cannot place him, but he surely must either be Purandara himself
or perhaps the powerful Gandharva king. Whatever he wants, let him have it
immediately.”
One of Virata’s counselors went to Bhéma and asked him what he desired. The
Päëòava looked up at the king and said, “O King, I am a cook named Vallabha.
Pray appoint me to your kitchen, for I am expert in the culinary arts.”
Virata gazed at Bhéma’s massive arms and broad chest. “I cannot believe that
you are a cook. You shine like the thousand-eyed deity, and from your grace,
beauty and prowess you appear to be the best of men.”
“O King, I am your servant. Allow me to work in the royal kitchens.” As he
addressed the king, Bhéma’s voice resounded in the royal court like a great
drum. “In days gone by, my cooking was tasted by Yudhiñöhira, but I possess
other abilities as well. I am a peerless wrestler and can entertain you by
fighting lions and elephants.”
As with Kaìka, the king felt an immediate affection for this unusual arrival.
“You shall become the head of my kitchens. But I do not think this office
worthy of you, who should rather be the ruler of the earth.”
Bhéma began to work in the kitchens, becoming a great favorite of the king
and recognized by no one.
Draupadé was next to enter the city. With her glossy black hair twisted into
one long braid thrown on her right hand side and dressed in a single, soiled
cloth, she walked through the city streets as if in distress. Many people
gathered around her and asked her who she was and what she wanted. “I am a
Sairindhré,” Draupadé replied. “I seek someone who will employ and maintain
345

me.”
Hearing her sweet voice and observing her incomparable beauty, the people
found it hard to believe that she could be a maidservant. They directed her to
the royal palace, and as she was walking, Sudeñëa, Virata’s wife, saw her. The
queen asked, “O gentle one, why do you wander about in this way?” Draupadé
repeated her story and Sudeñëa replied, “This surely cannot be true. O most
beautiful one, it seems to me that you yourself could appoint numerous
servants. By your bodily appearance I take you to be of the highest and most
noble lineage. Your countenance shines like the full moon, your body is
shapely, your eyes are like lotus petals framed by curling lashes, your lips are
red like the bimba fruit, and your skin is as smooth as silk. In beauty you
resemble a goddess and must surely have descended from the heavens. Pray tell
me who you are, for you cannot possibly be a maidservant.”
Draupadé straightened her disheveled cloth and turned her dark eyes toward
the queen. “I am neither a goddess nor a celestial. I am a maid of the Sairindhré
class. I am skilled in dressing hair and preparing unguents. I can make
variegated and beautiful garlands of jasmines, lotuses, and lilies. Previously I
have served Satyabhämä, Kåñëa’s beloved queen, and Draupadé, the Päëòavas’
wife. My name is Mäliné. Now I have no engagement. Please allow me to serve
in your palace, O Queen.”
Sudeñëa gazed at Draupadé’s unparallelled beauty and obvious nobility. How
could she be a serving maid? Still, she would make a valuable addition to the
palace. But what effect would she have on the king and, indeed, any other man
who saw her? The queen smiled at Draupadé, but spoke doubtfully. “I can place
you on my head, never mind as my servant. I do not doubt it. Yet I fear that
your beauty will captivate the king’s heart. Seeing how even the women here
are staring at you, I feel there is no man alive who could resist your charms. It
seems that even the trees are bending low to pay you homage. Surely upon
seeing you the king will lose his heart and forsake me. O lady of sweet smiles,
the person upon whom you cast a glance will certainly fall victim to the god of
love. By engaging you I will bring upon myself my own destruction. Although I
should love to have your company, this is my fear.”
Covering her long hair with her upper cloth, Draupadé reassured the queen.
“Neither Virata nor any other man can win me, fair lady, for I have five
Gandharva husbands. Those invincible heroes always protect me and I will not
cast a single glance on another man. However, they stipulate certain
346

conditions for those who would engage me. My husbands desire that I not eat
any food which has already been taken by another and that I not be asked to
wash another’s feet. Guarding me secretly, my husbands bring about the
immediate destruction of any man who desires me. No one is able to sway me
from the path of righteousness, O Queen. Indeed, I ask that you always keep
me safe from other men. Therefore, allay your fears!”
Sudeñëa decided to employ Draupadé. She promised that her food would always
be fresh and untouched by another and that she would not be called upon to
wash anyone’s feet. Draupadé thanked her and was led by the queen into the
inner chambers of the palace, where she began her life as a maidservant.
The day after Draupadé’s entrance into Virata, Sahadeva made his way into the
city dressed as a cowherd. He arrived at the cow pasture in the region of
Virata’s palace. The king happened to be visiting his herd and was present
when Sahadeva arrived. Virata sent for him and asked who he was and why he
had come to the city. Sahadeva replied, “I am a vaiçyä named Tantripala. I used
to work with the cows belonging to the Päëòavas. I am expert in handling
cattle and desire to render you that service.”
Virata observed Sahadeva’s broad shoulders and long arms. “You must surely be
a Brahmin or a powerful kñatriya,” he replied. “The office of a ruler would
better suit you than that of a cowherd. Tell me, from where do you hail, O
afflicter of enemies? What engagement do you desire and what payment?”
“I used to reside in Indraprastha and I took care of the innumerable cows
there,” Sahadeva answered. “I know everything about caring for cows. O King,
I desire only my residence and upkeep and will serve you to the best of my
ability.”
The king accepted Sahadeva’s request. “I have one hundred thousand cows.
These, along with their keepers, shall be placed under your care. Live here in
peace and I shall ensure that you are provided with whatever you desire.”
The day after Sahadeva’s entry, another newcomer was seen making his way
into the city. Of huge body and adorned with the clothes and ornaments of a
woman, he went toward the king’s palace, shaking the earth with his steps even
though he walked with the gait of a broad-hipped woman. He stood before the
king with his body concealed by layers of colored silks. His arms were covered
by numerous conch bracelets set with gold, and he seemed like a huge,
gorgeously decorated elephant standing in the royal court.
Virata looked at him in surprise. He asked his courtiers, “Who is this person? I
347

have never seen such a one.” When none of them could identify him, the king
turned to Arjuna and said, “You appear endowed with the might of a celestial.
Young and dark-complexioned, you look like a lord of elephants. Although you
wear bracelets and fine gold earrings and have braided your hair, you still shine
like a god decked with garlands and equipped with armor and weapons.
Become like my son or even my self. I am old and worn out. Therefore, rule this
kingdom in my place and let me retire. I cannot believe you are of the neuter
sex.”
In a deep voice that echoed around the court, Arjuna replied, “I sing, dance
and play musical instruments. I am skilled in all these arts. O god among men,
assign me to your daughter Uttarä and I shall be her dancing master. Please do
not ask me how I acquired this form, for that would only add to my pain. O
King, know me to be Båhannala, a son or daughter without parents.”
Virata stared with astonishment at Båhannala. “After testing you I will happily
place you as my daughter’s instructor. I feel, though, that you deserve to rule
the earth rather than to accept such a humble office.”
The king had beautiful women examine Båhannala to ensure that he was free
from lust. He also asked him to display his abilities of singing and dancing. The
women reported that there was no problem; and the king, after seeing his
celestial skills, happily appointed Båhannala as Princess Uttarä’s teacher.
In the guise of a eunuch Arjuna began living with the women in Virata’s
palace, instructing them in singing and playing musical instruments as well as
in the various modes of dancing he had learned from the Gandharvas. Due to
Urvaçé’s curse, he felt no disturbance in the women’s presence and he soon
became a great favorite in their chambers. No one suspected that he was in fact
the world-renowned Päëòava.
It only remained for Nakula to enter Virata. Then, on the day after Arjuna
entered, he appeared in the city. The people saw him walking through the
streets like the sun appearing from behind clouds. Going to the royal stables,
he began to examine the horses. When the king saw him there, shining like a
celestial, he had him summoned to the royal court. Nakula introduced himself.
“O King, all victory to you. I am the keeper of horses known as Granthika. I
was formerly employed by Yudhiñöhira and am versed in all the arts of
horsemanship. I know the temper of horses and can break them completely.
Under my care, hardly an animal falls ill and not even the mares are found to
be wicked. Employ me as horse keeper, O King, and I shall serve you well.”
348

Virata looked at the tall, powerful person before him. He seemed to be born of
aristocracy. There was no doubt that he had the abilities he claimed to have.
The king agreed to employ him. “You shall take charge of my stables and all
those who work in them, including my charioteers. You appear to me like a
king yourself, and your sight is as pleasing to me as it must have been to
Yudhiñöhira. I wonder how that faultless Päëòava is faring in the deep forest
without servants such as yourself.”
Having achieved the positions they desired, the five brothers and Draupadé
began their final year in exile, unsuspected by anyone.

Chapter 36
Draupadé Again Insulted
After twelve long years in the forest, waiting for the day they could reclaim
their kingdom, the final year of busy city life passed quickly for the Päëòavas.
Yudhiñöhira diced with Virata and, thanks to the skills he had acquired from
Våñaparvä, won much wealth from the king. He secretly distributed his
winnings to his brothers. Bhéma ensured that his brothers had the best of food
and drink. From the ladies in the palace Arjuna obtained many items of
clothing, which he gave to his brothers, and the twins also shared with their
brothers the wealth they earned from the king. It seemed to the Päëòavas that
they were back in their mother’s house, they lived so happily. They also kept
vigilant eyes on Draupadé and were always alert to danger from Duryodhana’s
men.
i
In the fourth month of their stay in Virata, there was a festival held in honor
of Çiva. Among the festivities was a wrestling contest. Many powerful fighters
from all over Bharata assembled in the city, roaring like lions. Those colossalbodied men were maddened with power and strength. They strode about the
wrestling arena slapping their arms and chests. Virata honored them and
organized a tournament between them. One wrestler, Jémüta, was the most
powerful and he emerged victorious from the contest. As he stood shouting out
a furious challenge, none dared come forward to fight him. Virata then
summoned his cook, Vallabha, and ordered him to fight.
349

Bhéma could not defy the king’s order. Reluctantly, he prepared for the match.
Although he enjoyed fighting, he was afraid someone would recognize him if
he displayed too much power. Praying to Kåñëa that he not be recognized, he
went before the roaring Jémüta. The two wrestlers appeared like infuriated
elephants about to fight for leadership of the herd. A fierce fight ensued with
the combatants locked together, each looking for the other’s weak points.
Their blows sounded like thunderbolts striking mountains. The crowds gasped
and cheered in turn. Each fighter dashed the other to the ground, threw him,
pressed him down by force, and whirled the other around. They slapped and
kicked one another with tremendous power. Knees struck against knees and
heads against heads, sounding like two stones crashing together. As they
fought they shouted insults at each other. The crowd was delighted, some
supporting Bhéma and others Jémüta. Finally Bhéma, decided to end the bout.
He suddenly lifted his rival over his head and whirled him about. He spun him
a hundred times with such force that he fell unconscious. Then Bhéma dashed
him to the ground.
Seeing the senseless Jémüta lying on the ground, Virata was overjoyed. He
immediately gave Bhéma valuable gifts and asked if there were any others who
dared challenge him. When no one came forward, Virata ordered that he fight
with lions, tigers and elephants. Bhéma overpowered many animals in the midst
of the astonished crowd, but none had any idea of his actual identity.
The king was pleased with all the Päëòavas. By his celestial skills in the arts,
Arjuna delighted Virata and the palace ladies. Nakula showed him many welltrained and swift horses, and the king was also pleased with Sahadeva’s
handling of his cows and bulls. But Draupadé, seeing her husbands engaged in
such menial service, felt pained at heart.
The Païchäla princess waited upon Sudeñëa in misery, but she conducted
herself in such a way that the queen was satisfied by her service and gave no
thought as to who she might actually be. Eleven months passed.
One day, as Draupadé was moving about the palace, the commander of Virata’s
army, Kichaka, happened to see her. The mighty Kichaka was immediately
struck by Cupid’s arrows when he saw Draupadé’s enchanting beauty. She
seemed like a goddess descended to earth. His heart was inflamed by desire. He
went to his sister Sudeñëa and said, “I have never seen this maidservant before.
Who is she? Her beauty maddens me as wine does with its aroma. Indeed, this
bewitching damsel has ground my heart and brought me under subjection. I am
350

fevered with desire, and only she has the cure. Tell me, sister, how she has
come to be your servant. It seems that she is too good for such a position. Let
her grace my palace and enjoy every opulence with me.”
As he spoke, Draupadé entered the queen’s chamber. Without waiting for
Sudeñëa’s answer, Kichaka turned to Draupadé and said, “Who are you and
who do you belong to? O fair-faced maiden, simply by seeing you I have lost my
mind. I have never seen such grace and beauty in a woman. Are you Goddess
Lakñmé herself, or perhaps Çré, Hré, Kérti or Känti? You must be a celestial
because you shine like the full moon. What man would not yield to Cupid’s
influence when he beheld your face shining with such heavenly beauty? Your
well-shaped breasts, resembling lotus buds, and your shapely form have
afflicted me with the blazing fire of lust. O fair one, pray extinguish this fire
with the rain cloud of union. Your maddening gestures and movements have
pierced my heart. It behooves you to save me from my plight by surrendering
yourself to me and allowing me to enjoy your company. You shall have
whatever you desire and your time as a servant will end.”
Kichaka spoke at length in his attempt to woo Draupadé, but she was only filled
with horror. Lowering her face and covering her head she replied, “I am a
Sairindhré of low caste, holding the hateful position of dressing hair. O hero, in
desiring me you wish for one who is not worthy of such an honor. Furthermore,
I am already the wife of others and thus your conduct is unbecoming. Do not
turn your mind to adultery, for it leads inevitably to disgrace and calamity. To
fully abandon sin is ever the duty of the good.”
Kichaka, whose senses were completely overpowered by lust, simply smiled.
Without caring for the consequences he addressed Draupadé in sweet tones. “O
timid one, it is not fair of you to reject me. I am enslaved by Cupid on your
account. If you do not accept my proposal, then you will have to regret your
decision. I am the lord of this realm; the people depend upon me for their
safety. In heroism I have no rival on earth. My power and prosperity are
without compare. Why do you turn me down in favor of a life of servitude? I
shall bestow the kingdom upon you. Live with me in happiness and enjoy
whatever you desire.”
Draupadé was disgusted by Kichaka’s shamelessness and she became angry. “O
son of a suta, do not needlessly throw away your life. I am always protected by
five heroes. You cannot win me because I am already married to five
Gandharvas of terrible prowess. They will not tolerate this insult and will
351

doubtlessly slay you if you persist in your attempts to win me. You will have no
refuge, even if you descend to the subterranean world or soar to the heavens.
My husbands always crush their enemies. Why, O Kichaka, do you desire me
like a child on his mother’s lap who desires the moon? Look to your safety and
leave me alone.”
Draupadé turned and quickly walked from the queen’s chamber. Kichaka was
shocked and dismayed by Draupadé’s stern refusal. He said to Sudeñëa, “O
princess, do whatever is necessary to make this maiden inclined toward me. If
she does not accept me, I shall kill myself.”
Sudeñëa pitied her brother in his disappointment. She said, “I will find a
suitable opportunity and send Sairindhré to you to fetch something. In the
solitude of your quarters, you will be able to solicit her at leisure. She will then
most likely become attached to you.” Kichaka agreed to his sister’s suggestion
and returned to his palace.
A few days later the queen called for Draupadé and said, “O Sairindhré, today is
a festival and I am feeling thirsty. My brother has had some excellent wines
prepared. Please go there and fetch some for me.”
Draupadé answered in alarm, “O princess, I shall not go to that wicked man’s
house. You have seen for yourself how shamelessly he approached me. O most
beautiful lady, I asked when I came here that I be kept safe from other men. If
you send me to Kichaka, he will dishonor me. Please send one of your other
maids.”
“You need have no fear,” Sudeñëa replied dismissively. “You are being sent
from the royal palace; my brother will not dare to insult you.”
The queen handed Draupadé a golden pot and waved her away. Fearful and
crying, Draupadé left for Kichaka’s palace. As she walked she prayed, “As I am
always faithful to my husbands, by the strength of that virtue may I be
protected from Kichaka.” Draupadé looked up at the sun and asked the sun-god
for his protection. Sürya, out of compassion, ordered a Räkñasa to invisibly
protect her, and from that time on he never left her under any circumstances.
When Draupadé entered, Kichaka stood up in joy. With folded palms he said,
“O fair one of beautiful tresses, you are welcome. Somehow I have managed to
survive the last few days since seeing you. Now you shall become the mistress
of my house. Let golden chains and brilliant ornaments of every description be
brought for your pleasure. Gems, jewels and silken garments await you in
abundance. I have prepared for you a fine bed. Come, drink with me the
352

honeyed wine.”
Without looking at him Draupadé replied coldly, “Sudeñëa has sent me to fetch
wine. Please fill this pot and let me leave quickly, for she is thirsty.”
“Let others take the queen her wine,” Kichaka said, moving toward Draupadé.
“You should remain here with me.”
Kichaka took Draupadé by the arm. Crying out in fear, she said tearfully, “As I
have never acted unfaithfully toward my husbands, even in my mind or heart, I
shall by virtue of that truth see you hurled down and punished for this sin.”
Draupadé struggled free from Kichaka and he ran after her, grabbing hold of
her upper garment as it trailed behind her. Trembling in wrath she spun round
and pushed him with all her strength. Caught by surprise, he fell to the ground
like a tree cut at its root. Draupadé rushed into the royal court to seek the
king’s protection. Kichaka pursued her and caught her right in front of the
king. Pulling her back forcefully, Kichaka kicked Draupadé and she fell to the
mosaic floor. The invisible Räkñasa appointed by the sun-god then struck
Kichaka a blow with the force of the wind and he fell prostrate.
Bhéma happened to be present in the court, along with Yudhiñöhira, and he
glared at Kichaka. The unforgiving Päëòava gnashed his teeth and clenched
his fists, ready to leap up at once and kill Kichaka. His eyes became dark and
smoky, and terrible wrinkles appeared on his forehead along with beads of
sweat. Bhéma rubbed his forehead with his huge hand, fighting his desire to
hurl himself at Draupadé’s offender. Yudhiñöhira reached over and pressed
Bhéma’s arm. “O cook, you had best go about your business,” he said in a low
voice. “You are surely needed in the kitchen.”
Restrained by his elder brother, Bhéma rose up slowly and left the court with
his eyes fixed on Kichaka, who was picking himself up from the floor, looking
around in amazement to see who had struck him. Draupadé, seeing her
husbands maintaining their disguises before the king, stood before Virata with
flashing eyes. “This son of a suta has kicked me, the honored wife of those
whose enemies can never sleep even if they reside in heaven. The suta’s son
has kicked me, the respected consort of those who are truthful, devoted to
Brahmins, and ever accustomed to giving charity. He has kicked me, the
beloved wife of those who are endowed with energy, power and self-control,
and who, if they were not tied down by duty, could destroy the whole of this
world. Alas, where today do those warriors roam? How can they, like eunuchs,
suffer their spouse to be so insulted? Where is their wrath, prowess and energy
353

when they cannot protect their own wife from a wretch?”
As she spoke Draupadé glanced toward Yudhiñöhira, who was squirming in
pain. Turning her gaze on Virata she went on, “What can I do? I am in this
city, and he who defies virtue has coolly allowed me to be insulted before his
eyes. Why does the king not act like a king toward Kichaka? O best of men,
how do you tolerate this outrage? Let all the courtiers mark your failure today.
Where is the virtue in either Kichaka or Virata, or even in the silent courtiers,
who have witnessed Kichaka’s despicable behavior?”
Draupadé was sobbing. Virata replied, “I do not know the full details of your
quarrel with Kichaka. Without knowing everything, how can I pass judgment?”
The king looked at his brother-in-law, who was smiling. The aging Virata
depended on Kichaka to defend his city. The king could not say anything to
offend him, but the courtiers were now praising Draupadé and reproaching
Kichaka. “This gentle lady is like a goddess in our midst,” they said. “Surely the
man who has her for a wife wants for nothing. By insulting her, Kichaka has
performed a sinful deed.”
Yudhiñöhira sat burning with anger. Drops of perspiration ran down his face. In
a taut voice he said to Draupadé, “O Sairindhré, you should return to Sudeñëa’s
apartments. The wives of heroes endure pain on behalf of their husbands, but
in the end they attain those blessed regions where their husbands go. I think
your Gandharva husbands do not feel that the moment is right for a display of
their power. You should not remain here and cause a disturbance. Be confident
that your husbands will assuage your sorrow in due course.”
Draupadé, who had fallen weeping to the floor, composed herself and stood up
to leave. “I practice piety for the sake of my kind and forgiving husbands.
They, of whom the eldest is addicted to dice, are ever oppressed by others.”
Watched by the mystified king, she went out of the court with her head
lowered and returned to the queen’s chambers. When Sudeñëa saw her tearful
face she asked, “O beautiful one, who has slighted you? Why do you weep? O
gentle one, whose happiness will come to an end today?”
Bowing before the queen, Draupadé replied, “As I went to fetch your wine,
Kichaka struck me in the court in the king’s presence.”
“What? Then I shall have him chastised,” Sudeñëa said angrily. “O lady with
curling tresses, if it is your will, then let this lustful man be killed.”
“Do not worry, O Queen. Those whom he has wronged will deal with him soon
enough. I think he will go to the region of Yamaräja before long.”
354

Draupadé went to her own rooms and bathed herself, putting on fresh
garments. She wanted to purify herself of Kichaka’s touch. Her mind dwelt on
her insult and she considered how to avenge herself. She thought of Bhéma. He
had obviously been ready to annihilate Kichaka on the spot. Certainly he
would fulfill her desire if she approached him. She could not face another day
knowing that Kichaka still lived. Seeing the king powerless to protect her, and
thinking she had no protector, Kichaka would doubtlessly continue to harass
her. Draupadé decided to go to Bhéma. When the palace residents were asleep,
she went silently to his quarters.
As she entered his room she found him asleep, snoring like a lion. The
chamber, filled with her beauty and Bhéma’s effulgence, seemed ablaze with
splendor. The princess went up to Bhéma’s bed and embraced him, even as a
creeper embraces a sal tree. In a voice as sweet as the sound of a véëä, she said,
“O Bhémasena, rise up. Why do you sleep like one dead? How can a sinful
wretch survive after insulting the wife of one who lives?”
Bhéma sat up. “Why have you woken me, gentle princess? You appear wan and
sorrowful. Surely the incident today in Virata’s court is the reason. I too am
burning with anger as I remember it. Tell me the cause of your pain, O Päïcälé,
and I shall do whatever lies in my power. I will always do whatever pleases you,
and I am prepared to deliver you from danger again and again. Quickly let me
know your desire and go back to your bed before others are up.”
Draupadé wept. “How can she who has Yudhiñöhira for a husband ever be free
of grief? You know all, O Bharata, and have no need to ask. The grief I felt
when Dushashana dragged me into the assembly hall still burns me day and
night. What other princess could live after such an insult? How could anyone
survive what I suffered at Jayadratha’s hands? Who but me could endure being
kicked in the presence of the Matsya king? Of what use is my life when you
allow me to suffer all these pains, O hero?”
Bhéma gently stroked his wife’s face as she wept. She looked into his angry eyes
and continued, “The wicked Kichaka wants me to marry him. As I remember
his words my heart bursts like an over-ripe fruit. O slayer of foes, all my
sufferings are due to your elder brother’s addiction to dice. Who else but him
could have sacrificed everything, including his own self, for the sake of
gambling? Having lost inestimable quantities of wealth, he now supports
himself by dicing. The great king Yudhiñöhira, who was worshipped by throngs
of Brahmins and tributary kings, now hides himself in fear, overpowered by
355

calamity. That lord of men––who is free from cruelty, full of compassion,
forbearing and truthful––has become a gambler in King Virata’s court. He now
depends on another’s mercy for his subsistence. Surely he is experiencing the
misery of hell.”
Draupadé poured out all her pent-up grief. The time in Virata had passed
slowly for her. With no opportunity to speak to her husbands and to be solaced
by them, she had suffered silently. It was agonizing to see her five heroic
husbands living as servants, and her own position as a serving maid was
practically intolerable. Only her sense of duty and loyalty to Yudhiñöhira
sustained her. Although she criticized Yudhiñöhira to Bhéma, she would never
consider being disloyal to him for even a moment. She spoke at length of her
sorrow at seeing Yudhiñöhira’s plight, and Bhéma consoled her.
Taking hold of Bhéma’s hands, the Païchäla princess continued. “O Bharata, I
shall tell you of another great grief. Do not become angry as I speak only out of
the sadness in my heart, but seeing you a servant and cook causes me more
distress than I can bear. When Virata joyfully made you fight with elephants,
and the ladies of his palace laughed, my mind sank in sorrow. Indeed, I fainted
and the queen had to revive me. She said, ‘It seems you harbor some
attachment for this cook. Both of you came to Virata together and I often see
you lamenting for him. Are you attached to the handsome Vallabha?’ She still
chides me in this way, which only increases my pain.”
Draupadé then described to Bhéma the pain she felt on seeing Arjuna acting as
a eunuch. “The mighty Dhanaïjaya, the scourge of his enemies and fearful to
even the celestials, now lives in a guise despised by all men. Covering his body
with gaudy clothes and bangles, that hero lives in grief, surrounded only by
women. When I see the dreadful wielder of the bow decked with ornaments,
with his hair tied in a braid, my heart burns with anguish.”
Bhéma remained silent as Draupadé spoke, revealing to him all the pain she was
experiencing upon seeing each of her husbands in positions of servitude.
Finally she concluded, “I tell you all this only so that you may be aware of my
suffering. You are always my protector and shelter and I depend fully upon you,
O son of Päëòu. Surely in some past life I offended some great deity and am
thus receiving the results. The destiny of men is difficult to understand. When
I see you five brothers cast into sorrow and myself subjected to the hard
miseries of a maidservant, I consider it all the work of inscrutable destiny. I do
not know how much longer I can carry on, how-ever. Just look at my hands.”
356

Draupadé held out her hands and showed Bhéma the calluses caused by the
work she did for the queen. Hearing of her suffering and seeing her condition,
Bhéma covered his face and cried. After some moments he composed himself
and said in sorrow, “Fie on the strength of my arms and fie to Arjuna’s
Gäëòéva, since I now see your two lotus hands scarred by work. O princess, I
would have wrought havoc in Virata’s court, but Yudhiñöhira restrained me.
With a single kick I would have crushed Kichaka’s head. O Päïcälé, when I saw
him strike you I was ready to destroy the Matsya race. It was only due to
Dharmaräja that I held back. I too suffer in silence, O beautiful one. That we
have been expelled from our kingdom, that I have not yet annihilated the
Kauravas, and that we are forced to live here as servants scorches my limbs and
afflicts my heart as if it were pierced by a dart.”
Bhéma told Draupadé to be patient and not to criticize Yudhiñöhira. He cited
the examples of other great ladies who had followed their husbands in times of
misery. Eventually they were all brought again to happiness due to their
virtuous practices. Bhéma held Draupadé’s hands. “Less than a month now
remains of our exile,” he said. “After that time you will again become an
empress. Do not doubt.”
Draupadé threw herself onto Bhéma’s chest. “I do not think I will last that long.
The wicked-minded Kichaka will not leave me alone. He has no fear from
anyone and will doubtlessly seek to outrage me if I do not accept him. That
man is without virtue. He is proud, cruel, impudent and war-like, absorbed only
in gratifying his senses. Even the king has no power over him, and he will not
hesitate to approach me as he pleases. O Bhéma, although you Päëòavas are
adhering to your pledge out of virtue, you will surely suffer a loss of virtue
when I am violated and give up my life. To protect one’s wife is a pious
husband’s first duty, for from the wife one’s own self is born as the son. For
heroes there is always virtue in repressing the enemy. O mighty one, as you
have always rescued me from wicked men, I entreat you to slay Kichaka
without delay. If he should live for even one more day, I will swallow poison
and give up my life.”
Bhéma made up his mind. He could not stand Draupadé’s pain. Taking her by
the shoulders he said, “Gentle one, I will do as you say. Today I will slay
Kichaka and all his followers. Listen carefully. When the sun rises, you should
go to him with sweet smiles. Tell him that you secretly hold in your heart an
attraction for him. Then arrange to meet him in the evening. There is a
357

dancing hall some way from the other residences which is empty at night. Have
him come there and I shall greet him and send him to meet his ancestors.”
Overjoyed, Draupadé embraced Bhéma and left his room.
Just after dawn the next day, Kichaka went to the palace to seek her out.
Finding her in the queen’s quarters he said, “O timid one, yesterday you
witnessed my power. Although I threw you down in front of the king, he said
nothing. He is king in name only. I am the actual ruler here. Accept me as your
lord and I shall bestow heaps of gold and gems upon you. One hundred male
and one hundred female servants will wait upon you. You will ride on the best
of chariots. O beautiful lady, let us be united.”
Draupadé glanced down demurely. Turning herself slightly away from Kichaka
she replied, “O Kichaka, our union together must be without anyone else’s
knowledge. I am afraid of my husbands. If we can lie in secret, then I shall be
yours.”
Kichaka, his face blooming with happiness, replied eagerly. “It shall be as you
say. I am under your control and overpowered by Cupid. O lady of beautiful
thighs, we can meet in some lonely place where none shall detect us.”
Feeling sickened within herself but smiling outwardly, Draupadé said, “Not far
from here is the king’s dancing hall. The princess uses it only in the day. I will
go there two hours after sunset. O hero, meet me there.”
Draupadé left at once and went to her own chamber. Thinking of the night to
come, the day seemed like a month. On the plea of feeling ill, she remained in
her room the whole day. She felt sullied by her conversation with Kichaka and
would only feel peaceful when he was slain.
For his part, Kichaka was filled with anticipation. As evening approached he
dressed carefully and ornamented himself. He put on fragrant garlands and
smeared his limbs with perfumes and sandalwood paste. Overpowered by lust,
he waited for nightfall. How the time was dragging!
As soon as the sun had set Bhéma made his way to the dancing hall. He slipped
inside and hid himself, waiting for Kichaka’s arrival. Draupadé also came there;
and before long, Kichaka entered the darkened hall. He called out for
Draupadé. “Being praised for my beauty by the women in my house, I came here
thinking of you alone. You shall become the best of my consorts and I shall
give you immense wealth. O fair maiden, where are you?”
“By my good fortune you have come here tonight, O handsome one,” Draupadé
replied sweetly. “I consider your touch as burning and you are an expert at
358

gallantry. There is no other man as attractive as you are to women. O hero, I
am over here.”
Kichaka moved toward the sound of Draupadé’s voice. Bhéma was hiding
behind a silk drape at the side of the hall. As Kichaka passed, he suddenly came
out and stood before him. Bhéma’s angry voice boomed out, “Today your sister
shall behold you, vile as you are, thrown down on the earth with your limbs
shattered. With you slain, Sairindhré shall wander freely without fear. Then
too shall we, her husbands, live happily.”
Bhéma immediately seized hold of Kichaka’s hair, which was adorned with
garlands, and dragged him down. Kichaka was shocked. Sairindhré had tricked
him. Trying to shake off the slight inebriation from the wine he had been
drinking, he pulled himself free of Bhéma’s grasp. Bhéma punched Kichaka with
his iron-hard fists. Kichaka took hold of Bhéma’s two arms and tried to kick
away his feet. The two mighty men shuffled violently around the hall, locked
together. They appeared like the two celestial monkeys, Vali and Sugréva,
fighting together in days of yore. Breaking apart they stood belligerently facing
one another. Their upraised arms looked like two pairs of furious, five-hooded
serpents. They struck one another with the force of thunderbolts. The empty
hall resounded with great cracks and the walls trembled.
Enraged, they fought with fists, nails and teeth. They kicked and hurled each
other about with the force of a tempest. Neither showed fatigue nor wavered.
Blows rained down without cessation as both men became worked up into a
fury. Like two powerful bulls, they came against each other again and again. As
their blows landed the air was filled with the sound of trees splitting open.
Kichaka was astonished at his opponent’s power. Although he had fought and
defeated great heroes all over the world, he had never encountered such a foe.
It was like fighting with a mountain or the earth itself. Kichaka exerted
himself to his full power, trying to throw the unshakeable Bhéma to the ground,
but Bhéma caught him in an embrace that crushed him like a steel vice.
Breathing in deeply and expanding his massive chest, Kichaka broke free.
Bhéma instantly came at him again and struck him on the breast. Then he
threw Kichaka across the hall as a hurricane tosses a tree. Mustering all his
strength Kichaka rushed at Bhéma and took hold of his neck. He pulled the
Päëòava down and brought his knee up into his chest with all his power.
Bhéma was thrown to the floor and he rolled over quickly. He looked up at
Kichaka with burning eyes. Appearing like Yamaräja with mace in hand, he
359

rose from the floor blazing with anger. He bellowed at Kichaka and rushed at
him like a maddened elephant charging another. The two heroes again locked
together, grunting and grappling as they moved about the hall.
Although Kichaka was a powerful fighter, expert in all forms of combat, he
found all his moves more than matched by Bhéma. Gradually he felt his
strength waning. Bhéma, seeing his foe weakening, became even more
energetic. He took hold of Kichaka and crushed him in his mace-like arms.
Unable to catch his breath, Kichaka fell senseless to the floor. Bhéma grabbed
his hair and roared like a lion that had just killed a large animal. Lifting his
groggy opponent above his head, he whirled him about violently. Bhéma then
smashed Kichaka onto the marble floor and fell upon him. Placing his knees on
Kichaka’s chest he took hold of his throat, strangling him. Draupadé was joyful
as she watched Bhéma pound Kichaka into a mutilated mess. He thrust his
arms, legs and head into his body, and reduced him to a shapeless lump of flesh.
His anger appeased by Kichaka’s death, Bhéma stood up. He turned to
Draupadé. “See what I have done to this wretch, Päïcälé. You should know that
any who seek to harm you will meet a similar end, O beautiful-haired one.”
Bhéma left the hall and made his way back to his room. Draupadé returned to
the palace and told the guards that they should go to the dancing hall. “There
you will find he who desired another’s wife. Slain by my Gandharva husbands,
he lies weltering in gore.”
The guards ran to the hall and saw the dead Kichaka. They gazed in
amazement at his mangled body. Gradually thousands of soldiers came there to
see their slain commander lying amid his scattered ornaments. All of them
were astonished. He was hardly recognizable. Who was capable of such a feat?
Kichaka was an almost invincible warrior who had beaten the best wrestlers
and fighters in the world. The soldiers gasped in disbelief. None of them
suspected Vallabha. Struck with wonder they stood about asking, “Who could
have done this? Where are Kichaka’s arms and legs? Where is his head?”
As Kichaka’s followers looked at him they were filled with fear. Talking among
themselves they concluded that their leader must have been killed by the
Gandharvas. They lifted his body, which resembled the body of a tortoise with
its limbs withdrawn, and carried him outside the hall to perform the last rites.
As they made their way to the cremation ground they saw Draupadé watching
them. Knowing that Kichaka had gone to meet her, some of them exclaimed,
“There is the unchaste one for whom Kichaka was slain. She too should be
360

killed. Let us burn her along with our lord.”
A couple of the soldiers sought the king’s permission to execute Draupadé by
placing her on the fire with Kichaka. The king, knowing the power of his
commander’s followers, agreed. The sutas at once ran to Draupadé and seized
her. They bound the struggling princess and placed her upon the large bier
with Kichaka’s corpse. Draupadé cried out in terror as she was carried toward
the crematorium. “May Jaya, Jayanta, Vijaya, Jayatsena and Jayadbala hear my
words! Save me! The sutas are carrying me away. Let those heroic Gandharvas,
whose chariots and bows resound like thunder, understand that their wife is in
great peril.”
Bhéma heard her pitiful cries. Without hesitation, he ran from his room. He
could understand that Kichaka’s followers were taking Draupadé to the
crematorium. The Päëòava went there by a different route without being seen,
his head covered with a cloth. Scaling walls and crossing gardens he swiftly
reached the cremation ground which lay just outside the city. He found a great
palmyra tree and immediately uprooted it. He placed it on his shoulders.
Kichaka’s followers arrived and saw Bhéma standing like Death personified
holding his rod of chastisement. They howled in fear. “Here is the Gandharva
who killed Kichaka. Release Sairindhré before he kills us all.”
The sutas put Draupadé down and ran in all directions. Bhéma pursued them
relentlessly and struck them down with the tree. As he struck out at them, he
knocked over other trees, which fell crashing to the ground. Roaring like a
furious lion, the Päëòava slew all the sutas one after another. In a short time,
the crematorium was covered with more than a hundred dead bodies. They all
lay about like uprooted trees. Telling Draupadé to return to her rooms, Bhéma
quickly went back by the route he had come before anyone discovered him.
The people of Virata, hearing the commotion from the crematorium, rushed to
see what was causing it. Discovering the slain sutas, they ran to the king and
informed him. “O King, the powerful suta followers of Kichaka have all been
killed. They are scattered about like so many mountain summits clapped by
thunderbolts. Surely this is the work of the Gandharvas, enraged by Kichaka’s
assault on Sairindhré. She is now returning to your city unharmed. We are
afraid of her. She is beautiful beyond compare, the Gandharvas are powerful
and wrathful, and men are undoubtedly lustful. Quickly do something so that
our city may not be destroyed.”
Virata was astonished. “Let Kichaka and all his followers be cremated on one
361

great pyre with gems and perfumes. I will take care of Sairindhré.”
Turning to his wife the king said, “When Sairindhré comes, tell her this from
me: ‘O fair one, please go wherever you like with my blessings. We are afraid
the Gandharvas will destroy us. Indeed, I am too fearful to even speak with you
directly.’”
As Draupadé entered the city, the people fled in all directions like deer seeing a
tiger. Some even shut their eyes and covered their heads. Draupadé went back
into the palace. After she had bathed the queen approached her and conveyed
Virata’s message. Draupadé replied, “O Queen, allow me to remain here for
only two more weeks. The Gandharvas will be obliged to you for this favor.
After that, they will take me away from here and do whatever is agreeable to
you.”
The queen assented and released Draupadé from her duties. After telling her to
remain in the palace until her husbands came, she left to inform the king.

Chapter 37
The Kurus Attack Virata
The news of Kichaka’s death spread from country to country. Everyone was
amazed to hear of his mysterious killing and the subsequent death of his one
hundred followers. In Hastinäpura, the spies dispatched by Duryodhana came
to the court and reported everything they had seen and heard. After informing
the Kurus that they had found no trace of the Päëòavas, they then told them
about Kichaka’s death. The Kurus were joyful to hear this news. Kichaka had
been a thorn in their side, often attacking surrounding countries and defeating
their armies. Many times the Kurus had been approached by tributary kings
seeking protection from Kichaka. Now he and his generals were dead,
apparently killed by invisible Gandharvas.
Duryodhana pondered the news. Less than two weeks remained of the
Päëòavas’ exile. Although he had sent out thousands of spies, none had
managed to find them. The Päëòavas had hidden themselves well––if they
were even alive.
The prince summoned his courtiers and said, “You should arrange for one final
362

search for the Päëòavas. Have the best of our men scour every city and town. If
those heroes still live, we face great danger. We are expecting them to emerge
from exile surrounded by their forces. Let us discover them before this happens
and send them back to the forest.”
Dushashana agreed. “We should certainly make a great effort to locate the
Päëòavas, but I doubt we will find them. We have already searched every city
and town. Either they have perished or they have crossed the ocean. I think
they are gone forever. I do not think we need fear them.”
When Dushashana sat down, Droëa stood up and said, “Persons like the
Päëòavas never meet destruction. They are heroic, resourceful, intelligent,
self-controlled, pious, grateful, and attached to observing vows. Yudhiñöhira is
both virtuous and without enemies. He is their leader. Thus they are patiently
waiting the day when they can return and overcome their misfortunes. This is
my opinion. O Duryodhana, you will see the Päëòavas at the end of their exile
and not before. Do not waste your energy searching for them. Rather, you
should prepare a welcome for them. Give them back their kingdom.”
Bhéñma applauded Droëa’s speech. The Kuru grandfather longed to again see
Päëòu’s sons. Their exile had passed slowly for him. His guilt at not having
prevented Duryodhana from banishing them burned him day and night. The
pain of remembering how Draupadé had been violated was especially acute.
Bhéñma felt helpless. Dhåtaräñöra did not heed his advice, and the evil-minded
Duryodhana was left to do as he pleased. Now the Päëòavas would finally be
returning. Surely they had suffered enough. Perhaps the king could now be
convinced to return to them their kingdom. Like the full moon rising in the
east, Bhéñma, clad in white silks, rose from his seat to address the assembly.
“I fully agree with Droëa. The virtuous Päëòavas, guided by the Brahmins and
walking always on a righteous path, will not perish. They who have as a friend
the infallible and all-powerful Kåñëa cannot be overcome by misfortune. The
pure-souled Yudhiñöhira can consume his enemies with his glance alone. We
should consider carefully how to deal with them now that their exile is ending.
It is certainly a mean policy to search for them. I have another view. Listen
carefully and I will speak for our good. A counselor should always speak the
beneficial truth and never anything evil.”
Bhéñma looked around the Kuru assembly hall. At its head sat Dhåtaräñöra,
flanked by Vidura, Droëa, Kåpa, Bählika, and himself. Duryodhana and his
brothers sat to the king’s right, along with Karëa and Çakuni. Other kings sat
363

in the assembly and all gazed intently at him as he spoke. Although it was well
known that he loved the Päëòavas dearly, the assembled kings knew he would
never be partial. His first thoughts were for the welfare of the entire Kuru race,
and he dealt equally with everyone, desiring nothing but their good fortune.
Placing his hand on his golden- hilted sword, Bhéñma continued.
“As far as locating the Päëòavas is concerned, I will tell you where to find
them. Look for that place where there are no calamities or disasters. Where the
pious Yudhiñöhira dwells, there will be an atmosphere of peace and security.
The people will be inclined toward charity and will be liberal, humble and
modest. There the people will be cheerfully performing their respective duties,
attached to piety, truthfulness and purity. You will hear the Vedic hymns
being chanted and see sacrifices being performed. Clouds will shower abundant
rains and the earth will be bearing crops. There will be signs of wealth
everywhere, and no one will be miserable. Indeed, that place where
Yudhiñöhira lives will resemble the heavens. Knowing all this, O Kurus,
consider what should be done. In my view, we should give up our petty
attempts to find them just to send them again to the forest. Let us welcome
them back and restore to them their father’s kingdom.”
Bhéñma sat down, applauded by Droëa, Vidura and Kåpa, who himself rose
from his seat and said, “What the aged Bhéñma has said is undoubtedly correct
and meant only for our good. His words are reasonable, truthful, and consistent
with scripture. Returning the Päëòavas’ kingdom is surely the wisest course of
action.”
Looking across at Duryodhana and his brothers, Kåpa said, “But if we are not to
follow this course, then we had best prepare for war. When those powerful
heroes return, they will be burning with energy and ascetic power. Therefore,
consider now how to expand your own forces. Seek out your allies and make
treaties with them. Build a vast, unassailable army. If you deny the Päëòavas
their rights, then we face the gravest possible danger.”
Duryodhana was pensive. Kåpa was right. If he did not return the Päëòavas’
kingdom, there would no doubt be a fight. But he had no intention of
returning their kingdom. The fight was inevitable––unless they could be
discovered first and sent back into exile. The Kaurava prince thought
carefully. The report about Kichaka had intrigued him. Apparently he had
been slain by the five Gandharva husbands of a single woman. The
coincidence with Draupadé and the Päëòavas was almost incredible, especially
364

because there were only a handful of men who could have killed Kichaka in
hand-to-hand combat: Balaräma, Çalya, Karëa––and Bhéma. It could not have
been the first three, because what reason would any of them have had for going
to Virata and killing Kichaka in secret? He had been beaten to a pulp in the
dead of night. That sounded suspiciously like Bhéma. And he would have had
to do it in secret. It added up. Kichaka had violated a woman with five
husbands and had been slain in a manner that bore Bhéma’s unmistakable
stamp.
As Duryodhana pondered, Susharma, king of the Trigartas, took advantage of
the silence and said, “O Kurus, if you desire to expand your forces, you can
begin by bringing Virata under your subjection. Now he is without Kichaka
and his followers should be little trouble. Let us go and take his wealth.
Subjugating him, you shall increase both your treasury and your army by
requisitioning his forces. I will bring my own army to assist you. Too many
times have the Trigartas been overpowered by Kichaka. Now we shall avenge
ourselves on the Matsyas.”
Duryodhana felt that the gods––or perhaps the Dänavas––had answered him.
If he went to Virata, they might find the Päëòavas. If they were not there,
then there was no loss. He would still gain something by winning over that
kingdom. The prince stood up and issued instructions. “Susharma has made an
excellent suggestion. We should go to the Matsya kingdom immediately.
Prepare our army to leave at once. As he has suggested, Susharma will
accompany us with his own forces.”
Duryodhana ordered that they depart the next day. He told Susharma to go
ahead with his army and begin by taking away Virata’s cattle. Duryodhana
would follow with his forces and attack the city. As the other Kuru elders sat in
silence, Dhåtaräñöra gave his approval and preparations were begun.
***
After Kichaka’s death Virata’s citizens were afraid. Although Kichaka had
been cruel, he had also been powerful enough to protect them. Now they had
no protector. How long would it be before some aggressive monarch tried to
conquer them? The king, desperate to replace his commander, considered
Kaìka, Vallabha, Tantripala and Granthika. It seemed to him that any of them
could lead his army and protect the Matsyas.
It was not long before Virata was presented with an opportunity to test his
ideas. One morning as he sat in court, a cowherd ran in and exclaimed, “The
365

Trigartas are attacking us and stealing your cows, O King. Come quickly to
rescue them.”
The king immediately issued orders for his army to assemble. He called for his
armor and weapons and prepared to lead his army. His four sons surrounded
him, also ready for battle. In a short time, hundreds of other powerful warrior
chiefs assembled in the court. Outside the assembly hall, the vast Matsya army
lined the streets, ready to march. Chariots, elephants, horses and infantry
created a clamor that resembled the ocean’s roar.
Virata’s younger brother, Satanika, stood by the king’s side. The king said, “I
have no doubt that Kaìka, Vallabha, Tantripala and Granthika will fight.
Give them armor and chariots adorned with flags. I do not think such men,
endowed as they are with bodies like mountains and arms like elephants’
trunks, will not join the battle.”
Virata strode anxiously out of his hall to organize his army, while Satanika had
chariots fetched for the Päëòavas. Having the four of them brought before
him, Satanika presented them with armor and weapons and ordered them to
fight. Enlivened by the thought of a battle, the Päëòavas selected suitable
armor and put it on. They mounted chariots and rode out of the city behind
the king.
The Matsya monarch charged into battle on a massive chariot surrounded by
his sons and the Päëòavas. In his burnished armor, adorned with a hundred
suns and a hundred eyes, the king shone like the sun encircled by the major
planets. Behind them came a thousand infuriated elephants. Eight thousand
chariot fighters and sixty thousand horsemen followed them, holding their
weapons aloft and sending out terrible war cries. The entire army seemed like a
mass of clouds charged with lightning moving across the earth.
The Trigartas were still rounding up Virata’s huge herd as the Matsya army
rushed upon them. Quickly abandoning the cows where they would not be
harmed, the Trigarta warriors met the Matsya’s charge. A fierce battle ensued
on the grazing grounds. As the enraged warriors slew one another, the battle
resembled the one that had once taken place between the gods and the
demons. A thick dust cloud rose up from the field, obscuring everything and
screening the afternoon sun. Thick showers of arrows whistled through the air
and warriors fell by the thousands. The screaming fighters hacked at one
another with their swords and axes.
As the blood of slain fighters flowed into the dust on the field, the cloud
366

subsided. Heads adorned with helmets and earrings were rolling on the earth.
Well-muscled arms, their gloved hands still clutching weapons, lay on the
ground like serpents. Shattered chariots and pieces of armor were strewn
everywhere. Vultures descended and tore at the bodies of the dead fighters.
Jackals surrounded the battlefield.
Susharma, mounted on a gold chariot, came before Virata and bellowed out a
challenge. He immediately released a hundred powerful arrows that struck
Virata’s armor and fell to the ground. Roaring like maddened bulls, the two
kings circled one another with their weapons upraised. They discharged arrows
like clouds pouring torrents of rain. Seeing him engaging with the Matsya king,
Susharma’s two brothers came to his assistance. With well-aimed arrows, they
killed Virata’s four horses and his charioteer. They then slew the warriors
protecting his sides and rear. Susharma leapt from his chariot with his sword
held high and rushed toward Virata. With his two brothers, he seized Virata
and took him captive.
Yudhiñöhira saw Virata being led away on Susharma’s chariot. He quickly went
over to Bhéma and called out, “The Matsya king has been captured and his
army routed. We have lived peacefully in his kingdom this last year and are
indebted to the king. Bhéma, free Virata and thus repay our debt. We shall
then put the Trigartas to flight.”
Bhéma’s eyes glinted at the prospect of the fight. He had been awaiting
Yudhiñöhira’s command before engaging in the battle. “So be it,” he replied.
“Behold my prowess. I shall take hold of that huge tree over there like a mace
and disperse the entire Trigarta army.”
Bhéma moved toward a huge sal tree nearby, but Yudhiñöhira checked him. “O
child, do not be rash. If you uproot this tree and perform superhuman deeds,
people will be amazed and say, ‘Surely this is Bhéma.’ Take some other weapon
so that people will not recognize you. Go on your chariot and the twins will
protect your wheels. Release the king.”
Bhéma urged on his charioteer and raced toward Susharma, who was heading
away with the captive king. Nakula and Sahadeva rode on either side and
carved through the Trigarta forces. Approaching Susharma, Bhéma yelled,
“Wait! Turn and fight! Behold now a mighty feat of arms as I throw you down
with all your followers.”
Bhéma let go a steady stream of arrows and Susharma turned to face him.
When the Trigarta king saw the powerful Bhéma and the twins before him, it
367

seemed to him that Yamaräja, flanked by Death and Time, had come to do
battle. Along with his sons and generals he tried to withstand the Päëòavas’
attack, but hundreds were being killed. Chariots were smashed and elephants
slain. Horses with their riders fell like trees blown over in a storm. The
Päëòavas’ forceful arrows swept in clouds through Susharma’s ranks and
created havoc. Bhéma leapt from his chariot and rushed about, whirling his
mace, mowing the infantry down like a field of corn.
Witnessing the devastation, Susharma was astonished. It seemed that they
would be annihilated by these three warriors. He pulled his bow back to his ear
and sent long steel shafts at the roaring Päëòavas. Bhéma struck the straightflying arrows with his mace and the twins struck at them with their swords.
Encouraged by the Päëòavas’ prowess, the remainder of Virata’s army rallied
and charged back into the fight. Yudhiñöhira rode into their midst, working a
great bow. With sharpened arrows the eldest Päëòava quickly dispatched a
thousand Trigarta warriors to Death’s abode. Bhéma, back on his chariot and
fighting alongside his brother, killed seven thousand. Nakula and Sahadeva,
focusing their efforts on protecting their elder brothers, slew a further
thousand brave Trigarta fighters.
Susharma began to retreat and Bhéma went after him swiftly. He killed
Susharma’s four horses and brought him to a halt. Seeing his opportunity,
Virata grabbed a mace and leapt from the chariot. The old Matsya king began
fighting Susharma’s troops, wielding his mace and dancing about like a young
man. Susharma jumped from his chariot and raced away. Bhéma called out to
him, “Stop! It is not becoming of heroes to fly away. With such prowess why
did you think of stealing Virata’s cows? Why are you now abandoning your
followers?”
Susharma, provoked, again turned to face Bhéma. “Stand and fight!” he
shouted, brandishing his iron club.
Bhéma leapt down and rushed toward the bellowing Susharma as a lion attacks
a deer. Not caring for Susharma’s blows, Bhéma seized him by the hair and
dashed him to the ground. Pulling him back up, he struck him several fierce
blows. Susharma fell gasping to the ground. Bhéma placed his knee on his
breast and dealt him powerful blows to the head. Susharma lost consciousness
and Bhéma dragged him to his chariot. He took the insensible Trigarta king to
Virata and said, “Behold this sinful man, whom I have captured. Surely he does
not deserve to live.”
368

The king replied, “Release the wretch.”
Bhéma dragged Susharma to his feet and, as he returned to consciousness,
snarled at him, “Although I should slay you for stealing the cows, I will release
you. According to kñatriya custom, you are now Virata’s slave. You must
declare this wherever you go. Only if you agree to this condition will you be
allowed to live. Go now and do not again perform such rash acts.”
Susharma bent his head low and climbed down from the chariot. He bowed to
Virata and left, taking with him the remnants of his army.
The Matsyas cheered. They surrounded the Päëòavas, still unaware of their
identities, and praised them. Virata said, “Today I have been saved by you four
heroes. All this kingdom’s wealth is as much yours as it is mine. I will bestow
upon you richly adorned women and heaps of gems. Tell me what you wish to
have and it is yours. Indeed, become the rulers of my kingdom. What more can
I say?”
Yudhiñöhira said humbly, “O King, we are pleased with your words, but it is
sufficient for us that you are freed from danger.”
“Come,” Virata said. “I will install you as king of the Matsyas. How can I rule in
your majestic presence? It is due to you alone that I am even able to see my
kingdom and my relatives today.”
Yudhiñöhira held up his hands in deference. “We are not able to rule Matsya.
Pray forgive us. O King, you should continue to rule this prosperous kingdom
in peace and happiness. Send emissaries into the capital to announce your
victory. In keeping with the custom of the victorious, we must spend this night
on the battlefield.”
Virata turned to his ministers and ordered them to carry news of their victory
to the city. “Let damsels and courtesans, decked with ornaments and carrying
musical instruments, come out of the city to entertain the troops,” the king
said delightedly. The ministers left at once and the warriors prepared to spend
the night on the field.

Chapter 38
Arjuna Encounters the Kurus

369

At dawn the next day, the Kaurava army arrived at the opposite side of the
city from where the battle with the Trigartas had been fought. Finding herds of
cattle grazing there, they immediately seized them. Once again the terrified
cowherds, seeing the Kaurava banners, fled into the city. They ran to the royal
court crying for protection. Virata’s eldest son, Bhuminjaya, was sitting on the
king’s throne in the king’s absence. The cowherd leader came before him and
said, “O prince, O mighty hero, we depend on you alone. The mighty Kauravas
with Duryodhana in the lead are seizing our cows. Defend the honor of our
race. The king has always praised your heroism and power. Taking whatever
soldiers that still remain in the city, display your power. You are this kingdom’s
greatest support. You resemble Arjuna himself. We beseech you to save us.”
Addressed thus in front of the palace ladies, Bhuminjaya replied proudly, “I
will surely display my prowess with the bow today, but I need a skilled
charioteer. My own charioteer was recently slain and has not been replaced.
Find the best of men to drive my horses, for I will fight a tremendous battle
with the haughty Kauravas. Entering into their army of elephants, chariots and
horsemen, I will destroy them. After striking terror into the hearts of
Duryodhana, Bhéñma, Karëa and Kåpa, I will bring back the cows. The
assembled Kurus will see my prowess and will wonder whether it is Arjuna who
is fighting with them.
The prince’s brave words circulated through the palace and soon reached
Arjuna. Delighted at the chance to confront Duryodhana, he approached
Draupadé and said, “Go at once to the prince and tell him that Båhannala was
formerly Arjuna’s charioteer. O slender-waisted princess, convince him to let
me drive his chariot into battle against the Kurus.”
Draupadé went straight to the royal court where she found Bhuminjaya still
vaunting his prowess. Unable to bear his repeated references to Arjuna, she
stepped forward and said, “The beautiful youth resembling an elephant and
known by the name Båhannala was once Arjuna’s charioteer. He was the
disciple of Pärtha and is himself a mighty bowman. I saw him when I lived with
the Päëòavas. It was Båhannala who drove Arjuna’s chariot when he
vanquished the gods at Khäëòava. Indeed there is no charioteer like him.”
Bhuminjaya looked at her in surprise. “How can I ask a eunuch to govern my
horses?” he asked.
“Have your sister ask him, O hero. He will certainly do her bidding. Do not
hesitate to engage him. With Båhannala as your charioteer, you will
370

undoubtedly vanquish the Kurus and rescue the cows.”
Still doubtful, the prince turned to his sister Uttarä and said, “Go at once and
fetch Båhannala.”
Virata’s daughter nodded and left the court. That lotus-eyed maiden was as
beautiful as Lakñmé herself with her slender waist and well-rounded breasts
adorned with pearls. She ran to the dancing hall, her golden ornaments
tinkling as she hurried along. Finding Arjuna, she bowed humbly before him.
“O Båhannala, our cows are being carried away by the Kurus. My brother, full
of heroism, is about to confront them with bow in hand. He requires a
charioteer. Sairindhré told him that you formerly drove Arjuna’s chariot. She
said that there was none equal to you in the skills of governing horses and
driving chariots. Therefore, O Båhannala, become the prince’s charioteer. Go
quickly! There is no time to lose.”
Arjuna smiled. “I am going.” He immediately left the palace followed by
Uttarä, just as an elephant in rut is followed by a she-elephant.
As he entered the court the prince called, “Ah, Båhannala, you are here. I have
heard that you are skilled in the driving chariots. As you drove Arjuna’s
chariot into battle against his foes, so today you should drive mine against the
Kurus.”
Arjuna approached the king and glanced downwards, playing with the long
braid of hair that hung down his side. “What power do I have to act as a
charioteer? Had you wanted song and dance, then I would have been the right
choice. How can I drive horses into battle?”
The prince looked at Båhannala. Although a eunuch, he was huge-bodied and
appeared to possess great power. His arms, covered with bangles and bracelets,
seemed like decorated serpents, and his shoulders, draped with white silk, were
as broad as a palace door. Having faith in Sairindhré’s words, Bhuminjaya said,
“O Båhannala, whatever you may be, drive my chariot today. We shall
challenge the wicked Kurus on the battlefield.”
The prince had a suit of armor brought for Arjuna. As if to make fun, Arjuna
struggled to put it on in various wrong ways. He appeared bewildered and
dropped the armor with a loud clatter. The palace ladies laughed and
Bhuminjaya came over to help him don the shining mail. He then led Arjuna
out to his chariot, which flew a flag bearing the sign of a lion. The prince
climbed aboard his chariot, his armor shining brilliantly in the morning sun.
Arjuna took his place at the front of the chariot and held the reins. The palace
371

maidens called out to him, “O Båhannala, after the prince defeats the Kurus,
take from them their fine silks and clothes as a token of your victory. We
desire to have those cloths for our dolls.”
“When the prince has overpowered the Kurus I shall surely bring back many
beautiful clothes for you,” Arjuna replied, throwing back his hair.
As Bhuminjaya was about to set off for battle, the Brahmins blessed him: “May
that great victory which Arjuna obtained at Khäëòava be yours today when
you meet the Kurus,” and they walked around the chariot with their hands
held palms outwards.
Arjuna urged on the horses and the chariot moved off with a deep rumbling
sound. Guided by Arjuna, the horses, decorated with golden necklaces and
silver armor, seemed to fly through the air. Within a short time the chariot
came within sight of the Kurus and Arjuna brought it to a halt. They were not
far from the cremation ground where his weapons were kept. The prince and
Arjuna gazed at the Kuru army in the distance. It seemed like a vast ocean, or a
forest of high trees moving through the sky. The dust raised by the army rose
up in a great cloud that screened the sun.
Bhuminjaya’s mouth fell open. He had never seen such a huge army. His hair
stood on end and he dropped his bow. “How can I fight such an enemy?” he
exclaimed, trembling. “Even the celestials could not face them. The Kuru army
has in their midst heroes like Droëa, Bhéñma, Karëa, Kåpa, Açvatthämä, and
the heroic king Duryodhana. Simply seeing them from a distance I have
become terrified.”
Wailing loudly, the prince ordered Arjuna to return to the city. “It is not wise
to confront this army. My father has gone out with the army and I am alone. I
have not practiced the skills of warfare. I am only a boy. I cannot overcome
those who are expert in arms. O Båhannala, head back to the capital.”
Arjuna turned to face the terrified prince. “Why do you increase your enemies’
delight, O prince? You have become pale with fear before you have even begun
to fight. Before both men and women you loudly vaunted your powers. You
said, ‘I shall defeat the Kurus and bring back the cows.’ Those were brave
words. O mighty-armed hero, how can you now return unsuccessful? You will
be derided by everyone. As for myself, eulogized by Sairindhré and commanded
by you, I have come here to defeat the Kurus. I will not return without
achieving that goal. Stop wailing and let us proceed into battle.”
Bhuminjaya stood shaking in the chariot. “Let the Kurus take our wealth as
372

they please. Let men and women laugh at me. Let the cows go anywhere. Let
the city be desolate. Let me fear my father. I cannot enter the battle.”
The prince jumped down from his chariot and began to run back toward the
city. Arjuna called out to him, “A brave kñatriya never flees the battlefield.
Better to die in battle than to run in fear.”
Bhuminjaya did not listen. With his long sword swinging from side to side as he
ran, he did not even look back. Arjuna sprang from the chariot and ran after
him.
Having seen the chariot’s approach, the Kurus had moved toward them. They
saw the prince running in fear and an unusual figure pursuing him, his long
braid and white silks streaming in the breeze. The Kuru soldiers laughed and
said to one another, “Who is this person, who appears to be a eunuch? He is
fire concealed by ashes. Although assuming the form of a neuter, he has the
body of an elephant. Indeed he resembles Arjuna, with the same head, the
same neck, and the same mace-like arms. His movements also resemble those of
the Päëòava.”
The Kurus gazed at Båhannala as he raced after the prince. Clearly he was no
eunuch. Surely it was Arjuna in disguise. Who else would have dared to face
the Kuru army alone? Obviously the Matsya prince had ventured to fight
simply out of childishness. It seemed that Arjuna was trying to stop him from
fleeing. The Kuru warriors watched the scene, not quite certain if they were
seeing Arjuna or not.
Catching Bhuminjaya, Arjuna seized him. The prince cried out, “Let me go! O
Båhannala, turn back the chariot. Only one who lives can secure prosperity
and happiness. When we get back I will give you one hundred coins of pure
gold, eight brilliant vaidurya gems, an excellent car drawn by the best of horses,
and ten infuriated elephants if you release me.”
Arjuna said nothing. He dragged the prince back to the chariot. He then said,
“O repressor of foes, if you do not like to fight, let us swap places. You govern
the horses and I will fight the enemy. Protected by my arms you may fearlessly
enter into the midst of the dreadful Kuru host. Why are you distraught, O
hero? You are the foremost of kñatriyas and a great prince. Together we will
overpower the Kurus and release the cows. Take the reins and we will proceed
into battle.”
Bhuminjaya was still terrified, but he became encouraged by Arjuna’s
confidence. He sat on the chariot and took the reins. Arjuna directed him to
373

guide the chariot toward the sami tree by the crematorium. Before facing the
Kurus he wanted to retrieve his Gäëòéva bow.
As the chariot moved off with Arjuna now in the back, the Kurus spoke
together. All of them suspected that the so-called eunuch was actually Arjuna.
Within the hearing of Duryodhana, Bhéñma and Karëa, Droëa said, “I perceive
numerous ill omens. Violent winds are whipping up around us, throwing dust
and gravel over our troops. The sky is shrouded with darkness and huge black
clouds are forming overhead. Our celestial weapons seem to be jumping from
their cases and our horses are shedding tears. Jackals are yelling hideously
nearby. All these signs indicate a calamity. Protect yourselves and arrange the
army well. Expect a great slaughter and guard well the cows. This great
bowman in the guise of a eunuch is undoubtedly Pärtha. O heroic men, surely
this man dressed as a woman is Kiréöé, whose chariot bears the emblem of
Hanumän, the destroyer of Lanka’s gardens. Indignant after his long stay in
the forest, he will today wreak havoc in battle. I do not see anyone here who
can stop him from defeating us and taking back the cows.”
As Droëa spoke, Karëa became angry. “Why do you always make light of us
and praise Arjuna? He is not even a sixteenth part of either myself or
Duryodhana.”
But Duryodhana was smiling. “If this is Pärtha, O Radheya, then my work is
done. We have discovered the Päëòavas before their final year is complete.
Now they will have to return to the forest. If this is anyone else in eunuch’s
guise, I shall soon lay him flat on the ground with my sharp arrows.”
Arjuna’s chariot soon reached the sami tree, out of sight of the Kurus. Arjuna
said, “Climb this tree, O prince, and bring down that bundle up there. It holds
the weapons I need. Your bow and arrows will not withstand the force of my
arms when, worked up with anger, I defeat our enemies. Here are the
Päëòavas’ weapons, including the Gäëòéva bow, as huge as a palm tree and
embellished with gold. It is a celestial bow without blemish, and it is capable of
bearing the heaviest weight.”
Bhuminjaya looked up at the bundle high in the tree. “It is heard that a corpse
is tied to this tree. How can I, a prince, touch such an unclean thing?”
“Do not be afraid, O prince. This is no corpse. There are only weapons
wrapped in that bundle. Bring them down at once. I would not make you
perform a cursed deed, born as you are of a noble race and heir to the Matsya
king.”
374

Bhuminjaya reluctantly climbed the tree. He cut the bundle loose with his
sword and brought it down to the ground, struggling under its huge weight.
Arjuna told him to open the bundle and the prince cut away the deerskin
covering. As the weapons were revealed they shone like the sun. Bhuminjaya
gasped. The blazing weapons resembled sighing serpents. The prince was
awestruck. He reached out to touch them and asked, “To what illustrious hero
does this bow, with its hundred golden embellishments, belong? And whose is
this one, embossed with shining golden elephants? Surely some powerful
warrior owns this bow, decorated with three effulgent suns.”
Bhuminjaya carefully lifted the brilliant weapons. Arjuna’s two inexhaustible
quivers lay next to Nakula and Sahadeva’s swords, which had hilts worked with
gold. Both swords were sheathed in tiger skins. Arjuna explained who owned
the weapons.
“The bow about which you asked first is the Gäëòéva. It is equal to a hundred
thousand other bows and is worshipped even by the celestials. It was first held
by Brahmä, then by Indra and Soma, and now it has come to Arjuna through
Varuëa. The bow next to the Gäëòéva, adorned with a hundred golden insects,
belongs to Yudhiñöhira, and the huge bow next to that is Bhéma’s. The quivers
containing winged shafts as sharp as razors belong to Arjuna. Those arrows
become inexhaustible in battle. The sword nearby the quivers bearing the
emblem of a black bee and carrying the sting of a bee is also Arjuna’s.”
Arjuna described each weapon and its owner to the amazed prince. When he
had finished Bhuminjaya said, “These weapons are both beautiful and dreadful,
but where are their owners? Where is Arjuna and the noble Yudhiñöhira?
Where indeed are the twins and the mightiest of men, Bhéma? We never hear
of those heroes, who are capable of destroying all enemies but who lost their
kingdom in a game of dice. Where is Draupadé, the jewel among women, who
followed them faithfully to the forest?”
Arjuna then revealed to the prince his identity and that of all his brothers.
The prince looked at him in astonishment. He had never suspected it, but now
it seemed obvious. The mighty Vallabha could well be Bhéma, and Kaìka
always had a certain nobility and bearing which outshone the other courtiers.
Surely he could be Yudhiñöhira. But the prince still needed to be convinced. He
asked Arjuna, “I shall believe your words if you can tell me Arjuna’s ten names,
which I have heard before.”
Arjuna replied, “Because I conquered many countries and collected their
375

wealth, I am called Dhanaïjaya. I never return from battle without defeating
my enemy and thus I am called Vijaya. My steeds are white and so they call me
Swetavahana. I was born when the constellation Uttarä Phälguna was in the
ascendant; therefore, I am Phälguné. Because I wear the brilliant diadem given
to me by Indra, I am called Kiréöé. I am dreadful to behold in battle and so men
call me Bhibatsu. I am named Savyasäcin because I can draw the bow with
either hand. Being unapproachable and irrepressible, I am known as Jiñëu.
Arjuna is my name because I always perform white deeds of great purity. My
father, out of affection for a black-complexioned boy, called me Kåñëa. These
are my ten names, O prince.”
Bhuminjaya fell at Arjuna’s feet with his arms outstretched. “By my good luck I
have seen you, O Dhanaïjaya. Please forgive anything I may have said to you
in my ignorance. You are worthy of my worship. My fears are all removed and I
am ready to act as your charioteer. Please order me.”
“I will fight the Kurus and return your animals. Have no doubt,” Arjuna said as
he strapped on his quivers. “This chariot will be like your citadel with my arms
for its ramparts and the Gäëòéva as its unassailable defenses. Simply guide this
chariot and have no fear.”
The prince placed the Päëòavas’ weapons in the chariot. “With you in the
chariot, how can I be afraid? But I am bewildered as to how you have accepted
the guise of a eunuch. It seems incredible that one of your prowess and power
should assume such a form.”
Arjuna smiled. “I am observing a vow, both to acquire religious merit and to
satisfy another’s will. That vow is now complete, O prince.”
The Päëòavas had calculated that the full term of their exile was completed
that day. Thus Arjuna had revealed his identity to the prince without fear.
Now he would fight openly with the Kurus. He looked at the horses yoked to
the chariot. “Are these horses battle-trained?” he asked.
“These horses are equal to the four horses that draw Kåñëa’s chariot,” the
prince answered proudly. “I myself am a skilled driver, no less skilled than
Däruka or Mätali. I will break through the enemy ranks with such speed that
the chariot will hardly be visible.”
Arjuna nodded and removed his bangles. He pulled on a pair of iguana-skin
gloves that covered his forearms. Tying back his hair with a piece of white
cloth, he sat on the chariot and thought of his celestial weapons. They
appeared within his mind and said, “We are here, O son of Päëòu. We are
376

prepared to do your bidding.”
“All of you dwell within my memory,” Arjuna said with delight. The thought of
battle with Duryodhana was filling him with new enthusiasm and energy.
Thirteen years had been a long time to wait. At last he would have the chance
to use the weapons he had obtained from the gods. He strung the Gäëòéva and
twanged it, producing a sound of two mountains striking one another. The
earth vibrated, shaking the trees, and fireballs fell from the sky. When the
Kurus heard the terrific sound, they knew it was surely Arjuna with his
Gäëòéva bow.
Arjuna took down the lion banner and meditated on Agni. A celestial banner
fell from the sky adorned with gold and bearing Hanumän’s image. After
walking around it reverentially, Arjuna hoisted the flag on the chariot’s
flagstaff. He ordered Bhuminjaya to drive, and the chariot moved off toward
the north in the direction of the Kurus. Arjuna blew his conch shell with all
his strength. It emitted a thundering sound which made his horses drop to
their knees. The prince, stricken with fear, fell over in the chariot.
Arjuna consoled the prince and told him to take courage. “You are a kñatriya
and the son of a great king. Why then do you tremble at this sound, losing
control of the horses? Many times have you heard the sounds of battle, of
mighty conches and trumpets being blown. Why are you terrified like an
ordinary man?”
The prince got up and took hold of the reins. He brought the horses back to
their feet and replied, “Surely I have heard many conches blown, but never
one such as this. Nor have I ever heard a bow sounding like the Gäëòéva. This
celestial banner also fills me with wonder. The monkey seems to be alive and
about to leap down from the flag. My mind is simply astonished.”
Arjuna laughed. “Stand firm on the chariot and hold the reins tightly, for I will
blow my conch again.”
Arjuna blew his conch and twanged his bow once more. The combined sound
filled the four quarters and seemed to rend the mountains. The prince kept his
position with difficulty and controlled the terrified steeds.
In the distance Droëa heard the terrible sounds Arjuna was making. He turned
to Duryodhana. “There is no doubt that Savyasäcin has come to fight with us.
Even more dreadful omens are now visible, portending a great calamity for the
Kurus. Your army seems cheerless, as if they are weeping. All our leading
warriors stand motionless, bereft of energy. A pall of gloom seems to hang over
377

our forces. Let us make ready for battle. When Pärtha appears, you will have
cause to repent your actions.”
Duryodhana scowled. He went over to Bhéñma and said, “O grand-father, it
seems that we have found the Päëòavas before their exile is complete. The
condition was that they should return to exile if found in their final year. If
this is indeed Bhibatsu, then they will have to spend another twelve years in
the forest. You should carefully calculate the time, O Bhéñma, so that there is
no doubt.”
Duryodhana looked around. In the distance he saw the dust rising from
Arjuna’s chariot. The Kaurava held his bow firmly. “Whoever it is coming
toward us, be it Arjuna or the Matsya king, we will have to fight today. Why
then are our leading men sitting panic-stricken on their chariots? We are many
and here comes but a single warrior. Our preceptor’s talk of omens and
calamities is unbecoming. Our agreement with Susharma was that we would
support him in the battle against Virata. We must now keep our promise. O
Bhéñma, arrange our troops for battle. I fear that Droëa is overpowered by his
affection for the enemy. How can he guide or protect us in our hour of
danger?”
Karëa had come up alongside Duryodhana. He spoke loudly so that all the
leading Kurus could hear him. “It seems you have all become fearful simply
upon seeing Arjuna. Do you not know that Arjuna is no match for me? After
spending a long time in the forest, he will be weak in battle. Like a qualified
Brahmin receiving charity, he will soon quietly receive thousands of my
arrows. By killing Arjuna I will repay my debt to Duryodhana. Today I will
extinguish the Päëòava fire, which is kindled by the fuel of weapons and which
consumes all enemies. My unfailing shafts will pierce Pärtha like serpents
entering an anthill. You will see him lying on the ground like a hill covered
with golden karnikara flowers. With powerful javelins I will bring down the
screaming monkey from his banner and shatter his chariot to pieces. All of you
may fight alongside me or, if you like, go away with the cows. I can face Arjuna
alone.”
Kåpa looked contemptuously at Karëa. “O Radheya, your crooked mind always
desires war. You do not understand things according to time, place and
circumstance. Wise men only choose war when all other means have failed and
when the signs are favorable. How can it be favorable for us to face Pärtha in
an encounter? Alone he vanquished the Gandharvas and alone he withstood
378

the celestial host at Khäëòava. Again, he alone defeated the powerful
Nivätakavacas and Kalakanyas. Unaided, he fearlessly took away Subhadrä
from the midst of the Yadus, exciting the wrath of the invincible Balaräma.
Now he has come before us after practicing celibacy in the forest and having
acquired from the gods all their divine weapons.”
Arjuna’s chariot had stopped some way off. The Kuru army arrayed itself in a
pointed formation facing his direction. At the head of the army Kåpa
continued to speak, admonishing Karëa who stood fuming on his chariot, his
great bow held at the ready.
“Anyone desiring to fight alone with Arjuna is deranged,” Kåpa said as he
pulled on his gloves. “He is like a man who desires to swim the ocean with a
rock tied to his neck. O Karëa, you brag like a foolish child. You wish to take
out the fangs of an infuriated serpent with your bare finger, or pass through a
blazing fire after smearing your body with oil and dressing in silk. Pärtha will
move through our ranks like a Yamaräja with his rod in hand. Let our army,
clad in coats of mail, stand ready. Let yourself, myself, Duryodhana, Bhéñma,
Droëa and his son all stand together. Maybe if we six are united and supported
by our army, we will stand a chance, although even then I am doubtful.”
Açvatthämä pulled up his chariot behind his father. He had heard Karëa’s
speech and he too spoke derisively. “We have not as yet achieved anything,
Karëa. We have not taken the cows and we have not defeated the enemy. Why
then do you boast? Great heroes, even after winning many battles and
conquering great kingdoms, do not utter a single word of self-praise. Indeed,
silence itself is the quality of the truly powerful. Fire burns silently and silently
does the sun shine. The earth bears her great load of moving and non-moving
creatures without a word.”
The powerful Açvatthämä, always galled by Karëa’s arrogance, was especially
angered by his disregard for Droëa. Standing in his chariot with his hand on
his long sword, he loudly rebuked Karëa, echoing his father’s sentiments.
“What kñatriya on this earth could be proud of winning a kingdom by deceitful
gambling like this wicked and sinful Duryodhana? In what single combat did
you or he ever defeat Arjuna or any one of his brothers? In what battle did you
conquer Indraprastha? In what encounter did you win Draupadé, O man of
wicked deeds, so that you could drag her to the assembly when she was in her
period and wearing a single cloth? You have cut the root of the sal tree that is
the Kuru dynasty. Arjuna and his brothers will never forgive you for your
379

insult to Draupadé.”
Açvatthämä looked across at Arjuna’s chariot, which was waiting in the
distance. He remembered their time together in his father’s school. Arjuna had
always been Droëa’s favorite and that had hurt him deeply, but there was no
doubting Arjuna’s martial skills. Açvatthämä had been forced to grudgingly
admit his own inferiority. There was not a warrior on earth who could match
Arjuna at bowmanship. Karëa’s bold words would soon be shown to be little
more than idle boasts.
Turning back to Karëa, Açvatthämä continued. “Dhanaïjaya never turns away
from a fight even when faced with Gandharvas, Räkñasas or Asuras. Whoever
he turns upon is blown away as a tree is knocked over by the force of Garuòa’s
wings. Who would not praise Pärtha, who is superior to you in prowess, no less
skilled a bowman than Indra, and equal even to Kåñëa himself in battle? My
father’s warning should be heeded. His affection for Arjuna should not be
criticized, for the wise say that a disciple is the same as a son.”
Açvatthämä then looked at Duryodhana. “O proud man, fight with Arjuna in
the same way that you defeated him at dice. Let your uncle Çakuni now show
his true prowess in a real fight. The Gäëòéva does not cast dice, but it
discharges burning arrows. Those dreadful shafts can rend the mountains and
pierce the earth. The lord of death, the wind-god, or the god of fire may leave
something behind, but Arjuna, worked up with anger, does not. You may
challenge him if you wish, supported by the vain son of a suta––but for myself,
I see no point in fighting Dhanaïjaya.”
Bhéñma had been listening to all the speeches. He was sure that it was Arjuna
who had appeared before them in the guise of a eunuch. The old Kuru warrior
longed to embrace him again. It was tragic that he had to face Arjuna on the
battlefield. A kñatriya’s duties were hard and painful without doubt. There was
no way to avoid this fight. Arjuna would certainly not abandon his duty as a
warrior. The Kurus would need all their powers united to face him in battle.
Their arguments would only weaken them and make it easier for Arjuna to
win.
Bhéñma looked across at Arjuna’s chariot and said, “Droëa’s son has spoken
well, as has Kåpa. Karëa speaks his boasts only to incite us to perform our
kñatriya duties. No wise man would find fault with his preceptor. In my view,
we must fight. Who would not be bewildered when faced with an adversary as
powerful and effulgent as the sun? Karëa’s words should only encourage us.
380

Açvatthämä, forgive him. There is serious work at hand. With Kunté’s son
before us, there is no time for dissension. The wise declare that of all the
dangers that face an army, the worst is disunion among the leaders.
Açvatthämä is right. We should heed Droëa’s warning, for Arjuna is the best
of warriors.”
Duryodhana folded his palms and said to Droëa, “O preceptor, please forgive us
for doubting you and let us be peaceful among ourselves. If you are pleased,
then everything can be accomplished.”
Droëa stood in his chariot, radiant in his bright armor. “Bhéñma’s words have
pacified me. The grandfather has spoken well. We should arrange ourselves
with care and protect Duryodhana. I am sure this is Arjuna, and I do not think
he will be satisfied merely by recovering Virata’s cows. I am also sure that he
would not have shown himself before his exile had expired. O Bhéñma, tell us
your opinion.”
Bhéñma had already calculated the time. Like Duryodhana, he too had carefully
considered the reports of Hastinäpura’s spies and concluded that the Päëòavas
were very likely at Virata. As he looked across at Arjuna’s chariot, tears
pricked his eyes. “Kunté’s sons are not greedy and will never do anything
against virtue,” he declared. “All of them are noble. With Yudhiñöhira at their
head, there is no doubt that they will keep their word. They do not desire to
win the kingdom by unfair means. Otherwise, why did they not show their
prowess even at the gambling match? The Päëòavas would sooner invite death
than speak an untruth. By my calculation their time is complete. I therefore
conclude that we will soon see all five brothers again. If Duryodhana will not
restore their kingdom, then our meeting will take place on a battlefield.”
Duryodhana smoldered like a fire fed with oil. He seemed about to burst into
flames. His dark eyes turned toward Bhéñma and he spoke in a low voice. “I will
not return the Päëòavas’ kingdom. O Grandfather, please arrange for a battle.”
Bhéñma was grave. “We should act with caution. I have yet to see a battle in
which one side was sure to be victorious. And one party is always defeated. We
now face Vijaya. I therefore suggest, O King, that you leave with half the army.
Take the cows with you and I, along with the other Kuru leaders, will remain
here to hold off Arjuna.”
Duryodhana agreed. Leaving Bhéñma in charge of half the army, he left with
the other half, driving the cows ahead of him. Bhéñma stood surrounded by
Droëa, Kåpa, Karëa and Açvatthämä. He ordered them into various positions
381

in preparation for battle. As they moved into position they saw Arjuna’s
chariot approach. Hearing a sound resembling thunderclaps as Arjuna twanged
his bowstring, Droëa said, “There is no doubt that that is the Gäëòéva. No
other bow could emit such sounds. Observe closely the banner on the chariot.
There you will see a celestial monkey sending forth terrible cries. Know for
certain that it is Arjuna who faces us.”
As Droëa spoke two arrows fell from the sky and landed in his chariot at his
feet. Other arrows touched the chariots of Bhéñma and Kåpa.
“Seeing his elders again after a long time, Pärtha is offering his respects,”
Droëa said, holding up his hand to bless Arjuna. “Päëòu’s son shines on the
battlefield like a well-tended sacrificial fire. Stand firm, for his next arrows will
not be carrying his respects.”

Chapter 39
The Battle at Virata
In his chariot only a half a mile from the Kurus, Arjuna instructed the prince
to halt while he established the enemies’ position. Bhuminjaya gazed in
amazement at the army before them. “Who are these heroes who resemble
mountains in the midst of a mighty ocean?” he asked.
“The one with the emblem of a golden waterpot on his flagstaff is Droëa,”
Arjuna replied. “I always worship him. You should circumambulate his chariot
and I will strike him only if he first attacks me, for such is the duty of
kñatriyas.”
Arjuna pointed to each of the leading chariots. “The hero clad in a coat of
tigerskin on the chariot drawn by red horses is Kåpa. Today I will show him
how light I can be in the use of weapons. By his side, the warrior whose flag
bears the sign of a bow is Açvatthämä. He is my preceptor’s son. Thus he too is
worthy of my respect. The one clad in golden mail, whose emblem is a serpent
against a gold background, is Duryodhana. He always bears the Päëòavas ill
will. Immediately behind him is a hero, blazing like fire, with the emblem of a
strong rope for binding elephants––that is the wicked-minded Karëa. Be
careful when you approach him for he always challenges me to fight.”
382

Arjuna pointed toward the chariot which stood just behind the four he had
already named. “This great hero, whose flag is blue and emblazoned with a
golden palmyra and five stars, and who is shielded by a white umbrella, is
Çantanu’s son Bhéñma, our grandfather. Always treated with regal honor by the
Kauravas, he follows Duryodhana. You should approach him last for he will
never harm me.”
After observing the army for some time, Arjuna told the prince to advance. As
they moved off, he saw Duryodhana detach himself from the army and move
toward the south, followed by half the troops. Arjuna ordered Bhuminjaya to
follow him. “I will engage with Duryodhana, for if he is overpowered, then our
purpose will be accomplished.” Arjuna then sent arrows toward his three
elders, who faced him on the battlefield.
Kåpa, observing Arjuna’s chariot change direction, immediately understood his
intention. “Quickly move to intercept the Päëòava,” he shouted. “What will
we do with the Matsyas’ vast wealth if Duryodhana were to sink like a holed
boat in the Pärtha water?”
Arjuna released hundreds of thousands of arrows, and they covered the Kuru
forces like a swarm of locusts. The warriors could not see anything and they
became confused. Being unable even to flee, they praised Arjuna’s prowess.
The earth and sky resounded with the twang of the Gäëòéva and the blast of
Arjuna’s conch shell. Virata’s son maneuvered the chariot dexterously and cut
off Duryodhana, preventing him from escaping with the cows. As Arjuna
closed upon Duryodhana, the cows began to run back toward the city.
Duryodhana quickly came back to the side of the other Kuru leaders.
After saving the Matsya cows, Arjuna said, “Let us leave the cowardly
Duryodhana for now. He has fled for his life. I know the wretched Karëa
desires to fight with me, even as one elephant fights with another. Seek him
out, O prince, and I will curb his pride. He has grown insolent due to the
protection Duryodhana has afforded him.”
The prince swung the chariot around and raced into the center of the
battlefield, from where he could see all the leading Kurus. Four of
Duryodhana’s brothers came forward and confronted Arjuna. They sent their
arrows toward him in steady waves, but Bhuminjaya avoided the falling shafts
by his skillful driving. At the same time, Arjuna shot his own blazing arrows,
which covered the Kaurava chariots. The Päëòava, remembering Bhéma’s vow
to kill all of Dhåtaräñöra’s sons, avoided slaying any of them.
383

Other mighty warriors rushed at Arjuna, roaring and releasing showers of
weapons. One, a king named Shatruntapa, assailed him with such force that he
checked the movement of his chariot. Arjuna disappeared beneath a hail of
arrows as Shatruntapa fought with fury. Wounded by the assault, Arjuna
blazed up in anger. He drew the Gäëòéva back to his ear and fired five deadly
arrows that killed Shatruntapa’s four horses and his charioteer. With ten more
straight-flying shafts, he tore off the king’s armor along with his arms and
head. Shatruntapa fell to the earth like a mountain peak struck down by a
thunderbolt.
Arjuna turned toward the other Kuru fighters who were closing in on him. He
seemed to be dancing in his chariot as he released his gold-plumed arrows.
Long lines of shafts were seen to fly from Arjuna in all directions. As he moved
among the Kuru army he appeared like a forest fire consuming dry wood at the
end of summer. The battlefield presented a dreadful scene, with the mangled
bodies of warriors and animals strewn about. Elephants screamed and horses
whinnied in terror. The roars of the fighters and the blasts of conchshells and
trumpets added to the clamor. Above all these sounds rose Hanumän’s terrible
cries from Arjuna’s standard.
As Arjuna’s chariot approached Karëa, Arjuna was attacked by Karëa’s
brother. Arjuna at once killed his horses and with a crescent-tipped arrow
beheaded the warrior right in front of Karëa. Seeing his brother fall like a
palm tree cut at its root, Karëa was infuriated. He rushed at the Päëòava with
a great shout. With twelve arrows he wounded both Arjuna and Bhuminjaya,
as well as all of his horses. Arjuna assailed Karëa with full force, like Garuòa
falling upon a serpent. The other Kurus, seeing an encounter about to take
place between the two heroes, stood back to watch.
Arjuna sent a thick shower of arrows toward Karëa, but Karëa baffled the
shafts with his own. He counterattacked Arjuna with thousands of arrows.
With his bright armor and flashing steel arrows, Karëa seemed like a fire
sending forth showers of sparks. Seeing Karëa holding Arjuna off, the other
Kuru fighters cheered him on. They clapped their hands and blew their
conches. Arjuna could not tolerate hearing such praise and he fought with
redoubled strength. Both combatants sent hundreds of thousands of arrows at
each other. To those watching it seemed like the sun and moon were
contending behind black clouds.
Karëa repeatedly attempted to kill Arjuna’s horses and charioteer, but the
384

Päëòava checked Karëa’s arrows with his own every time. The two fighters
fired arrows with blinding speed, their hands hardly visible as they worked
their bows. Karëa sent a non-stop stream of shafts that resembled the sun’s rays
shining on the earth. Gradually, however, Arjuna gained an edge over his
opponent. While checking Karëa’s arrows he began to pierce him all over his
body. With fleet arrows he wounded Karëa in the arms, thighs, breast and
head. Without his natural coat of impenetrable armor, Karëa was hurt badly by
Arjuna’s attack. Finally he turned away from the fight and fled like one
elephant defeated by another.
When Karëa retreated, the other Kurus, headed by Duryodhana, came to
attack Arjuna. Without flagging, Arjuna cheerfully met their attack. He
displayed various celestial weapons and filled the entire sky with arrows. No
part of the battlefield occupied by the Kurus was visible as Arjuna’s arrows
rained down. It was impossible to even look at the Päëòava in his anger. He
seemed like the fire at the end of the cosmic manifestation. As Arjuna fought
like a superhuman being, he created havoc among his foes. His arrows only fell
where they were aimed and his bow was always bent into a circle. The Kuru
army fell back in terror, the soldiers worshipping Arjuna in their minds. Horses
and elephants that were not slain ran in all directions. Smashed chariots lay
everywhere, with the bodies of their drivers and warriors lying prostrate
nearby.
In the sky the gods, Gandharvas, Siddhas and åñis assembled to watch Arjuna
fight. The fragrance of their celestial garlands spread across the battlefield as if
the trees had blossomed in spring. Their clothes, ornaments and shining
conveyances lit up the region with a brilliant lustre. The sky was ablaze. It was
beautiful to behold. In the midst of all the celestials stood Indra, looking with
affection at his son.
Arjuna looked around at the routed army and saw Droëa. Feeling affection for
his teacher he ordered Virata’s son to drive the chariot toward him. “O prince,
Droëa is always worthy of my worship. In intelligence he resembles Shukra, the
guru of the demons, and in his knowledge of morality he is no less than
Båhaspati. He has studied all the Vedas and the science of archery resides
within him. He is always ornamented by forgiveness, self-control, truthfulness
and compassion. I desire to fight with him, so advance with caution.”
The prince urged on the horses and Arjuna blew his conch. Droëa saw him
coming and took out his own conch, giving it a mighty blast. The conches
385

sounded together like a thousand trumpets. Droëa’s red horses rose up and
drew his chariot quickly forward. Seeing his preceptor approach, Arjuna was
joyful. Placing his bow by his side he called out, “O gentle one, we have
completed our term of exile in the forest and now wish to exact our revenge.
You should not be angry with us. O irrepressible hero, I will not strike you
unless you attack first.”
Droëa smiled at his favorite disciple. Without replying he raised his goldplated bow and discharged more than twenty shafts. Arjuna instantly raised his
own bow and countered his arrows with astonishing speed. Droëa covered
Arjuna’s chariot on all sides with thousands of arrows. Bhuminjaya swiftly
turned the chariot and dropped away from Droëa as Arjuna dexterously cut
down his arrows. Both fighters invoked celestial weapons and spread a network
of arrows that amazed the watching Kuru soldiers. Other weapons began to
appear on the battlefield as the two combatants chanted mantras sacred to
various deities. Firebrands and blazing discuses were hurled from Droëa’s bow,
but Arjuna struck them all down. He sent an even greater number of longshafted arrows toward his preceptor. Droëa, smiling all the while, cut down all
those arrows in mid-flight.
The Kurus cheered again and again as they witnessed the prowess of both guru
and disciple, and they wondered at the harshness of a kñatriya’s duty that
impelled the two to fight one another.
Even as he fought with Droëa, Arjuna kept up his attack on the Kuru army.
His arrows descended on them like lightning bolts. As the fierce razor-headed
shafts struck horses, elephants and soldiers, they made a sound resembling a
hard downpour of hailstones. The battlefield was strewn with arms still
clutching weapons and heads adorned with helmets. Golden armor and pieces
of shattered chariots littered the ground. The screams of terrified soldiers filled
the air as Arjuna maintained his assault.
Feeling affection for his disciple, Droëa displayed only some of his power. He
held off Arjuna’s attack on himself and sent a barrage of golden-feathered
arrows back at him. His shafts traveled toward Arjuna in rows, their feathers
touching. Arjuna responded by releasing so many arrows that Droëa and his
chariot became invisible. Those observing Arjuna could not discern any
interval between his taking up arrows, placing them on his bow, and then
firing them. Even Indra, watching from the heavens, was wonderstruck. Droëa
was totally enveloped in a thick mass of arrows that fell continuously upon
386

him. Seeing this the Kurus cried out, “Alas!”
Açvatthämä was infuriated and he rushed at Arjuna, bellowing out a challenge.
The Päëòava turned toward him and offered Droëa a chance to retreat.
Açvatthämä, highly-skilled in battle, sent an arrow that cut Arjuna’s evertwanging bowstring. The deities in the sky, beholding this superhuman feat,
exclaimed, “Well done! Bravo!” Açvatthämä succeeded in wounding Arjuna
with a number of sharp-pointed shafts decked with kanka feathers.
Arjuna laughed and restrung his bow. A furious fight ensued between the
disciple and the son of Droëa, which made the hairs of the heroes who were
watching stand erect. It resembled a clash between two maddened elephants.
They struck one another with burning arrows that looked like serpents hissing
through the air. But Açvatthämä’s arrows quickly became exhausted as Arjuna
fought on, his own supply being inexhaustible by the fire-god’s boon.
As Açvatthämä withdrew from the fight, Karëa returned and twanged his
bowstring with a crash like thunder. Arjuna gazed at him with coppery-red
eyes. Hoping to kill him, he fired thousands of arrows in his direction. He then
called out, “O Karëa, the time has come for you to make good your boastful
words. Many times have you vainly stated that there are none to equal you in
battle. Fighting with me today you will know your own strength and will never
again disregard others. Without ever considering piety, you have given vent to
many harsh words. Try your best to make good those insults you offered me in
the assembly. You cannot defeat me. Now reap the fruit of your insult to
Draupadé. Only virtue restrained me that day from exacting a terrible
vengeance. Today you will feel the force of my restrained anger, held in check
these last thirteen years. Fight, O sinful one, and let all the Kurus watch as you
perish.”
Karëa sneered. “Prove yourself in battle, Pärtha. The world knows that your
words exceed your deeds. As a result of your weakness and inability, the
Kauravas have forced you to suffer. Do not bother to make excuses. Now we
will all see your power when I strike you with my irresistible weapons. Even if
Indra himself came to fight on your behalf, you would not escape.”
Arjuna was derisive. “You have always fled from me and thus you still live to
utter these empty words. Even today when you saw your brother slain you fled.
What power were you showing then?”
Bending the Gäëòéva into a semicircle, Arjuna quickly fired dozens of armorpiercing arrows that shone like fire. Karëa delightedly received those shafts
387

with his own, intercepting every one. Again a network of arrows spread out
between the two fighters. Karëa released searing shafts with unerring accuracy
and pierced Arjuna’s arms and hands. Unable to tolerate the attack, Arjuna
cut Karëa’s bowstring with a crescent-headed arrow. Karëa replied with a
number of arrows that made Arjuna lose hold of the Gäëòéva. Quickly
regaining his composure, Arjuna sent razor-headed shafts at Karëa which cut
his bow to pieces. Karëa took up a fresh bow and released a fierce steel arrow
resembling a lance, but Arjuna struck it down even as it left Karëa’s bow.
Five or six powerful fighters came up to support Karëa, but Arjuna slew them
all. The Päëòava drew his bow back to his ear and fired four steel shafts that
killed Karëa’s horses. With another powerful arrow he struck Karëa on the
breast, making a sound like an explosion. The arrow pierced Karëa’s armor and
penetrated into his body. He lost consciousness and fell sideways in his chariot,
whereupon he was quickly taken onto another chariot by his charioteer and
carried away.
Arjuna and Bhuminjaya scoffed at the defeated Karëa. Arjuna then looked
around and said, “Take me to the place where you see the emblem of the
golden palmyra. There stands our grandfather, Çantanu’s son, looking like an
immortal. He too desires to fight with me.”
Bhuminjaya was exhausted. Gasping for breath he replied, “I do not think I can
continue guiding your horses. My mind is confounded and my limbs are weak.
It seems as if the four quarters are melting from the power of the celestial
weapons you and the Kurus have released. I am beside myself with the sight
and the smell of flesh and blood. I have never before seen such a battle. The
clamor has deafened me and I feel stupefied. The twang of the Gäëòéva, like
repeated thunderclaps, and your lightning bolt arrows have rent my heart. I am
consumed by fear. It appears as if the earth is shifting before my eyes and I am
losing my vitality.”
Arjuna consoled the prince. “You are a prince in the Matsya line. It is your
sacred duty to face the enemy in battle. Take heart, for you will find strength
in the Supreme Power. The Lord is always pleased when we perform our
prescribed duties with firmness and determination. Guide the horses for only a
while longer. I wish to face the grandsire in battle.”
The prince felt heartened and he urged the steeds forward. As the chariot
moved across the battlefield toward Bhéñma’s chariot, Arjuna continued, “This
battle will not last much longer. The Kuru army is reeling like a wheel under
388

the force of my weapons. I will make a river flow toward the other world, with
blood for its waters, chariots for its eddies, and elephants for its aquatics. The
Kuru forest, with heads, arms and tall backs for its branches, will be cut down. I
have obtained all the celestial weapons from the gods. Do not fear, O prince,
for I will rout the Kurus and put them to flight.”
When Arjuna got within striking distance of Bhéñma, he sent a hail of shafts at
him. Bhéñma patiently countered his arrows and four of Duryodhana’s brothers
came forward to protect him. Dushashana launched a fierce attack on Arjuna.
He wounded Bhuminjaya with a large dart and pierced Arjuna’s breast with
another. Arjuna at once sent golden-winged arrows, which cut Dushashana’s
bow to pieces and severely wounded him in the chest. Dushashana retreated,
leaving his three brothers to fight with Arjuna. Each of them were similarly
injured and had to retreat.
At Bhéñma’s command, thousands of Kuru troops surrounded Arjuna and
assailed him. The Päëòava spun around in his chariot with his bow constantly
drawn to a circle. Sometimes he shot with his left and sometimes his right arm.
Blazing arrows went in all directions and the Kuru force was torn apart. Arjuna
appeared in battle like the scorching mid-day sun with its unbearable rays.
Kuru heroes leapt down from their cars and fled, throwing aside their weapons.
Horsemen turned and drove their horses away in terror. The Kurus retreated
with difficulty, falling over the bodies of men, elephants and horses.
Duryodhana, Karëa, Kåpa, Droëa and Açvatthämä then rushed toward Arjuna
together. They covered him with so many arrows that no part of his body was
visible. Even amid that onslaught Arjuna maintained his calm and invoked the
Aindrastra, summoning the fire-god’s invincible power. That weapon sent
hundreds of thousands of flaming arrows and darts at the Kurus and drove
them back. Arjuna then saw Bhéñma standing before him on his chariot.
Gaìgä’s son was smiling. In his shining coat of mail, he shone like a white
mountain at sunrise. He lifted his gold-plated bow and fired a dozen arrows,
which struck the roaring monkey on Arjuna’s banner.
Pushing aside the affection he felt for the old Kuru leader, Arjuna sent a huge
dart which broke down the white umbrella over his head. He quickly followed
it with arrows that severed his flagstaff and killed the two warriors protecting
his flanks. Arjuna wounded Bhéñma’s horses and brought his chariot to a halt.
Bhéñma became angry and he began to invoke divine weapons. A massive hail
of arrows, darts and spears fell blazing from the sky. Arjuna instantly checked
389

his attack with his own celestial missiles. He counter-attacked Bhéñma with
volumes of arrows that sped toward him. Bhéñma received Arjuna’s assault like
a hill receives a cloud. He dexterously cut down all the arrows as they flew, and
they fell to pieces on the ground.
The battle between Arjuna and Bhéñma raged fiercely for some time as the
Kurus watched in amazement. It seemed as if Indra were contending with Bali,
the Asura king. Neither side paused in the fight. Arjuna’s Gäëòéva had become
a circle of fire and Bhéñma danced on his chariot like a youth.
Finally, Arjuna succeeded in baffling Bhéñma with a weapon that sent an
uncountable number of golden-winged arrows in repeated waves. Bhéñma fell
back in his chariot and, seeing his opportunity, Arjuna severed his bow with a
razor-faced arrow. Immediately after that he shot ten steel shafts with heads
shaped liked calves’ teeth. Those deadly arrows pierced Bhéñma’s breast. The
Kuru chief was stunned and he stood leaning on the pole of his chariot for
some time. Seeing him senseless, his charioteer turned the chariot and carried
him away.
Most of the Kuru army had been overpowered and, if not slain, had fled. Only
a few of their heroes still stood on the battlefield. Duryodhana, burning with
anger and humiliation, brought his chariot before Arjuna. He threw a golden
dart that struck Arjuna on the forehead. Blood gushed from his wound and the
son of Kunté looked like a mountain giving forth a stream of red lava. Arjuna
struck Duryodhana with arrows that stung like poisonous snakes. The two
cousins fought furiously, using all their martial skill.
Duryodhana’s brother Vikarëa came to support him on an elephant. He drove
the beast toward Arjuna’s chariot intending to crush him underfoot, but
Arjuna bent the Gäëòéva into a full circle and fired an iron arrow that hit the
elephant on the forehead. The arrow penetrated the elephant’s head up to the
feathers and the beast fell screaming to the ground. Vikarëa leapt clear and,
terrified, ran a full eight hundred paces to his brother Vivingsati’s chariot.
Arjuna released a similar arrow that struck Duryodhana full on the chest. The
Kaurava prince fell to his knees and vomited blood, his shining armor bent and
pierced. Seeing himself standing alone against Arjuna, Duryodhana ordered
his charioteer to retreat. Arjuna laughed and called after him, “Why do you
flee, O hero? How are you renouncing your fame and glory? Why are your
trumpets not blown in the same way as they were when you first left
Hastinäpura? Know me to be Yudhiñöhira’s obedient servant and Kunté’s third
390

son. Remembering the conduct of kings, turn back and show me your face, O
mighty-armed one.”
Duryodhana and his brothers continued to flee. They completely abandoned
their attempts to steal the Matsyas’ wealth. Remembering his promise to the
Matsya ladies, Arjuna went around the battlefield and took the costly robes
from the fallen Kuru warriors.
As they made their way back to the city Arjuna said, “You are the only person
who is aware of my true identity. It may be wise to keep this information secret
for a little while longer. You should tell your father that it was you who routed
the Kurus.”
Arjuna wanted to wait for Yudhiñöhira to decide the exact moment for them to
reveal their identities. Understanding this, Bhuminjaya replied, “I would not
have had the power to achieve what you have achieved today, O Savyasäcin,
but I will not disclose your identity until you give me your permission.”
Arjuna had the prince take the chariot back to the cremation ground. When
they arrived, Arjuna folded his palms toward Hanumän on his banner. The
monkey flew up into the sky and vanished, and Arjuna hoisted the prince’s
lion banner again. He replaced his weapons in the bundle high in the sami
tree. Then, taking his place as the chariot driver, they headed back toward the
city.

Chapter 40
Out of Exile
Toward noon on the day after his victory, King Virata reentered his city.
Praised by bards he shone amid the four Päëòavas, whose identities he still did
not know. When he reached his palace and was seated upon his throne, he
inquired after the whereabouts of his eldest son. Some of the palace ladies told
him what had happened. “Out of excessive bravery, the prince has gone out to
fight the best of the Kurus. With Båhannala as his charioteer and no other
support, he rode out promising to defeat the vast Kuru army and bring back the
cows.”
The king was at once overcome by sorrow. “How will my son fare against the
391

likes of Bhéñma, Droëa, Karëa and Duryodhana? And when the Kurus hear of
the Trigartas’ defeat, they will likely attack the city. Surely we are in peril.”
The king told his ministers to have the army prepare to go out again. “We must
quickly rescue Bhuminjaya and hold the Kurus off from attacking our city.
With such a useless person as his charioteer, I do not think my son will be
alive.”
Yudhiñöhira smiled as he took his place near the king. “If Båhannala is his
charioteer, you need not fear. The Kurus will not be able to defeat him. Indeed,
even the celestial hosts would not be able to overpower him with Båhannala on
his chariot.”
The king looked at Yudhiñöhira quizzically. This was no time for joking. He
wrung his hands and thought only of his son. Surely Bhuminjaya was already
dead. It was reckless of him to have ventured out, especially with only a
eunuch as his support.
As Virata gave orders for his forces to assemble, a messenger entered the court
with the news that the Kurus had retreated. “The cows have been rescued and
your son is well, along with his charioteer. They will soon be arriving in the
city.”
“This news is not at all wonderful,” Yudhiñöhira said. “Victory is certain for
anyone who has Båhannala with him.”
The king ignored Yudhiñöhira’s remark and said joyfully, “Decorate the
highways with flags and festoons. Worship all the gods with profuse gifts of
flowers and costly incenses. My other sons and my ministers should go out to
greet the prince, along with musicians and beautiful dancers. Bring him here in
style and have a messenger riding an elephant go around the city ringing a bell
to announce our victory.”
Soon a large procession of handsomely dressed and beautiful maidens,
musicians playing drums, trumpets, cymbals and conches, Brahmins chanting
auspicious hymns, and bards composing songs in praise of the prince made its
way out of the city.
Overjoyed, the king turned to Yudhiñöhira and said, “Come, Kaìka, let us play
dice while we wait for my son. I will happily stake heaps of gems, gold, and
numerous well-adorned women. My pleasure knows no limits today.”
“O King, one should never gamble when he is experiencing so much joy,”
Yudhiñöhira replied with a smile. “Gambling is attended by many evils. The
great King Yudhiñöhira lost his entire kingdom, all his wealth, and his godlike
392

brothers in a game of dice. Therefore, I do not like to gamble. But I will play if
you wish.”
The king laughed and sat down at his dicing table with Yudhiñöhira. As they
played he said, “What do you think of this news then, Kaìka? My son has
single-handedly defeated the invincible Kurus.”
Yudhiñöhira again said that it was no surprise since the prince had Båhannala
with him. The king was beginning to feel annoyed. “Why do you praise a
eunuch as superior to my son? O Brahmin, you insult me by such words. Why
should my son not have defeated the Kurus? He is a fearless and powerful
fighter.”
Yudhiñöhira threw the sapphire dice across the gaming board. “When Bhéñma,
Droëa, Kåpa, Duryodhana, and the other Kurus assemble for battle, I do not
see any warrior who could face them except Båhannala. None have been seen,
nor will they ever be seen, who can equal his strength of arms. He always
delights in a mighty encounter.”
The king stood up suddenly, clutching the dice in fury. “You obviously do not
know right from wrong. I should certainly punish you for this impropriety.”
Virata hurled the dice at Yudhiñöhira and struck him in the face. Blood flowed
from his nose and Yudhiñöhira cupped his hands to catch it. He looked across
at Draupadé, who sat in the court. She quickly fetched a jug of water.
Yudhiñöhira held a wet cloth to his face to stem the flow of blood.
At that moment, a second messenger came before the king and announced
that his son had arrived at the palace gates. The king, forgetting his anger, told
the messenger to bring the prince in at once.
The messenger turned to go, and as he was leaving Yudhiñöhira whispered to
him, “Have the prince come alone. Tell Båhannala not to enter the court.”
Yudhiñöhira knew that Arjuna had taken a vow that if anyone caused his blood
to flow other than in battle, he would kill that person. If Arjuna saw his
brother now, Virata would be slain.
Within minutes Bhuminjaya entered the court adorned with garlands and
sandalwood paste. He bowed at his father’s feet and folded his hands toward
Yudhiñöhira. Seeing him covered with blood he asked his father, “Who has
done this to Kaìka? O King, who has committed such a crime?”
The king looked angrily at Yudhiñöhira. “This wily Brahmin deserves even
more. While I was praising your achievements, he glorified Båhannala as if he
were your superior.”
393

Bhuminjaya was shocked. “You have committed a great sin! Pacify him at once
so that the deadly venom of a Brahmin’s curse does not consume you.”
The king apologized to Yudhiñöhira, who nodded his forgiveness. Virata then
said to his son, “O descendent of Kekaya, in you I truly have a son. There can
be none to equal you. Alone you overcame the Kuru host and took back our
cows, even as a tiger snatched his prey.”
The prince shook his head. “I did not rescue the cows, Father, nor did I defeat
the Kurus. Everything was done by the son of a celestial. Seeing me fleeing in
fear, that mighty one, capable of wielding the thunderbolt, stopped me and got
upon my chariot. He alone defeated the Kuru army, headed by Bhéñma, Droëa,
Duryodhana, Kåpa, Karëa and Açvatthämä. Indeed, I could hardly look at
those warriors as they released their weapons. The celestial youth routed them
one by one. He overpowered that army of lions and sent them reeling back to
Hastinäpura.”
The king was astonished. He asked his son where the youth had gone, but
Bhuminjaya said he could not tell. Yudhiñöhira remained silent, tending the
wound on his face. He glanced at Draupadé who stood smiling. The king would
soon discover the truth.
It was late in the evening when Virata dismissed the royal court. He went away
with his son, listening in astonishment as the prince described the battle with
the Kurus.
***
The following day at dawn, Yudhiñöhira, surrounded by his brothers, entered
the royal court before the king arrived. They were dressed in white clothes and
adorned with gold ornaments. Like five angry lions, they strode up to the royal
dais and took their seats on thrones reserved for kings.
Soon after their arrival, the king, accompanied by his ministers, entered the
hall. He saw with surprise that Kaìka was sitting near his throne with the four
Päëòavas next to him. Still not realizing their identities, he stormed over to
Yudhiñöhira. “What are you doing? You are a dice player and a courtier. Why
are you sitting on a royal seat, adorned with ornaments and surrounded by my
cook and my horse and cow-keepers?”
Arjuna replied, “This man, O King, is worthy of sharing a seat with Indra. Ever
engaged in performing sacrifice, respectful toward Brahmins, well-read in the
Vedas, firm in his vows––he is the embodiment of virtue. Even the celestials,
394

Asuras, Nägas, Gandharvas, Yakñas, and other divine beings are not his equal.
He is far-sighted, forgiving, powerful, truthful and self-controlled. Famous all
over the world and loved by all, this man is a royal saint like the great Manu
himself. O King, this is the foremost of all the Kurus, the pious King
Yudhiñöhira. Does he not deserve a royal throne?”
Virata’s eyes opened wide. Staring at the five brothers one after another, he
replied, “If this is Yudhiñöhira, then who are these other four? Where is the
mighty Bhéma and his invincible brother, Arjuna? Where are Nakula and
Sahadeva and the illustrious Draupadé? Since their defeat at dice, no one has
seen them.”
Arjuna lifted his hand towards Bhéma. “This one, your cook Vallabha, is
Bhéma, possessed of dreadful prowess and energy. It was he who slew the lustful
Kichaka. On the other side of Yudhiñöhira sits Nakula, the keeper of your
horses, and next to him is Sahadeva, your chief cowherd. These two warriors
are capable of slaying enemy battalions consisting of thousands of warriors. As
far as the lotus-eyed Draupadé, she has for this last year served in your palace as
Sairindhré, for whose sake Kichaka was slain. I am Arjuna, Kunté’s third son.
We have all lived happily in your city like creatures living in the womb.”
Virata’s eyes flooded with tears. The great and virtuous Päëòavas had chosen
his kingdom to spend their final year of exile. Why had he not recognized
them? Now it was obvious. Who else could have exhibited such power in battle
but these brothers? The king folded his palms and bowed low to Yudhiñöhira.
As the king stood up again, Bhuminjaya indicated Arjuna. “It was he who slew
the Kurus like a lion killing deer. It was he who rescued the cows and
overpowered the great heroes from Hastinäpura. My ears are still deafened
from the incredible blasts of his conch.”
Virata felt deeply ashamed of himself for insulting and wounding Yudhiñöhira.
He spoke humbly. “The time has come for me to honor your illustrious selves.
What should I do? If you like, I shall bestow my daughter Uttarä on Arjuna. I
am fully indebted to you all. It was Bhéma who rescued me from the clutches of
Susharma, and Arjuna has saved us from defeat at the hands of the Kurus. O
great King, please forgive me if I have unwittingly given you any offense. You
are worthy of my worship.”
Virata offered his entire kingdom to Yudhiñöhira, with his scepter, treasury and
city. He arranged for Brahmins to offer them worship and repeatedly
exclaimed, “What good fortune!” The Päëòavas got down and embraced the
395

old monarch, who gazed at them without satiation. Again offering his kingdom
to them, he turned to Arjuna and added, “O hero, please take my daughter’s
hand.”
Arjuna placed his arm around the king’s shoulders. “Let your daughter become
my daughter-in-law. That would be a fitting alliance between our two houses.”
The king looked surprised. “Why would you not accept the princess as your
own wife?”
“Since I came here, your daughter has seen me like a father,” Arjuna replied.
“We have often been alone together and she has often confided in me. O King,
I have seen her as my daughter and do not wish anyone to think it was ever
different. If I were to accept her as my wife, others will doubt her purity. I wish
to prove her purity and therefore will continue to see her as my daughter.
There is no difference between a daughter and a daughter-in-law. Let her wed
my son Abhimanyu. He is Kåñëa’s nephew and he resembles a celestial in every
way. He will be a proper husband for Uttarä and a son for you.”
The king nodded approvingly. “You have spoken wisely, most virtuous one. Do
what you think is proper. Whoever has a relationship with Arjuna, no matter
what it may be, has all his desires fulfilled.”
Yudhiñöhira gave his permission for the marriage and it was settled. The king
then arranged for the brothers to be quartered in his palace. He sent
messengers out to announce to the Päëòavas’ friends and allies that, having
come out of exile, they were well and now staying in his capital. Yudhiñöhira
invited all of them to come to the city, and before long they began to arrive.
Kåñëa and Balaräma came from Dwärakä, bringing Abhimanyu and many
other members of Their family. Drupada arrived accompanied by a huge
division of soldiers. The great king Kashiraja, a good friend of Yudhiñöhira
whose daughter had married Bhéma, also came with another vast army.
The Päëòavas duly worshiped all of them as they arrived in Virata. They were
particularly joyful to see their friend and well-wisher Kåñëa, who brought with
him an immense force of warriors. He bowed before Yudhiñöhira and Bhéma,
while the younger Päëòavas touched his feet. Then they all embraced and sat
down to exchange news.
It was settled that the marriage between Abhimanyu and Uttarä would take
place on the next full-moon day, and Virata began to make the arrangements.
The city was decked with flags and festoons. When the day of the wedding
arrived, garlands were hung everywhere and musicians played in Virata’s
396

palace. Many beautiful damsels, wearing jeweled earrings and headed by
Draupadé, led Uttarä to the wedding sacrifice. Numerous Brahmins sat around
the fire chanting auspicious hymns from the Vedas. As the Päëòavas looked on
with Kåñëa, Balaräma and the other kings, Abhimanyu accepted Uttarä’s hand
from Virata.
Surrounded by the Brahmins and kings, the bride and groom shone like a god
and goddess amid the celestial hosts. Virata gave Abhimanyu a dowry of seven
thousand horses, two thousand elephants and a great heap of gems and gold.
The ceremony ended with a feast. Pure foods were offered to Viñëu and then
distributed first to the Brahmins and then to the thousands of citizens who
attended the wedding. Gifts and charity were distributed to all, and everyone
left the ceremony filled with joy. As they departed for their homes, they
praised the king as well as his daughter and new son-in-law.
***
With the wedding celebrations over, the Päëòavas began to think of their next
move. How were they going to recover their kingdom? No word had been
received from Hastinäpura. The Kurus now knew that the Päëòavas were alive
and well and living at Virata. According to the agreement made at the final
gambling match, it was time to give them back their city and dominions. But it
seemed the matter would not be settled peaceably. Kåñëa suggested they call an
assembly and discuss what to do next. Thus the day following the wedding, all
the kings came to Virata’s court.
On the front seats sat Virata and Drupada, the senior most kings, along with
Kåñëa and Balaräma, whom everyone considered to be the greatest. By their
sides sat Yudhiñöhira and his brothers, and all around them were dozens of
other monarchs. These mighty heroes shone like stars studding the clear sky.
The hall buzzed with their conversation as they settled into their places. When
everyone was seated, the noise died down and they sat gazing pensively at
Kåñëa. Smiling gently and glancing around at all the kings, Kåñëa spoke first.
“Everyone knows how Yudhiñöhira was unfairly defeated at dice and
dispossessed of his kingdom by Suvala’s son. You also know how he and his
brothers were made to live in the forest for thirteen years. The sons of Päëòu,
who are capable of subjugating the world by force of arms, whose chariots go
unrestrained to any terrestrial or celestial region, and who are true to their
word, have now completed their vow. They have suffered unbearable
397

hardships, especially in this last year when they were obliged to accept menial
service to others. They now seek their rightful kingdom.”
Kåñëa looked around the assembly. All the kings, seated on golden thrones
decked with gems, gazed intently at Him as He continued. “O kings, consider
what is right and best for both the son of Dharma and for Duryodhana. The
virtuous Yudhiñöhira will not accept even the kingdom of the gods
unrighteously. He would prefer the rightful lordship of just a single village.
Although he has been antagonized and cheated by the Kauravas, he still wishes
them well. Duryodhana and his brothers have repeatedly tried to kill the
Päëòavas, but Yudhiñöhira has tolerated everything with a peaceful mind. All
of his brothers are obedient to his order and would never abandon virtue. They
will accept whatever he decides is right, and he will always follow My advice.”
Kåñëa glanced at Yudhiñöhira, whose eyes were fixed affectionately on Kåñëa’s
face. Yudhiñöhira desired only to please Kåñëa, and his brothers all shared that
sentiment. Whatever Kåñëa advised would surely be best for them. Even
Bhéma, although longing to wreak vengeance on the Kauravas, would renounce
his anger if Kåñëa deemed it wrong. He rested a hand on his great mace as
Kåñëa went on.
“My feelings are that we should first establish Duryodhana’s intentions by
sending a reliable messenger to Hastinäpura. Let us try by all means to settle
this affair peaceably and fully in accordance with the eternal codes of religion.
Let us avoid unnecessary violence. But if Duryodhana will not return
Yudhiñöhira’s lands, then I think there will have to be war. The Päëòavas will
slay Duryodhana and all his followers. If you feel the Päëòavas’ cause is just,
then unite yourselves and your forces with them and march out for battle. Tell
me, O kings, if My words meet with your approval.”
Balaräma raised His hand, signifying His intention to speak. The assembly
turned toward Him. His dark blue silks highlighted His pure white complexion.
A brilliant helmet adorned His head and a garland of white lotuses hung
around His neck. By His side lay His golden plow weapon. As He spoke, His
voice resounded around the hall like a drum.
“Devaké’s son has spoken well. His words are meant for the welfare of both the
Kauravas and the Päëòavas. Let the Kuru kingdom be shared. The heroic sons
of Kunté will dwell in peace with their cousins, each ruling half of the Kuru
empire. I agree that a man should be dispatched to Hastinäpura. He should
address the noble-minded Bhéñma, Droëa, Vidura, Kåpa, Karëa, Çakuni, and all
398

of Dhåtaräñöra’s sons. All of them are heroes and all of them are well-versed in
the Vedas. After informing these men of Yudhiñöhira’s desire, the messenger
should carry back their reply. But the Kauravas must be given due deference.
After all, it was by Yudhiñöhira’s fault that the kingdom was lost. Although
unskilled at dice, he accepted the skillful Çakuni’s challenge. There were many
other kings with whom he could have played, but he chose the son of Suvala.”
Balaräma looked at Yudhiñöhira and smiled. The Päëòava showed no sign of
discomfort at His words. Yudhiñöhira had always felt guilty of a misdemeanor
for having gambled away his kingdom. He bowed his head as Balaräma went
on. “The brave son of Päëòu unfortunately lost at every step of the game. In
the grip of lust and anger, he gambled everything and was defeated. Who can
blame Çakuni for this? Therefore, we must adopt a conciliatory tone when we
address the Kauravas. We should avoid war by any means. That which is
gained by peaceful methods is beneficial to all, while that gained by war has the
opposite effect.”
Although Yudhiñöhira accepted Balaräma’s speech, it surprised the other
Päëòavas. They knew that the Yädava hero had a soft spot for Duryodhana,
His disciple at mace fighting, but when He last saw them, just after their
leaving Hastinäpura, He had been in favor of them marching into the Kuru
capital and punishing the Kauravas. It was hard to understand why His
attitude had changed. Perhaps Duryodhana had influenced Him with his
version of what had happened in Hastinäpura. Whatever the causes, the
Päëòavas knew that Balaräma was always their well-wisher. They remained
silent as He paused in His speech.
Suddenly Sätyaki, a powerful Yädava hero and one of Arjuna’s martial
students, leapt to his feet. He was incensed by Balaräma’s words and could not
hear more. Even as Balaräma continued to speak Sätyaki interrupted, and all
eyes turned toward him. “A man will always reveal his inner nature when he
speaks. Even as a forest contains trees which bear fruits and those which do
not, so in one family are born powerful heroes and others who are powerless
and cowardly. O You who bears the sign of the plow on Your banner, I am
loath to call You cowardly, but why do you display such timidity toward the
wicked Kauravas?”
Balaräma sat calmly, but Sätyaki’s face glowed red with fury. He gazed around
the assembly as he went on. “How can anyone sit here and listen as Balaräma
speaks in this way? We all know what happened in Hastinäpura. Yudhiñöhira
399

was cheated of his kingdom by a mean trick. Had the Kauravas gone to
Indraprastha and defeated him there, then that would have been fair, but they
summoned him to play in their own city and then compelled him to accept
Çakuni’s challenge. How can prosperity attend such men? Why should
Yudhiñöhira now approach them in a servile mood? The Kuru kingdom is his by
right. It once belonged to his grandfather and then to his father. There is no
doubt about this. Even if this pious man had no rightful claim to the kingdom,
he still deserves to rule the earth by virtue of his qualities. If the Kauravas will
not willingly give him back his ancestral territories, then I will force them to
do so. I will persuade them by cold steel on the battlefield.”
Sätyaki stepped forward and stood on the mosaic floor in the center of the hall.
He clutched the hilt of his sword as he stepped into the middle of a design
depicting the blazing sun. “I will oblige the evil-minded Kauravas to fall at
Yudhiñöhira’s feet. If they refuse, then they shall have to go with their
ministers to Death’s abode. Who can withstand Sätyaki when he stands ready
to fight? Can the mountains bear the thunderbolt? In the same way, who can
bear the brunt of the Gäëòéva bow when Arjuna wields it, or the force of
Bhéma’s mace? When the Päëòavas are united with Drupada and his two sons,
as well as with their own sons, what man valuing his life would face them?
When the great Yädava heroes come out for battle, what will the Kauravas do?
After killing all of them, let us install Yudhiñöhira as emperor of the world. It is
impious and shameful to beg from enemies. We should set out at once. Either
the Kauravas will surrender the kingdom, or they will lie prostrate on the
battlefield.”
Having vented his anger, Sätyaki returned to his seat. Balaräma still remained
peaceful. He could understand Sätyaki’s feelings. The old king Drupada then
spoke. “O you with long arms, it will doubtlessly be as you say. Duryodhana will
never surrender the kingdom. Dhåtaräñöra is too fond of his son, and he will
follow him without question. So it will be with Bhéñma and Droëa. They have a
misguided loyalty. In my opinion, we should not act on Balaräma’s suggestion.
Duryodhana will not respond to a humble approach. He will misunderstand
such a mild message as weakness. Force is the only language he respects.”
Everyone present esteemed Drupada’s wisdom and maturity. They listened
attentively. “This is my advice: let us prepare for battle. Send out messengers to
all our allies and have them come here. Duryodhana will certainly do the same.
Even now his men will be heading out and approaching even those whom we
400

now count as friends. Our messengers should travel swiftly around the globe,
for a noble man will not refuse he who first asks him for help.”
Drupada then named the kings and their countries where they could find
support. He knew Duryodhana would ask everyone to fight with him, whether
they were his allies or not. It was important to reach the kings first with their
own plea. After listing forty or fifty monarchs who might assist their cause,
Drupada concluded, “While we are assembling our forces, let a good man go to
Dhåtaräñöra. I suggest we send my priest. We should carefully instruct him
what to say to the Kauravas. But I do not expect much to come of that. Battle
is inevitable.”
Kåñëa clapped His hands approvingly. “These words befit the great king of the
Païchälas, who is unequalled in prowess. You are old in learning and wisdom.
Thus you are just like our guru. We should act as you say and not otherwise. I
agree. But My relationship with both the Päëòavas and the Kauravas is the
same, regardless of the present situation among them. I have come here and
been pleased by King Virata’s reception. The wedding is over and I will now
return to Dwärakä. I leave it in your hands, O monarch, to guide these kings in
how to sue for peace between the two parties. If a mutually agreeable solution
cannot be found, and if the foolish Duryodhana will not accept peace due to
his pride and ignorance, then summon Me again. I will do all in my power to
help.”
The assembly of kings agreed to Kåñëa’s proposal and they withdrew to their
own quarters. Virata worshipped Kåñëa with respect and sent Him on His way
back to Dwärakä. Then he began to make preparations for war. Messengers on
swift horses were dispatched around the world, and soon large armies began to
arrive at Virata. Troops poured in from all quarters and set up camp around
the city. Filled with men and animals, the earth seemed covered with dark
clouds. The gathering troops created a clamor resembling the roaring ocean. In
the Kuru capital also, vast armies were amassing to support Duryodhana. The
goddess Earth, with her mountains and forests, seemed to tremble under the
burden of so many warriors.
When the large force was ready at Virata, Drupada, after consulting with the
other kings and the Brahmins, spoke with his priest. “O Brahmin, among all
men those who are twice-born are the best. Among the twice-born the
Brahmin is the best, and among Brahmins he who knows the Vedas is superior.
Those who have realized Vedic knowledge are even better, and among those
401

the best are they who practice their knowledge in life. I am of the opinion that
you are the best of all men, having realized the Supreme Brahman. Your
knowledge and wisdom are equal to Båhaspati’s. You know what kind of man
Yudhiñöhira is and how the Kurus stole his kingdom. You also know the
situation in Hastinäpura, as well as the nature and disposition of Dhåtaräñöra
and his son. Duryodhana will not voluntarily return Yudhiñöhira’s kingdom.
His old father, blinded by attachment, will follow his lead.”
Drupada then explained that although he should go to Hastinäpura to ask
Dhåtaräñöra to return the Päëòavas’ kingdom, there was another purpose. He
knew that Duryodhana––and his father––could not be swayed by reason. The
priest’s job, therefore, was to convince other Kuru leaders of the righteousness
of Yudhiñöhira’s claim and of Duryodhana’s foolishness in bringing on war.
After thirteen years of listening to Duryodhana, few among the Kurus may still
recognize the truth. The cruel and dishonest treatment meted out to the
Päëòavas at the dice game might have been all but forgotten. Even the wise
and ever-virtuous Balaräma seemed to have been influenced toward the
Kauravas.
“By speaking words of virtue and truth, you will win the hearts of honest men.
Vidura will support you, as will Bhéñma, Droëa and Kåpa. In this way, you will
create dissension among the Kurus. They will lose time trying to re-establish
unity among themselves, and that will allow us to make further preparations
for war. It may even be that Dhåtaräñöra, moved by your words, will act upon
them and do what is right. In any event, we will benefit from your going there.
Do not fear for yourself, as they will certainly respect you. You are a learned
Brahmin and an ambassador, as well as an aged and virtuous man.”
After receiving Drupada’s request, the priest left immediately for Hastinäpura.

Chapter 41
The Kings Choose Sides
While both the Kauravas and Päëòavas were preparing for war, Kåñëa and the
Yädavas returned to Dwärakä. Duryodhana heard of Kåñëa’s arrival and
decided to go personally to ask His assistance. Having learned from his spies of
402

the Päëòavas’ preparations, the Kuru monarch had already sent messengers to
every part of the globe to seek other kings’ assistance, but Kåñëa was so
powerful that He warranted a personal request. Kåñëa and the Yädavas were
the greatest warriors on earth. If Duryodhana could secure their assistance,
then the Päëòavas would stand no chance. Kåñëa was their main support.
Accompanied only by a few bodyguards, Duryodhana mounted the best of his
horses and set out for Dwärakä at a gallop.
In Virata, Arjuna also thought of Kåñëa. After consulting Yudhiñöhira, he too
decided to go personally to seek his friend’s help. Leaving in a swift chariot he
soon arrived in Dwärakä. As he reached Kåñëa’s palace, he saw the palace
guards receiving Duryodhana. The two princes, after greeting each other in a
friendly way, went together to Kåñëa’s chamber. They found Him asleep on a
large bed. One of His wives was fanning Him gently. Duryodhana went straight
to the head of the bed and sat down, but Arjuna remained at Kåñëa’s feet,
standing with palms folded and gazing at His face with tears of affection in his
eyes.
After a while Kåñëa awoke. As He opened His eyes He saw Arjuna, who bowed
to Him in love. Then Kåñëa sat up and saw Duryodhana by His head. He
immediately welcomed both visitors. After honoring them, He inquired why
they had each come.
Duryodhana replied, “It is well known that You are equally disposed toward
both myself and Arjuna. I have come here to seek Your assistance in the war
which will soon be fought among us. Indeed, O killer of Madhu, I arrived
before Arjuna and thus it is only right that You assist me rather than him. This
is the practice of good men, and You, Kåñëa, are the best of men.” Kåñëa looked
smilingly at Duryodhana. “I accept that you arrived first, O King, but I saw first
Arjuna. Therefore, I think I will help both of you. Scripture ordains that one
should help the youngest first, so I will first offer My assistance to Arjuna. I
have an army of one million soldiers known as the Näräyaëas, all equal to Me
in battle. Let one of you take them and let the other take Me alone. But I will
not fight. Indeed, I plan to leave My weapons aside during the entire battle. O
son of Kunté, what do you choose?”
Without hesitating Arjuna chose Kåñëa. Duryodhana could hardly conceal his
joy. Arjuna’s sentimentality had overpowered his reason. He had forsaken
Kåñëa’s invincible army in favor of Kåñëa Himself, who would not even fight.
What a mistake!
403

Smiling slightly, Duryodhana said, “It seems then that I am left with the army.
With Your permission, O Keçava, I shall now depart.”
Having received Kåñëa’s army, Duryodhana thanked him and left. He made his
way to Balaräma’s palace. He knew that Balaräma was always favorable toward
him. Surely He would take his side in the war. Duryodhana found Balaräma
seated in His palace. After greeting Him with words of affection and praise,
Duryodhana submitted his plea.
Balaräma, His hand resting on His plow weapon, looked grave. “O son of Kuru,
for your sake I spoke out in Virata’s assembly at the time of Abhimanyu’s
marriage. I pointed out to Kåñëa that our relations with you and the Päëòavas
are equal, and that your cause is as just as that of the Päëòavas. O hero, Keçava
did not accept My words. I cannot for a moment exist apart from Kåñëa.
Therefore, I have decided to help neither side. I will take no part whatsoever in
the upcoming war. Fight according to kñatriya principles, O best of men. May
good fortune be yours.”
Balaräma stood up and embraced Duryodhana. Knowing that Kåñëa had sided
with the Päëòavas, He considered the Kauravas already defeated. Duryodhana
left Balaräma’s palace and went to see Kåtavarmä, the Yädava commander-inchief. He asked for his help and Kåtavarmä, in accordance with kñatriya
custom, could not refuse. He agreed to fight on the Kaurava side along with the
million warriors already given by Kåñëa. He thus gathered the army and
prepared to leave with Duryodhana. Surrounded by the terrible-looking forces,
and with Kåtavarmä by his side, Duryodhana headed back toward Hastinäpura
with a light heart.
In Kåñëa’s chamber, Arjuna and Kåñëa were alone. Kåñëa asked, “Why did you
choose Me knowing I will not fight over My army?”
“There is no doubt that wherever You are there will be victory. If You desired
it, You could slay all the Kurus. In Your presence, O foremost among men, I too
will be able to kill them all. You are the most famous and illustrious person in
the world and I will attain a similar fame by gaining victory in this war. O
Kåñëa, it has long been my desire that You act as my charioteer. Please fulfill
my desire, if You find it acceptable.”
“It is fitting, O son of Kunté, that you measure yourself against Me,” Kåñëa
replied softly. He placed a bejeweled hand on Arjuna’s shoulder. “I shall gladly
act as your charioteer. Let your desire be fulfilled.”
The two friends spent some time together in Dwärakä and then prepared to
404

leave. Surrounded by many Yadu chiefs and warriors, they set off for Virata.
***
King Çalya of Madras received news about the impending war. As the brother
of Päëòu’s second wife, Mädré, he wanted to assist his nephews, the Päëòavas.
He had already formed a strong friendship with Yudhiñöhira, and he longed to
see him again. Taking his army he left his city to go to Virata. While traveling,
Çalya’s army occupied an area of four square miles. With their flashing armor
and bright pennants, they appeared like a moving sea covered with gems. They
traveled in slow marches toward Virata, shaking the earth and sending up
massive clouds of dust.
Hearing that the Madras army was on the move, Duryodhana arranged a regal
reception for them along the way. He had palaces erected in charming spots,
well-decorated with gems. The Kaurava sent artistes for their entertainment
and had the best of food and drink laid out for the entire army. Artificial lakes
adorned with lotuses and fountains were constructed, with fine seats arranged
around them. As Çalya approached each place he was greeted by thousands of
Brahmins, who received him with worship and adoration. He was shown to a
palace that would have been suitable for the gods.
Greeted with honors befitting Indra, Çalya was pleased, thinking too highly of
himself and too little of the king of the gods. Assuming that Yudhiñöhira had
made all the arrangements, he asked his servants, “Where are Yudhiñöhira’s
men? Fetch them, for I would like to reward them.”
The servants looked surprised. They went to Duryodhana, who had remained
concealed from Çalya, and informed him of everything. When Çalya had
become so pleased that he was ready to give away even his life, Duryodhana
revealed himself. Bowing before his maternal uncle, the Kaurava prince said,
“You are welcome. Please instruct me what else I can do for you.”
It was Çalya’s turn to be surprised. He embraced Duryodhana and replied, “I am
satisfied by your reception. Ask from me what you may desire.”
Duryodhana folded his palms. “Grant me an auspicious boon, O illustrious
man. Become a leader in my army.”
Çalya realized that he had been tricked, but out of honor he could not refuse
Duryodhana’s request. He replied, “It is done. What else do you desire?”
Duryodhana said that he had no other desire. With joy he continued to repeat
Çalya’s words: “It is done.”
405

Disappointed that he would now be opposing the Päëòavas in battle, Çalya
said, “O King, O best among men, go back to your capital. You shall soon see
me there, but first I want to see Yudhiñöhira. Then I will come and join your
army.”
“You may go, but please return quickly. I am depending on you. Do not forget
your promise.”
After embracing, the two men parted and Çalya continued on to Virata. He
saw the Päëòavas there and was greeted by all of them with respect. They
embraced him and sat him on a beautiful seat. Çalya gazed at his nephews with
tear-filled eyes. “It is good to see all you heroes hale and hearty after your exile.
How have you passed these last thirteen years? Nothing but misery attends one
who has lost a kingdom; but now your suffering, brought on by Dhåtaräñöra’s
son, will end as you slay your enemies.”
Çalya looked at Yudhiñöhira sitting at his feet. “O great devotee of God, no one
has seen even a trace of greed in your character. Like the åñi kings of old you
exhibit self-control, forgiveness, truth, nonviolence, and all the other qualities
that are so rare in this world. You are mild, generous, religious, and attached to
virtue. O chief among kings, it is fortunate that I am able to see you freed at
last from your difficulties.”
Çalya then told Yudhiñöhira about his meeting with Duryodhana and his
promise to the Kaurava prince.
Although Yudhiñöhira was disappointed, he agreed that it was a point of honor.
He said, “O King, you have done the right thing by granting such a boon when
you were pleased at heart. You had no choice and I do not criticize you for it.
Still, I have a request. You can do us a great favor in the coming war with our
cousins. It is well known that you are a charioteer without equal in this world. I
have no doubt that when the final battle takes place between Arjuna and
Karëa, you will be asked to drive Karëa’s chariot. At that time you should do
whatever you can to discourage Karëa and take away his energy to fight.
Although it is improper to ask this of you, O hero, still I ask it out of fear of the
suta’s son. We must by any and all means defeat that evil-minded one.”
Çalya felt pleased that, although he had been forced into fighting for
Duryodhana, there was still something he could do for Yudhiñöhira. The news
of the Päëòavas’ exile had greatly upset him. It was outrageous that the Kurus
had allowed such a thing to happen. His brother-in-law Päëòu would have
been mortified if he had been alive. How could the Kurus expect any good
406

fortune when they injured men of the Päëòavas’ caliber, and especially when
they insulted a woman like Draupadé?
Çalya said, “I will surely do as you ask, O noble-minded one. I do not doubt that
Duryodhana will have me drive Karëa’s chariot. At that time I will say those
things which are calculated to deprive him of energy. O King, all the miseries
you have endured at Duryodhana and Karëa’s hands will soon give rise to your
happiness. This is the way of the world, O hero. Do not blame yourself.
Everything is under the control of supreme destiny. It is the Lord’s
arrangement only that great personalities like you suffer difficulties. Even the
gods are sometimes obliged to suffer. I have heard that Indra has had to endure
much misery, along with his queen.”
Yudhiñöhira asked Çalya to tell the story of Indra and how he had suffered. The
Madras king recited the history in detail. Çalya was well known for his wisdom
and knowledge, and even the Brahmins came forward to hear him speak.
After speaking with the Päëòavas for hours, it was time for Çalya to depart.
Yudhiñöhira again worshipped him with due honor and reminded him of his
promise. Assuring Yudhiñöhira that he would do whatever he could to assist
him, Çalya bid the Päëòavas farewell and made his way to Hastinäpura.
Soon after Çalya’s departure, Sätyaki returned from Dwärakä. He brought with
him a huge army consisting of chariots, horsemen, elephants and infantry.
Bearing battle axes, swords, spears, lances, mallets, clubs, maces and bows of all
sorts, the army appeared like clouds with lightning. A full akshauhini in
number, it merged with Yudhiñöhira’s forces like a river entering the sea.
One after another, different kings came to Yudhiñöhira’s side. Dhristaketu, the
king of the Cediç, came with another akshauhini division, as did the king of
Magadha, Jayatsena. The two kings Pandya and Virata also each supplied an
akshauhini of powerful warriors. Finally, Drupada brought his army, assembled
from various countries and led by his two sons, which amounted to two full
akshauhinis. Within only a few months, seven akshauhinis stood ready at Virata
to fight for the Päëòavas.
In Hastinäpura, various other kings were coming to assist Duryodhana. They
amassed eleven akshauhinis. The soldiers crowded Hastinäpura and its
surrounding regions so that there was hardly any free space anywhere.
Duryodhana had arranged for a vast army of vaiçyäs and çüdras, greater in
number than even the warriors themselves, to ensure that the soldiers received
sufficient care while they awaited the order to march into battle. All that
407

remained to be done was to meet with the Päëòavas or their emissaries. If no
agreement could be reached––and Duryodhana planned for no agreements––
then the war would begin. The Kurus, informed that a messenger was on his
way, waited expectantly.
***
Drupada’s priest arrived at Hastinäpura soon after the troops had assembled.
As he approached the city from a distance, he saw those soldiers camped
everywhere like masses of clouds descended to earth. Entering Hastinäpura, he
made his way through the crowds and came to Dhåtaräñöra’s palace, where he
was received by the king himself, along with Bhéñma and Vidura. They brought
him straight to the royal court. After worshipping him with arghya and other
offerings, they invited him to address the assembly.
Looking around at the many kings and ministers seated in Dhåtaräñöra’s great
hall, the priest spoke. “As you all know, Dhåtaräñöra and Päëòu are brothers.
Therefore, their claim to their paternal kingdom is equal. No one doubts this
to be true. Yet although Dhåtaräñöra’s sons have inherited their share of the
kingdom, the Päëòavas have been denied theirs. Dhåtaräñöra’s sons wrested the
Päëòavas’ kingdom and wealth which they fairly acquired through the practice
of virtue. Even before that, the Kauravas attempted to kill their honest cousins
in different ways. Because the Päëòavas’ life duration has still not expired, the
Kauravas were unsuccessful in their attempts. Despite all this, Yudhiñöhira
bears no ill will toward them. He has accepted all tribulations without
complaint. Now he wishes only to have his rightful property returned.
Although he has suffered the severest miseries––in this court, in the forest,
and at Virata––he does not long for war.”
The priest paused and looked at Dhåtaräñöra. The blind king shifted
uncomfortably on his throne. Shafts of sunlight entered through the latticed
windows, illuminating his pained expression. By his side Bhéñma and Vidura
slowly shook their heads, remembering again the terrible day when Päëòu’s
sons had been sent away. They looked intently at the priest as he continued.
“The Päëòavas wish for a peaceful settlement. They do not want to gain back
what is theirs by ruining the world. Forgetting their troubles these last thirteen
years, they are prepared to live in friendship with their cousins. But their
kingdom must be returned. They have gathered seven akshauhinis and
prepared them for battle. Although you have a greater force, you should not
408

consider yourselves more powerful. The Päëòavas have Kåñëa on their side,
who possesses inconceivable power. They are also assisted by Drupada, Pandya,
Dåñöadyumna, Çikhaëòé and other mighty monarchs. Each of the Päëòava
brothers is a maharatha. Arjuna alone exceeds the strength of your entire
army, O descendents of Bharata. What man would dare face Dhanaïjaya when
he comes out to fight, his chariot guided by the immortal Keçava? Therefore
act according to virtue. Give back what should be returned. Do not miss this
opportunity.”
The assembly remained silent when the priest had stopped speaking.
Everyone’s eyes turned toward Dhåtaräñöra. It was up to him to respond. The
Kuru monarch said nothing. Duryodhana smiled and glanced at Karëa. This
old priest was wasting his time. They had an army almost twice the size of the
Päëòavas’ forces. Where was the question of surrendering anything to
Yudhiñöhira? The Kaurava prince looked around the assembly at the silent
kings and ministers.
Bhéñma broke the silence. He thanked and praised the priest with gentle words.
Then he said, “O learned one, it is fortunate that the Päëòavas are doing well
and that they have secured the assistance of many kings. It is especially
fortunate that Dämodara, Kåñëa, has taken their part. It is fortunate indeed
that they desire to act virtuously and that they wish for peace. You have
spoken the truth. Your words are sharp, in keeping with your status as a
Brahmin. All the Päëòavas have borne many troubles and are certainly
entitled to their father’s wealth. Not even the holder of the thunderbolt could
keep that from them, what to speak of those bearing the bow. There is little
doubt, as you say, that Arjuna alone can defeat our army. He could stand
against the three worlds.”
Karëa sprung to his feet. Catching Duryodhana’s eye he barked at the priest,
insolently interrupting Bhéñma. “O Brahmin, you are wasting your time.
Yudhiñöhira was fairly defeated and went to the forest in accordance with his
vow. I do not believe that the prescribed term has even ended. Why then are
the Päëòavas demanding their kingdom? Duryodhana will not yield even an
inch of land out of fear, but out of virtue he could give the entire earth. Let the
Päëòavas first keep their vow and then come humbly before Duryodhana, who
will doubtlessly afford them refuge. If they desire to abandon righteousness and
seek battle, however, they will meet only grief.”
Karëa glared. Both he and Duryodhana refused to accept that the Päëòavas
409

had fulfilled their vow. They did not believe that Bhéñma’s astronomical
calculations were correct. According to their own estimations, there were a
few months left. Duryodhana would not even consider negotiating with the
Päëòavas. The prince nodded in agreement as his friend spoke.
Bhéñma turned toward Karëa. “O son of Rädhä, why do you talk so much? Do
you not recall how during the fight in the Matsya kingdom Arjuna singlehandedly defeated all of our principal warriors, including you? You have seen
his prowess often enough. If we do not do what this Brahmin says, we will all be
killed.”
Some of the kings present agreed with Bhéñma while others praised Karëa. The
hall buzzed with voices and Dhåtaräñöra raised his hand for silence. He rebuked
Karëa, then solaced Bhéñma. Then he addressed the assembly: “In my opinion,
Bhéñma has spoken well. He speaks for our interests and for the interests of the
entire world. I need time to deliberate. Let the assembly be adjourned. O
Brahmin, go back to the Päëòavas and tell them that I shall send Saïjaya soon
with my reply.”
After the priest had been worshipped by Dhåtaräñöra’s court Brahmins, he left
the assembly. Everyone then returned to their own abodes, leaving Dhåtaräñöra
alone with his personal servants.
The blind king pressed his hands together. There was no doubt that Bhéñma
had spoken wisely, as he always did. Dhåtaräñöra could not ignore his
assessment of the situation, especially when it was shared by Vidura, Droëa
and Kåpa. These were all learned and virtuous men. Now they were imploring
him to control Duryodhana and return Yudhiñöhira’s kingdom to him.
But whenever he spoke to his son he felt powerless in his hands. Even when he
tried to instruct Duryodhana in righteousness, Duryodhana simply laughed.
The prince’s view of righteousness did not include justice for the Päëòavas. It
seemed that Providence was in control and that they were all moving
inevitably toward some divine plan. Dhåtaräñöra sighed and loosened his heavy
royal robes. Perhaps he should take stern action and have his son chastised and
even imprisoned, but he simply felt unable. All he could do was advise the
prince for his own good. After that, it was between him and his own destiny
how he chose to act.
The king called for Saïjaya. Saïjaya was intelligent and affectionate toward
the Päëòavas; he would certainly be the best man to send as an envoy to them.
He would know what to say to pacify them. Perhaps he would even be able to
410

prevent a war.
Saïjaya entered the room and, after he had announced himself, Dhåtaräñöra
said, “O Saïjaya, the sons of Päëòu are now living in Virata. Please go to them
and convey my feelings. O learned one, I have never heard of faults in those
men. Even now, after suffering so much at our hands, they remain friendly
toward us. They act only to acquire virtue and never fall into ignorance, folly
or laziness. Those heroes have conquered their senses and live only for others’
benefit. They have no enemies other than that great weak-brained fool, my
son, Duryodhana, and the still meaner Karëa. Duryodhana is strong only at the
beginning of endeavors because he is so given to indulgence. Still, he thinks
himself capable of robbing the Päëòavas of their rightful share. Who could
hope to stand against Yudhiñöhira, Keçava, Arjuna, Bhéma, Mädré’s twin sons,
Sätyaki, and the other great kings? Indeed, Arjuna alone, with Kåñëa guiding
his chariot, can subdue the three worlds. His arrows fly in clouds, roaring like
thunder and sweeping away everything in their path.”
Dhåtaräñöra had thought about the upcoming battle again and again. He knew
his sons did not stand a chance. Although they had a bigger army, that would
not stop the Päëòavas, assisted as they were by Kåñëa, from winning.
Dhåtaräñöra revealed his fears to Saïjaya. “No one can hope to conquer Kåñëa;
He is always victorious. He is the best of all men and the Lord of the worlds.
With His support the Päëòavas could, I am certain, stand against the celestial
host, headed by Indra and Mahadeva. Just He and Arjuna together have
already shown their power at Khäëòava. What then can we expect when they
are united with Bhéma and the twins? Our army is finished! The Päëòavas’
power is inestimable. O Saïjaya, let me tell you about the other kings who
have rallied to their cause.”
Dhåtaräñöra had already heard from his spies about the situation in Virata.
After listing all the kings supporting the Päëòavas, he again turned to the
discussion of Kåñëa. It was Kåñëa he feared. Just see how easily He had slain the
mighty Çiçupäla, Naraka, Kaàsa, and so many others. “He is surely Viñëu
incarnate. Thinking of Kåñëa’s power and Viñëu’s deeds in former ages, I find
no peace, O son of Gavalgani. Perhaps the only person I fear more is
Yudhiñöhira. I do not fear anyone as I fear him. He has long practiced austerity
and dedicated himself to virtue. Whoever receives his wrath will be consumed
like a reed falling into fire. His cause is just. This also frightens me.
“Therefore, go on a swift car to the high-minded Päëòava and speak
411

affectionate and kind words. Tell him that I desire peace and will comply with
any request he makes. Inquire after his welfare and that of his friends and
followers. Say whatever you feel is appropriate to promote the interests of our
race. Do not speak anything which will give rise to hostility.”
Without offering assurance that the Päëòavas would regain their kingdom,
Dhåtaräñöra gave his own message to Saïjaya and then asked him to leave at
once.

Chapter 42
Dhåtaräñöra’s Message
The Päëòavas were sitting alone with Kåñëa when they received word of
Saïjaya’s arrival. Yudhiñöhira asked that he be brought in at once and then
received him warmly. Saïjaya bowed before Kåñëa and all the brothers. After
he was seated he said to Yudhiñöhira, “It is fortunate, O King, that I find you in
good health and among friends. Surrounded by your brothers and the
illustrious Kåñëa, you appear like Indra. The aged and wise Dhåtaräñöra
inquires after your welfare, along with the well-being of your wife and other
relatives.”
After saying that everything was well, and asking after the Kurus’ welfare,
Yudhiñöhira said, “Do the Kurus still think well of us? Do they remember
Arjuna’s unequalled prowess and that he can send sixty arrows at once from
his bow? Do they remember the mighty Bhéma, who can make entire armies
tremble when he picks up his mace? Do they remember the twins, who
conquered so many regions of the earth by the strength of their arms? Surely
Dhåtaräñöra’s sons have not forgotten the defeat they met at Dwaitavana, when
Bhéma and Arjuna had them released. Although we would be their friends and
live with them in peace, I fear this will not come to pass. Alas, Saïjaya, there
seems to be no way to win Duryodhana over despite our best endeavors.”
“It is exactly as you say,” Saïjaya replied sadly. “The Kurus are well and they
certainly remember you. Duryodhana is surrounded by both wise and wicked
men, but he takes his inspiration only from the latter. His behavior toward you
is surely reprehensible. His father sincerely regrets it. Indeed, the old king
412

often sits sighing, lost in feelings of repentance for the ill treatment you
brothers have received at Kuru hands. He has consulted Brahmins and knows
that conspiring against friends is the worst of all sins. The king wants only to
make a lasting peace among us all. Yes, the Kurus remember your power. It is a
mystery how men of your caliber are forced to suffer so much misery, but we
are sure that you will never abandon virtue for the sake of pleasure. O you who
have created no enemies, listen now as I convey to you Dhåtaräñöra’s message.”
Yudhiñöhira asked that Saïjaya speak the message before all the kings gathered
at Virata’s court. The charioteer then stood in their midst and bowed before
speaking. “I offer you my respects. Dhåtaräñöra has sent me here to say that he
desires peace. He inquires about your welfare and asks with all sincerity that
there be peace among us. This is what he said. The sons of Päëòu are all
virtuous. They are incapable of a mean act. Yudhiñöhira is mild, generous and
forgiving, and acts only for the welfare of all beings. How could he be
responsible for an act which will destroy us all, which is sinful, and which leads
only to hell––an act which will bring the same result regardless of who is
successful. Blessed are those who promote their cousins’ interests. They are
truly sons, well-wishers and friends of the Kurus who are prepared to sacrifice
their own interests for that of the dynasty.”
Kåñëa smiled. The kings glanced at each other. Dhåtaräñöra’s message was clear.
They listened as Saïjaya clarified it further.
“If you succeed in subjugating the Kauravas, O sons of Kunté, and thus regain
your kingdom, what will you gain? Having slain your relatives, your life will be
like death. What will be the result of a battle in which heroes such as
yourselves, Keçava, Sätyaki, Chekitana and others contend with Droëa,
Bhéñma, Kåpa, Açvatthämä and the Kuru warriors? It means total annihilation.
There will be no good to either side. I find it hard to believe that the Päëòavas
are capable of causing such destruction. With clasped hands I fall at the feet of
Kåñëa and of the aged Drupada. Throwing myself upon your protection, I beg
that all be well between the Kurus and the Päëòavas. If someone requested it,
you would give up your lives; why, then, would you not act to preserve all these
warriors?”
The hall remained silent. Yudhiñöhira waited until Saïjaya had taken his seat
and said mildly, “What have I said that made you think I wanted war, Saïjaya?
What man, so cursed by the gods, would choose war when peace could be
made? The sons of Kunté will act only according to virtue and thus bring
413

happiness to all. One who acts according to the senses’ dictates follows the
path leading to misery. We become free from misery only when we are free
from the longing to gratify our senses. Dhåtaräñöra and his foolish sons fail to
understand this truth. Thus they act in ways which never bring happiness.”
Yudhiñöhira looked at Kåñëa, who smiled in approval. The Päëòava stood up as
he continued to speak, appearing in his robes and ornaments like a golden
banner raised in honor of Indra.
“Having accepted the advice of his dull-headed son, who is wicked and
addicted to sin, the king now laments. Why did he not heed Vidura’s words,
who desired only the Kurus’ well-being? To gain prestige for himself,
Duryodhana seeks to deprive others of prestige. He is jealous, wrathful,
haughty, spiteful, and filled with lust. Dhåtaräñöra knows what his son has
done, but still he chooses to follow him, thus forsaking both virtue and
pleasure. He cannot hold his ill-gotten gains for long, although he wishes for
unending prosperity. He and his son desire to rule the earth undisputed. We
have heard nothing to indicate that they have changed their minds, O
Saïjaya. They now consider whatever of our wealth they possess to be
rightfully theirs.”
Yudhiñöhira indicated the kings who sat in a circle around the hall. “All these
monarchs know well how Duryodhana came to possess our kingdom. He and
his brothers, along with the unintelligent Karëa, think they can overcome us
in battle. Obviously, they have not seen Arjuna with his Gäëòéva bow
stretched to its limit, nor have they seen Bhéma whirling his mace or the twins
with their swords in hand. Saïjaya, you know the troubles we have borne at
the Kurus’ hands. Even so I forgive them. Let there be peace between us. Let
them return Indraprastha to me and they keep Hastinäpura. Let Dhåtaräñöra
return what is rightfully ours.”
Saïjaya had delivered Dhåtaräñöra’s message, but he now wished to speak on
his own behalf. He was surprised to see the usually peaceful Yudhiñöhira so
inclined toward war. “There can be no doubt that you are attached to virtue, O
king of men. Why do you desire to destroy the Kurus? Death may come at any
moment. It behooves all men to remain fixed on the path of truth. No one
should even contemplate sin, for that may immediately lead one to hell. O
Bharata, if the Kurus will not return your kingdom without war, would it not
be better for you to live as a beggar than to seek to annihilate them? Indeed,
you could live happily with Kåñëa and the Yädavas. Desire for wealth is the
414

enemy of virtue. A wise man should shun it entirely. One who renounces
desires and lives simply, even though devoid of wealth, shines like the sun and
becomes famous in this world; but one who is the slave of desire, even if he
obtains the earth, is ruined.”
As Dhåtaräñöra’s intimate servant, Saïjaya wanted to carry out his mission to
secure peace. He knew the Kauravas could not win in a war, but he also
doubted Yudhiñöhira’s motives. Saïjaya was a spiritual disciple of Vyäsadeva
and had received many instructions from the åñi. It seemed to him that
Yudhiñöhira was allowing himself to be overpowered by material desire without
considering what might be in his spiritual interests.
Saïjaya maintained a respectful tone. “O son of Påthä, you have studied all the
Vedas and performed asceticism. You have controlled your mind and senses
and you are dedicated to performing sacrifices and giving charity. Why are you
now giving way to anger? You are already famous in this world as a man of the
highest principles; you have presided over the Räjasüya and offered gifts to
hundreds of thousands of Brahmins. O King, do not let this go in vain by now
committing a great sin. Do not act impelled by malice and thereby destroy the
results of all your asceticism and sacrifice. Forbearance is surely best for you
now, not the enjoyment gained at the cost of great men’s lives. What happiness
do you think you will enjoy when you and your brothers have slain all your
relatives? Even after gaining the earth, you will have to reap the results of your
good and bad deeds. Happiness and distress will arrive in due course, and in the
end you will meet with decrepitude and death. O hero, knowing all this you
should not fight. If your advisors would have you fight, then you should
abandon them. Do not forsake the path that leads to the worlds of the gods and
beyond.”
Saïjaya sat down again and Yudhiñöhira thought before replying. The sound of
the jeweled fountains in the gardens just outside made a gentle cascading
resonance. Temple bells chimed in the distance. Fragrant incense billowed
through the hall. The kings awaited Yudhiñöhira.
Finally, he said, “It is undoubtedly as you say. One should never stray from
virtue. But before blaming me, you should first ascertain whether it is virtue or
vice I am following. Sometimes virtue may look like vice and vice as virtue.
Only after careful deliberation can one discriminate between the two. All men
should follow the duties prescribed for them according to their respective
social positions. Brahmins may beg for a living, but kñatriyas may never beg.
415

Even in times of distress, kings and rulers should not accept alms. The creator
has ordained that we should live by gaining lordship over lands and protecting
the people. I would not accept this entire earth, nor even the kingdoms of the
gods, through unrighteousness.
“Here is Kåñëa. He knows every facet of Vedic knowledge and possesses full
wisdom. Let Him decide what is right in this case. I will always follow His
dictate and will never ignore His advice. Keçava is our friend and well-wisher;
we will hear His opinion and decide what should be done.”
As Yudhiñöhira took his seat, Kåñëa stood. His bodily lustre seemed to
illuminate the hall with a mystical radiance. Shining yellow silks and gold
ornaments framed His complexion, which resembled a blackish autumnal rain
cloud. Turning His lotus-petal eyes toward Saïjaya, He said, “O Saïjaya, I
desire that both the Päëòavas and the Kurus be happy and prosperous. I want
peace and I am happy to see that Dhåtaräñöra also desires it. Yudhiñöhira has
already shown a rare kind of commitment to peace, since it is he who has been
antagonized and abused by the Kurus. Why should he suddenly wish to escalate
the conflict between himself and his cousins? Surely, Saïjaya, you know as well
as I do the nature of right and wrong. Why, then, do you find fault with
Päëòu’s son, who has always adhered to his duties as they have been laid down
in the scriptures since the days of old?
“Regarding our present discussion, there are two schools of thought among the
Brahmins. Some say that by renouncing our duties we shall achieve perfection,
and others say that duties should never be renounced but should be performed
without attachment. My opinion concurs with this latter view, O Saïjaya.
Even to maintain himself a man must perform his duties in this world.
Knowledge without work yields no fruit.”
Kåñëa held up a bejeweled hand as He spoke. “See how the gods in heaven
shine through work, how through work the wind blows and the sleepless sun
gives rise to day and night? Sleepless does the Earth goddess carry her load, and
sleepless do the rivers carry their waters to satisfy all creatures. Indra attained
his exalted status by giving up pleasure and sense gratification. This is true of
all the principal deities. Knowing this, O suta, why do you plead on behalf of
the Kauravas, exhorting the Päëòavas to renounce their prescribed duties? You
are wise and aware of the truth. Then consider this question: does a king’s duty
lie in fighting or in not fighting? Surely you know that the creator endowed
kings with the power to check and even kill miscreants. Dhåtaräñöra has robbed
416

Yudhiñöhira of his rightful property. Whether one steals covertly or openly,
stealing is sinful. Should Duryodhana and his followers not then face the
consequences of their sin? Is Yudhiñöhira not justified in seeking to recover his
stolen property, even if it means killing the robbers?”
Kåñëa looked at Yudhiñöhira and his brothers, who sat together like a pride of
lions. The eyes of all the kings turned toward them as Kåñëa continued.
“Certainly Yudhiñöhira desires peace; but if his kingdom is not returned, then
in My opinion it is his duty to declare war. Indeed, it would be virtuous and
praiseworthy to be killed fighting in such a religious war. It is better that
Yudhiñöhira regain his own ancestral kingdom than to take the kingdom of
another. O Saïjaya, go now and lay these ancient principles before
Dhåtaräñöra amid his sons and the assembled chiefs of the various countries.”
Kåñëa paused. His audience was absorbed, accepting His gently spoken
arguments. Even Saïjaya nodded his head in agreement as Kåñëa went on.
“My dear Saïjaya, let Me remind you that the Kurus committed their sin in
their own council hall. All of them, even Bhéñma, was silent when the chaste
Draupadé stood weeping in Dushashana’s clutches. That slave of lust viciously
dragged her before her fathers-in-law to abuse and insult her. If Dhåtaräñöra
had checked his sons, he would then have pleased Me. He and all the Kurus
said nothing. That is, all except Vidura and one honest kñatriya. The other
kings also remained silent. You too, Saïjaya, did not utter a word. Now you
want to preach righteousness to Yudhiñöhira.”
Kåñëa’s eyes flashed as He described the incident. “At that time Karëa spoke
such sharp words to Draupadé that they pierced her heart. ‘Become the
Kauravas’ slave,’ the fool said. ‘Your husbands are no longer your husbands.
Choose another man.’ Karëa’s arrow of words also buried itself deep into
Arjuna’s heart.
“The sinful Çakuni again and again urged Yudhiñöhira in the dice game, ‘You
have only Draupadé left. Stake her, O King.’
“Again, when the Päëòavas were about to depart to honor their vow, clad in
black deerskins, Dushashana said, ‘These eunuchs, vanquished and ruined, are
going to hell for a long time.’”
Kåñëa paused again to allow His words to sink in. After thirteen years the
shock of those terrible events had worn off, but as Kåñëa described them,
Saïjaya remembered the horror of that day. He knew he had been wrong to
stand by silently as Duryodhana and his friends committed their crime. Out of
417

loyalty to the blind king he had watched in anguish as the noble Päëòavas, and
especially their gentle wife, had suffered unbearable insults. Without doubt the
seeds of the present calamity had been sown at that time. The arrows the
Kauravas had shot at that time would now come back at them as blazing shafts
launched from the Gäëòéva. The elders’ silence on that day would soon be
answered by the clamor of fierce battle. Saïjaya bowed his head.
Kåñëa continued. “I shall go to Hastinäpura to remind the Kurus of all these
events. We will settle the matter. If I can bring about peace without injuring
the Päëòavas’ interests, then I will have performed a virtuous act. I will also
have released the Kurus from the clutches of death. I hope Dhåtaräñöra’s sons
will receive Me with respect when I go there to speak of virtue and humanity.
If it is otherwise, you can be sure that those men, consumed by their own
viciousness, will lose everything on the battlefield. At the proper time, Bhéma,
mace in hand, will remind Duryodhana of his cruel words.”
Looking around the hall, Kåñëa concluded with a number of poetic metaphors.
“Duryodhana is a tree full of malice, Karëa is its trunk, Çakuni its branch,
Dushashana and his brothers the numerous fruits and flowers, and the blind
king Dhåtaräñöra its root. On the other hand, Yudhiñöhira is a tall tree full of
virtue, Arjuna is its trunk, Bhéma its branch, and the twins its fruits and
flowers. I myself, along with the Vedas and the Brahmins, are its root.
“O Saïjaya, tell your master that peace with the Päëòavas is the only
intelligent course. The Kurus are like a forest and the Päëòavas are the tigers.
Without tigers men would cut down the trees, and without the forest the tigers
have no protection. They need each other.
“The Kauravas are creepers of virtue while the Päëòavas are huge sal trees.
Without the support of a tree the creepers cannot grow. Päëòu’s sons are ready
to either wait on Dhåtaräñöra or ready to fight. Everything depends on how the
king acts now. Go back, wise one, and explain all this to Dhåtaräñöra.”
Saïjaya made no reply. He knew that Kåñëa spoke the truth. Bowing
respectfully to Him, he turned to Yudhiñöhira and said, “With your permission
I will leave. O god among men, I hope I have not offended you in any way.
After saying good-bye to Janärdana, Bhémasena, Arjuna and Mädré’s sons, as
well as the other heroes in the assembly, please give me leave to depart. May
happiness and prosperity be yours. May the king look upon you with goodwill.”
Yudhiñöhira folded his palms toward Dhåtaräñöra’s secretary and replied, “O
Saïjaya, we know you are our well-wisher. Your speech did not offend us, for
418

you spoke with a pure heart. Surely you are our favorite and you have always
shown us so much affection. Other than you, only Vidura could have come
here. O wise one, please convey our regards to our elders and friends. Offer our
respects to the Brahmins and our affection to the people. Is the king protecting
them well? O Saïjaya, are the arrangements we made for the well-being of all
our subjects still in place? I hope no person is needy or afflicted within the
Kurus’ jurisdiction.”
Yudhiñöhira named the Kurus one by one and asked Saïjaya to go to each of
them on his behalf and ask after their health. At last he said, “Go to
Duryodhana, who is dull-headed, ignorant, wicked and addicted to vice, and
say that the desire tormenting his heart for undisputed rulership is not
justified. Tell him this: ‘We shall not do anything disagreeable to you. Either
give back Indraprastha or fight, O chief of the Bharatas.’”
The assembled kings cheered Yudhiñöhira’s words and the Päëòava raised his
hand to silence them. Turning again to Saïjaya he said, “I pray that the
Supreme Lord will bless that foolish man with wisdom. Saïjaya, also say this to
Duryodhana: ‘Päëòu’s sons are ready to forget even the disrobing and abuse of
their wife just so that the Kurus may not be slaughtered. We will bear all the
ills and insults they have heaped upon us, but we want our due share. O best
among men, give up your greed for others’ property. Only then will there be
peace. We will accept even one province so that we may perform our Godgiven duty of ruling over and protecting the people. Give us just five villages,
one for each of us, and let there be an end to this quarrel. Let brother follow
brother and father unite with son. I desire to see the Kauravas and the
Païchälas coming together with cheerful hearts. To do my duty I am prepared
for peace or war. The choice is in your hands.’”
When Yudhiñöhira was finished, each of his brothers gave messages for the
Kauravas. When they had all spoken, Saïjaya said he would repeat their
messages exactly as they had been spoken. Then he bowed before the assembly
and departed for Hastinäpura.

Chapter 43
Anxiety for the Blind King
419

Dhåtaräñöra sat alone in his chambers. Saïjaya had been gone for days and was
due back at any time. The king wondered how the Päëòavas would receive his
message. Surely the gentle Yudhiñöhira would not opt for war. How could he
condone killing his beloved elders? But he would certainly act on Kåñëa’s
advice. Kåñëa was an unknown element. Dhåtaräñöra could not fathom His
motivations or intentions. Sometimes He seemed impartial––or at least He
said He was––yet He always appeared to favor the Päëòavas. Then again He
had given His army to Duryodhana and had promised not to fight. It was
difficult to understand.
As Dhåtaräñöra sat thinking, a messenger entered his room to inform him that
Saïjaya had returned. The king asked that Saïjaya be shown in at once.
Saïjaya entered the chamber with clasped hands and stood before Dhåtaräñöra.
“O lord of the earth, I am Saïjaya, returned from seeing the Päëòavas.
Yudhiñöhira sends his greetings and asks after your health, and that of your
sons and grandsons.”
“Blessings to you, Saïjaya. Welcome back. Tell me how Yudhiñöhira, who
creates no enemies, is faring. Are he and his brothers well?”
“All is well with the Päëòavas. Yudhiñöhira desires to have what was formerly
his. In his opinion, virtue is superior to acquiring wealth, and it is the essence
of happiness and joy. That godly man, motivated only by virtue, wishes to
again protect the people in accord with the eternal duties the creator has
assigned to him. Surely men are puppets led by God’s will. Otherwise, how
could the Päëòavas have suffered so much? I think that as long as a powerful
man does not have an opportunity to rectify things, his antagonists will
prosper. Your acts have been indescribably sinful, O King, and you will soon
receive their results. Yudhiñöhira, having cast away sin as a snake sloughs its
skin, is now resplendent amid other heroes.”
Saïjaya’s long and intimate relationship with Dhåtaräñöra allowed him to be
frank. The king winced as his secretary continued. “Reflect carefully on your
course, O King, because your motives are suicidal. You have acted dishonorably
toward the Päëòavas, and you have achieved neither virtue nor wealth.
Vicious and cruel, your deeds have earned you only shame and censure among
men. We can understand such actions from low-class men with poor education,
but you are born in the line of Bharata and have been advised by many wise
ministers. You too are wise and know the difference between right and wrong.
Why, then, do you act to bring about the destruction of your race?”
420

Dhåtaräñöra pressed a forefinger and thumb into his eyes. He felt unbearably
hot, although he was being fanned on both sides by young maidens with
chamara whisks. He unbuttoned his tunic and called for a cup of cool water.
Saïjaya did not relent. He could not bear to see his master bring about his own
ruin. The time for diplomacy was past. Disaster was imminent. If there was any
hope of averting it, the king needed to keep hearing the truth––and do
something soon.
“Surely the Päëòavas are aided by divine forces. Otherwise, how could Arjuna
have gone to the heavens in his mortal body? God alone awards men the results
of their deeds. Our exertions are useless if we fail to recognize this truth.
Striving only for our own gratification, we will gain nothing but misery. O
King, I blame you for the present situation. You have acted without regard for
God’s laws. If you do not reverse your decisions, you will be responsible for the
annihilation of innumerable men. Arjuna will destroy the Kurus as fire
destroys a heap of dry grass. Influenced by your headstrong son, you think your
success is sure. Thus you did not prevent the dice game. Now look at the result
of such madness. O King, because you are weak you will not be able to retain
sovereignty over this broad realm, any more than a fool can retain wealth
suddenly gained.”
It was late and Saïjaya was tired from his long journey. He asked Dhåtaräñöra’s
permission to take rest and said he would return in the morning to deliver
Yudhiñöhira’s message to the assembly. The king dismissed his servant with
kind words. He knew that Saïjaya had only his interests at heart, no matter
how cutting his words.
After Saïjaya left, Dhåtaräñöra sat alone, his mind wracked by painful
thoughts. Everything depended upon him. It would surely be just to return
Indraprastha to Yudhiñöhira, but Duryodhana would never agree. Would he be
able to check him? It had been almost twenty years since Dhåtaräñöra had
assumed the throne. Now he was lord of the earth––that is, he and
Duryodhana, his empowered representative. To give Yudhiñöhira his kingdom
would end all that. The self-effulgent Päëòavas would soon reestablish their
supremacy over their cousins. He and Duryodhana would be eclipsed. The king
felt his limbs tremble. Having had such power, it would be worse than death to
have it taken away.
Although it was late, Dhåtaräñöra felt that he needed to hear from Vidura. No
one could offer him impartial, thoughtful advice like Vidura. The king asked
421

that Vidura be summoned and within a short time he entered the chamber. “O
you of great wisdom, I am Vidura, here at your command. Order me. What can
I do for you? I am your servant.”
The king welcomed him warmly and had him sit at his side. He spoke in
somber tones. “O Vidura, I have just spoken with Saïjaya. He strongly
criticized me. He has not yet told me what Yudhiñöhira said and now I am
anxious. My body is burning and I cannot sleep. Tell me how to cure my
condition.”
Vidura, who had been called from his prayer and meditation, replied,
“Sleeplessness overpowers one who has been attacked by a stronger man, the
weak, those who have failed to attain their goal, those who have been robbed,
those consumed by desire, and thieves. I hope that you do not fall into any of
these categories, O King, nor that you are greedy for another’s wealth.”
Vidura knew well the king’s dilemma. He had discussed it with him on
countless occasions, always offering him the same advice. Dhåtaräñöra had
always ignored it. Vidura had repeatedly warned him of the eventual outcome
of his acts, an outcome which was now imminent. Dhåtaräñöra was obviously
realizing that fact.
The king turned his head toward Vidura. “Speak wisdom to me, dear brother.
Speak those words which are at once morally uplifting and also calculated to
secure my welfare.”
Vidura’s affection for his brother never waned, despite his brother’s
foolishness. He patiently advised him for his good, praying that one day the
blind king would come to his senses. Perhaps now, with the approach of
calamity, he would become more thoughtful. Vidura said, “Yudhiñöhira is a king
graced with all the auspicious marks. He is fit to rule the world. You should
have kept him near you, but you exiled him. For this blindness you are
condemned, O King, although you know what is virtue. Because he is
inoffensive, kind, forgiving and a lover of truth, Yudhiñöhira remembers your
supremacy and patiently bears the hardships you have inflicted upon him.
Having bestowed lordship of the world on Duryodhana, who bears enmity
toward Yudhiñöhira, how can you now expect peace and prosperity?”
Vidura had himself received many instructions from åñis and sages, and he
sought their association whenever it was available. Recalling the saints’ words
of wisdom, he became more gentle with Dhåtaräñöra as he continued to instruct
him. The king listened attentively.
422

“He is said to be a wise man who cannot be deviated from his duties by anger,
exultation, pride, lust or ignorance, and who remains fixed on the highest goals
of life. Attachment to the saintly, renouncing the association of blameworthy
men, and maintaining faith and reverence toward elders are also signs of the
wise. A wise man acts in accordance with religion, pursuing a course that
benefits him in both this life and the next rather than one that offers only
immediate pleasure. Wise men do not lament for what is lost, nor do they
hanker for the unattainable. They rejoice in virtuous deeds and they shun sin.
The wise understand this world to be temporary and miserable. They recognize
God’s supremacy and their own position as His servants. All their acts are
aimed at pleasing the Lord and achieving His eternal abode.
“On the other hand, a fool is proud, even though ignorant, vain and poor.
Fools try to achieve prosperity through sin, and hanker after others’ property.
Resorting to deceit and violence, a fool thinks nothing of hurting others to
achieve his nefarious ends. A fool forsakes that which should be obtained and
desires that which should not be desired. He is faithless, makes no offerings to
the ancestors, and worships only himself. Arrogant, angry and harsh of speech,
he lacks discrimination and befriends those who should be foes while hating
those worthy of friendship. Failing in his endeavors, he blames others and
punishes the innocent. Such men are ultimately destroyed to their roots.”
Vidura instructed Dhåtaräñöra well into the night. He tried his best to turn the
old king’s mind toward virtue and truth. He had nothing new to say to
Dhåtaräñöra. The Kuru monarch had often heard such teachings. He agreed
with everything, and even enjoyed hearing it. As Vidura spoke the king
recognized his own foolishness and sinfulness, and he freely admitted them. He
prompted Vidura to speak more and more, asking question after question. The
night ended with Vidura pointing out the certain results that would ensue if
the king did not act fairly toward the Päëòavas.
But Dhåtaräñöra knew he could not find the strength to act upon Vidura’s
wisdom. He knew that even though he wanted to act properly, he would not
have the will to cross Duryodhana. He knew that when he sat among the kings
in the assembly the next morning, he would be unable to accede to
Yudhiñöhira’s request.
Vidura understood the king’s position. He knew his words were having little
effect and decided that Dhåtaräñöra needed to hear from someone more
spiritually potent. After having spoken to the king for several hours he said
423

finally, “I am a çüdra, O King. I cannot instruct you further. But I know of
someone who can. The saintly Åñi Sanat-Sujata has instructed me in the
eternal Vedic truths on many occasions. I will invoke him and he will appear to
speak to you. That sage has lived a life of perpetual celibacy. His words are
powerful and pure. With your permission, I will call him.”
Dhåtaräñöra assented and Vidura sat in meditation, fixing his mind on SanatSujata. The Åñi divined Vidura’s thoughts by his own power and he came there
at once. His body shone with a brilliant luster, and he carried a waterpot and a
staff in his hands. Vidura received him with due rites and offered him an
elevated seat near the king.
When the sage was sitting at his ease, Vidura said, “O lord, the king has doubts
I cannot clear. If it is your desire, please instruct him in the ancient truths as
you have realized them. Only you can free him from duality and help him
become fixed on the path of virtue.”
The Åñi, who was clad in a black deerskin and had matted locks of hair,
nodded. Seeing his willingness to speak, Vidura told the king to place his
questions before him. Dhåtaräñöra said, “O Sanat-Sujata, please guide me. Pray
tell me how I can attain to the highest end of my life. Death comes to all
beings, but I hear that you know the secret of defeating death. How should I
act so that I might not be forever subjected to birth and death in this world?”
Sanat-Sujata replied, “You have asked how death may be avoided and eternal
life attained. Listen, O King, and I shall instruct you to the best of my
knowledge. It is said that actual death is ignorance. Where there is no
ignorance, there is no death. He who is ruled by lust, anger and greed is ruled
by Yamaräja and will see that great god again and again. Falling into all kinds
of hells he suffers unbearable miseries. Then he rises again and takes birth
among animals and men in this world, once more beginning the cycle. One
who controls his senses, however, and does not act on their dictates is saved
from this suffering. To such a man who checks his mind and senses, death is a
straw tiger. Therefore, you should avoid all sensual desires and cultivate
knowledge of the eternal soul, which exists separately from the senses and is
different from the body.”
Dhåtaräñöra asked, “What regions do those who control their senses attain?
How should such a man act in this world? O sage, I am not satiated by hearing
you speak only once.”
Sanat-Sujata sat cross-legged on the golden seat, his two hands held in front of
424

him with forefinger and thumb joined together as he spoke. “O King, one
should perform sacrifice and penance aimed at pleasing the Supreme Person. If
you do this, you will attain the supreme, eternal regions from which you will
not return. Step by step, one should progress along the path of knowledge,
never thinking oneself to be the material body and always acting to attain
spiritual progress.”
Dhåtaräñöra flinched as the sage continued. The aged monarch already knew
these teachings. He knew the sage spoke the truth. Dhåtaräñöra knew that his
own actions had been far from submissive to those instructions. Worse than
that, however, he knew he was unlikely to change. No doubt he would have to
perform much asceticism and penance to atone for his sins. Maybe then he
would finally be able to apply the saint’s instructions. It seemed that for now,
Destiny was moving him to act in ways contrary to good advice. Feeling
helpless in the face of his own weakness, Dhåtaräñöra went on questioning the
Åñi.
Sanat-Sujata could also see the king’s inner feelings, but he continued to
address him for his ultimate welfare. It was up to Dhåtaräñöra to choose his own
course of action. The sage knew that all he could do was make clear the
consequences of the various courses available to the king.
Dhåtaräñöra listened as Sanat-Sujata described how the Supersoul pervades the
universe and resides in the hearts of all living beings.
The king asked, “How can one come to know that Supersoul?”
“The Supreme, who is known as Brahman, can only be known by one who has
attained the same spiritual nature as Him. That nature is attained by the
practice of serving the spiritual master, studying the Vedas, observing celibacy,
practicing asceticism, and abstaining from violence toward others. Gradually
one will become free of the material nature’s influence and become situated in
his original spiritual nature. Then by meditation, one can know the Supreme.”
Dhåtaräñöra was intrigued. “What form does the immortal and omnipresent
Supersoul have in this world? Is he white, red, black, or some other color?
What are his attributes?”
“He may appear as any color, but He is not like anything within your present
experience. He is the form of the universe, but simultaneously appears in the
heart in a form the size of your thumb. Everything rests in Him and is absorbed
back into Him at the time of dissolution. He is without duality and yet from
Him springs the infinite varieties of creation. His arms and legs are everywhere
425

yet He is still. He sees everything and He possesses all knowledge. No one is
unknown to the Supreme Being.”
Returning to the king’s question about how to know the Supersoul, the sage
further described what behavior elevates one to the spiritual platform. He went
on to explain about the nature of Brahman and the state one experiences when
he attains that nature. Sanat-Sujata spoke until the rising sun filled the king’s
chamber. Seeing that it was daybreak, the Åñi concluded his discourse and
stood up to leave. Vidura touched his feet and both he and the king thanked
him for his instructions. Sanat-Sujata then vanished, leaving the two men to
prepare themselves for the assembly.

Chapter 44
Panic Among the Kauravas
Duryodhana had risen early on the day of the assembly. He knew Saïjaya was
going to deliver Yudhiñöhira’s message. After performing his morning ablutions
and receiving the worship and praise of the palace Brahmins and bards, the
prince met with Çakuni and Karëa. He expressed his determination not to
return the Päëòavas’ kingdom. His friends agreed and cheered him. They
encouraged him to remain firm and assured him that his old father, bound by
ties of affection, would not force him to return Indraprastha if he was resolute.
As they spoke, the three men slowly made their way to the assembly hall,
which shone like the Himavat mountain in the early morning sunlight.
Dhåtaräñöra entered the hall at the head of all other kings. Led by Vidura, he
made his way to his throne. The floor in the hall had been sprinkled lightly
with perfumes and spread with flower petals. The kings took their places on
seats made of carved ivory and wood, decorated with golden inlays and
precious stones. As they settled onto the silk cushions, they looked around to
see who was present. Immediately surrounding Dhåtaräñöra were Vidura,
Bhéñma, Droëa, Kåpa, Çalya, Kåtavarmä, Jayadratha, Bählika, Somadatta,
Açvatthämä, as well as Duryodhana and his one hundred brothers. The
chamber, filled with so many heroes, seemed like a cave full of lions. The
lustrous men, with their bright silks and golden ornaments, lit up the hall and
426

appeared like an assembly of the gods.
When everyone was seated, the doorkeeper announced that Saïjaya had
arrived and was waiting to deliver his message. Dhåtaräñöra gave permission for
him to enter the hall. Saïjaya, his gold earrings swinging, bowed at
Dhåtaräñöra’s feet. Folding his palms he faced the assembly and said, “O sons of
Kuru, I have just returned from the Päëòavas. Those virtuous men salute you
all, each according to your age and status. Hear now the messages they have
sent through me.”
Saïjaya carefully relayed Yudhiñöhira’s message exactly as he had heard it:
either the Kurus should return the Päëòavas’ kingdom––or even just five
villages––or there would be war.
Dhåtaräñöra said nothing. He looked pensive. After some moments he said, “I
wish to hear Arjuna’s message, for it is from him that we face the greatest
danger. Kåñëa’s friend, Arjuna, is immeasurably powerful and has suffered at
our hands. Tell me, Saïjaya, what did Dhanaïjaya, the destroyer of sinful men,
say?”
Saïjaya bowed his head to the king and remained standing. “These were the
words of the wrathful Arjuna, who was eager to fight and who, with reddened
eyes, spoke in the presence of Yudhiñöhira and Kåñëa.”
Summoning the mood in which Arjuna had spoken, Saïjaya delivered his
exact words: “Speak to Dhåtaräñöra’s son in the midst of the Kurus, and in the
hearing of the wicked-minded Karëa, who always desires to fight, speaks
harshly, has a dull intellect, and is extremely ignorant. His time has come.
Speak also in the presence of those kings who have come from around the
world to fight the Päëòavas. If Duryodhana does not surrender Yudhiñöhira’s
kingdom, then it is clear that he desires to pay for his former antagonism
toward the Päëòavas. If he chooses battle, then our ends will be achieved. Tell
him not to choose peace, but to choose to fight with me and Bhéma, Nakula
and Sahadeva, Sätyaki and Dåñöadyumna, and Çikhaëòé. I look forward to it.
Although we have lain on a bed of woe these last thirteen years, let
Dhåtaräñöra’s son, when he lies dead on the battlefield, obtain a bed of endless
woe. He could never conquer the virtuous Yudhiñöhira in a fight. Therefore, he
resorted to trickery and deceit. Päëòu’s eldest son, whose senses and mind are
fully under control, has patiently endured all his suffering. When he directs his
anger against the Kauravas, then will Duryodhana have cause to repent.”
Duryodhana sneered as Saïjaya continued. Arjuna described how he
427

envisioned the war between them taking place. “As a blazing fire in the
summer consumes dried grass, so will the Kaurava army be consumed even by
Yudhiñöhira’s glance. When Duryodhana sees the iron-clad Bhémasena on his
chariot, mace in hand and vomiting the venom of his wrath, then will he
repent this war. When that exceedingly vain one sees Bhéma felling elephants
by the thousands, their warriors dispatched to the next world, then will he
repent. When Nakula comes down from his chariot, clutching his sword and
razing warriors as if they were a field of corn, then will the wicked one repent.
When Sahadeva chops off the heads of kings with his well-aimed arrows, and
when he finally encounters the vicious Çakuni, then will Duryodhana repent.”
One by one Arjuna mentioned all the great warriors who would fight for the
Päëòavas, describing how they would wreak vengeance on the Kauravas.
Dåñöadyumna would kill Droëa and Çikhaëòé would slay Bhéñma. Bhéma had
already vowed to slay Duryodhana and all his brothers. Arjuna would destroy
warriors by the tens of thousands. Finally he would kill Karëa and all his sons
and followers. Arjuna painted a grim picture of the war’s outcome, which he
saw ending in the total annihilation of Duryodhana and his forces. Finally he
spoke about Kåñëa.
“I have selected Kåñëa as my charioteer in preference to Indra and his
thunderbolt weapon. If Kåñëa desires someone’s victory, even if He Himself
does not fight, that person cannot fail. Our victory will be easy. Whoever
desires to overpower Kåñëa wishes to swim the unfathomable ocean or to put
out a blazing fire with his two hands, or to stop the sun and moon in their
course through the heavens. That best of men, the Lord of all the worlds, has
already slain demons more powerful than Duryodhana. Even the invincible
Naraka, son of the Earth, who could easily withstand the gods in battle,
succumbed to Kåñëa’s irresistible weapons. Duryodhana desires to defeat Kåñëa,
who is the Supreme Viñëu, either by capturing Him or by winning Him over to
the Kaurava side. That fool will soon realize his ignorance.”
Through their spies, the Päëòavas were aware of the Kauravas’ strategies.
Arjuna knew that Duryodhana feared Kåñëa and was thinking of how to deal
with Him. The Kaurava prince even considered capturing Him when He came
to Hastinäpura on His peace mission.
Arjuna ended his speech by describing the omens he saw: “Without my touch
the Gäëòéva bow stretches. My arrows move out of their quiver on their own
accord. My polished sword leaps from its scabbard. Near my banners I heard,
428

‘When will your chariot be yoked, O Kiréöé?’ At night, crowds of jackals howl
gleefully and vultures and crows descend from the sky. All these signs indicate
carnage. These omens will prove true when I hurl my celestial weapons in all
directions. I will leave no trace of the Kaurava army. O Saïjaya, tell this to
Duryodhana in the hearing of the king, Bhéñma, Droëa, Kåpa, and the wise
Vidura. I will surely act as these elders say. Let them check the evil
Duryodhana or let the war begin.”
The assembly was silent. Duryodhana looked nonchalantly around the hall,
smirking. Karëa fumed and clutched his ivory-hilted sword. Seeing
Duryodhana’s indifference, Bhéñma addressed him gravely.
“O prince, listen as I recount an ancient history. Once all the gods went to
visit Brahmä. Arriving at his abode they saw two beautiful, blazing
personalities illuminating even that shining region by their splendor. Brahmä
told the gods that these two were Nara and Näräyaëa Åñis. They were forever
practicing asceticism for the good of the worlds, and they lived to destroy the
demons. The gods had come to Brahmä out of fear of the Asuras and, headed
by Båhaspati, they approached those two Åñis and begged that they help them
defeat their enemies. Assisted by Nara and Näräyaëa Åñis’ invincible power,
the gods triumphed over the Asuras. Now those two Åñis among the gods have
appeared as Kåñëa and Arjuna. Such is the general belief. Arjuna has already
shown his prowess by slaying thousands of demons in the celestial realm. The
son of Vasudeva has also killed innumerable demons. Together they have
vanquished the gods at Khäëòava, and together they will fight us.”
Bhéñma looked penetratingly at Duryodhana, who moved uncomfortably on his
throne. He did not want to hear about his enemies’ power. Anyway, why
should he worry? He thought of the Dänavas’ assurances and remembered how
they would possess his forces. Soon he would be seeing a different Bhéñma, and
soon the Päëòavas would be facing an army more powerful than they had
anticipated.
Bhéñma concluded his speech. “Nara and Näräyaëa repeatedly take birth in this
world to annihilate the miscreants and demons. It was Närada Åñi who told us
this. O child, when you see these two seated on the same chariot, armed for
battle, then you will remember my words. By desiring to fight with them you
have lost sight of both virtue and profit. Do not encounter them in battle. If
you ignore my advice, you will see your warriors slain.
“But it seems that you will only listen to the advice of three persons: Karëa,
429

who is the son of a suta and has been cursed by his guru; the cunning Çakuni;
and your small-minded brother Dushashana.”
Karëa was already seething from Arjuna’s speech. Now he was infuriated.
Springing to his feet he exclaimed, “It is unfair that you speak of me in such a
way, O Grandfather. I follow a kñatriya’s duties and have not abandoned
virtue. Why do you always revile me? I wish only for the Kurus’ good.
Dhåtaräñöra’s sons are honestly ruling the world. Why should they give the
kingdom to their enemies? To serve Dhåtaräñöra I will slay the Päëòavas in
battle.”
Karëa roared and then took his seat. Bhéñma looked at him sadly; then, turning
toward Dhåtaräñöra, said, “O King, although this suta’s son brags of his power,
he is not even a sixteenth part of the Päëòavas. You should know that this fool
is largely responsible for this calamity about to befall your sons. Encouraged by
his empty promises, Duryodhana is ready to face Arjuna in battle. Your weakbrained son, depending upon Karëa, has insulted the Päëòavas. What can this
vain man achieve that is even approaching what Arjuna has achieved? What
could he do when Arjuna killed his brother in the fight against the Matsyas?
What did he do when your son was carried away by the Gandharvas? Yet he
roars like a bull in the assembly. Ignorant of virtue and profit, he simply speaks
whatever comes to his mind.”
Bhéñma sat down. Karëa kept his head down and said nothing. Bhéñma’s words
cut him deeply. He longed for the chance to prove him wrong. The sooner he
could face Arjuna in battle the better. It would be different next time. Indra’s
çakti weapon would settle the dispute once and for all. Why had he not had it
with him at Virata? Somehow it had not occurred to him to bring that weapon.
He had not been expecting to meet Arjuna. Well, he would not make that
same mistake again. Then Bhéñma would be silenced.
Droëa had listened carefully to everything that had been said. Seeing his
opportunity, he rose to speak. Facing Dhåtaräñöra, the old martial preceptor
said, “Take heed of Bhéñma’s words and follow his advice, O King. You should
not let yourself be guided by those who covet wealth and are slaves to desire.
Peace with the Päëòavas is without doubt the best course. What Arjuna has
submitted to us through Saïjaya will surely come to pass if we fight. In all the
three worlds, no one wields a bow like him.”
Droëa, Bhéñma and Vidura––each looked expectantly at Dhåtaräñöra. But the
old king remained silent. Ignoring their advice, he asked Saïjaya to repeat
430

what the other Päëòavas had said. “What did the large-minded Yudhiñöhira say
when he heard that we had amassed a huge army? Who is looking up to him for
orders and who is trying to dissuade him from war? What is that virtuous one,
wronged by my wicked sons, now planning?”
Saïjaya, who had been seated while the others had been speaking, came again
to the center of the assembly. “All the Païchälas now look up to Yudhiñöhira,
as well as the Matsyas and Kekayas. All those tribes, down to the last
herdsmen, are ready to do his bidding. Clad in a coat of mail he sits amid their
chieftains like Indra amid the gods.”
“Tell me in detail more about Yudhiñöhira’s forces. Also, please describe
Dåñöadyumna’s army and the army of the Somakas.”
As Saïjaya recalled the sight of those troops he became stunned and fell silent.
He drew a long sigh. His mind was overwhelmed with fear and he suddenly
fainted.
Vidura said loudly, “Saïjaya, recalling the mighty sons of Kunté and their
assembled troops, has lost control of his senses. He cannot utter a word.”
Dhåtaräñöra asked a servant to sprinkle cool water on Saïjaya’s face.
“The sight of the tigers among men has filled him with terror,” Vidura
repeated. “Console him with comforting words, O King, and let him continue
his report once his mind is peaceful.”
After some moments, Saïjaya came to his senses. Reassured by Dhåtaräñöra, he
drank some water and stood again to address the assembly. “I have seen, O
great king, those mighty heroes arrayed in armor like a pride of angry lions. At
their head stands the ever-truthful Yudhiñöhira, who never departs from virtue
out of desire or fear. He is ready to fight even the gods if need be. By his side
stands the terrible Bhémasena, whose strength equals that of ten thousand
elephants and who has slain Räkñasas with his bare hands. Bhéma brought
down the powerful Yakñas on the Gandhamädana mountain, and he slew
Kichaka and all his followers.
“Then there is Arjuna, whose glories have already been described and who is
fired with wrath. He is repeatedly bending the Gäëòéva and uttering war cries.
He satisfied the immortal Çiva in a fight and was given the celestial weapons.
“Next Mädré’s two sons, the powerful twins, stand ready with their terrible
weapons, breathing hot and heavy sighs.”
Saïjaya spoke of all the principal warriors on the Päëòavas’ side. He
mentioned Çikhaëòé, who, according to prophesy, was destined to kill Bhéñma,
431

and Dåñöadyumna, destined to kill Droëa. As he named the many great heroes
aligned against the Kauravas, Duryodhana and Karëa scoffed. Dhåtaräñöra,
however, became fearful. When Saïjaya stopped speaking, the king began to
address the assembly.
“O Saïjaya, all these you have named are powerful and courageous fighters,
but Bhéma is equal to them all. He gives me the greatest fear. We are like deer
facing an enraged and hungry tiger. Many a night have I remained sleepless,
thinking about the furious Bhéma rushing at my sons with mace in hand. I do
not see anyone in our army who can face him. When wrathful he is an
implacable foe who tears through the battlefield like a tornado. He will surely
put an end to my wicked sons. Seeing him advance toward them, they will
meet with a calamity equal to meeting the god of death wielding his staff.
Bhéma will roam among my sons as a fully grown lion roams among a herd of
deer. From his childhood he has been inimical to Duryodhana and his brothers.
Finding the opportunity on the battlefield, he will not hesitate to annihilate all
of them. O Saïjaya, it is only by good fortune that he has not already killed my
sons for the wrongs they have inflicted upon him and his brothers.”
Dhåtaräñöra went on to describe the threat Bhéma posed to his sons. Sweat ran
down his face and he clenched his fists as he spoke. Bhéma’s vow to kill his sons
gave him the greatest anxiety. The kings and ministers in the hall looked at
him with pity as he concluded his speech.
“Destiny is surely all-powerful. Even though I see my sons’ inevitable death,
still I do not dissuade them from their aims. Because they all desire to traverse
the eternal, noble and heavenly path, they will part with their lives in battle
and ensure their everlasting fame on earth. Perhaps our only hope now lies in
the support of our three aged, wise heroes: Bhéñma, Droëa and Kåpa. They will
doubtlessly repay the support and kindness we have given them by coming out
for battle against the Päëòavas. Even though the sons of Kunté are as dear to
them as my sons, they will not avoid their duty. For a kñatriya to meet death in
the line of duty is commendable. It leads to glorious regions of bliss. It seems to
me, Saïjaya, that knowledge does not destroy woe; rather, distress destroys
knowledge. As I contemplate the impending destruction of the Kurus, grief
bewilders my senses and confounds my mind. I cannot let go of my attachment
for my sons, the kingdom, my wife, my grandsons, and a thousand other things.
Such blind attachment leads only to suffering.”
Dhåtaräñöra sighed. Bhéñma and Vidura looked at him in despair. He could
432

clearly understand what would happen should they fight the Päëòavas, but still
he would not save the situation. All he had to do was give his sons the order to
cease hostilities and the war would be finished before it began. Although
Duryodhana officiated as the monarch, his father still occupied the throne as
the head of state. If the king ordered the prince to make peace with the
Päëòavas, he would have to obey.
But Dhåtaräñöra showed no signs of giving such an order. He seemed resigned
to actualize the death and destruction of everyone and everything he held
dear. The two ministers looked at each other, hopelessly, as the king
continued.
“This great calamity the Kurus now face owes its existence to the dice game.
My son is at fault because he is filled with avarice. This is the work of eternal
time. Bound by time I am helpless in the face of my own ruination. What can I
do? Where will I go? O Saïjaya, the foolish Kurus will all be killed by time and
I can do nothing about it. I will hear news of my hundred sons dying and then
hear the loud wailing of women. Only I will be left alive. How will death touch
me? As a raging fire consumes a dry forest, so Bhéma and Arjuna will consume
my army.”
The king then described Arjuna’s prowess, whom he considered no less a
danger than Bhéma. He knew Arjuna was truthful and would not kill any of his
sons out of respect for Bhéma’s vow, but he would certainly not restrain himself
with the rest of the Kaurava forces.
“Although I think about it day and night, I do not see a warrior on earth who
can stand against the Gäëòéva bow.” Dhåtaräñöra’s voice was almost choking.
“Some may think that either Karëa or Droëa can withstand him, but I do not
share that view. Karëa is careless and passionate, and the preceptor is old and
weakened by affection for Arjuna. No one can kill Arjuna, nor will battle with
him result in anything but his own victory. The authorities have assured us of
this truth, and the Kurus have witnessed his strength with their own eyes.
With Keçava guiding his chariot and the Gäëòéva in his hand, Arjuna will be
irresistible in battle.
“The fools under Duryodhana’s control do not know this. When a thunderbolt
falls on one’s head, something may be left behind. When Arjuna’s arrows fall
on one’s head, however, nothing will be left behind. I can see him now in my
mind’s eye, coursing through our troops, his arrows flying in all directions and
beheading countless warriors. Could anyone face the combined might of
433

Arjuna and Bhéma and survive? Whomever Providence wills to be destroyed
will not escape. Alas, the time for the Kurus’ destruction is imminent.”
Dhåtaräñöra fell silent. If his sons were destined to die, then it would come to
pass. But perhaps destiny would dictate some other outcome. After all, who
could have foreseen that the noble Päëòavas would have to give up their
kingdom and enter the forest? Maybe their victory was not so certain. The king
hardly dared to hope for his own victory. How could the Päëòavas be overcome
while they were supported by that unfathomable Kåñëa?
Weeping and sighing repeatedly, Dhåtaräñöra said, “Although you have told me
of the Päëòavas’ powerful forces, there is one who equals all of them and more.
That mighty one could, by His desire, bring all the worlds under His control.
That person is Kåñëa. He seems to have set His mind on the Päëòavas’ victory.
It seems hopeless for my party. My heart quakes as I think of Yudhiñöhira’s
wrath, Bhéma’s prowess, the strength of Arjuna and the twins, and Kåñëa’s
inconceivable powers. What fool, desiring death, would fall like a moth into
the inextinguishable Päëòava fire? We have treated those heroes deceitfully.
As a result, my sons will have to die. O Kurus, do not fight. If you wage war,
then our race will be annihilated. Let us seek peace. Yudhiñöhira will not
disregard me, especially upon seeing my distress.”
The king trailed off in tears. The rest of the assembly regarded him silently.
What could anyone say? Dhåtaräñöra had said nothing about giving back
Yudhiñöhira’s kingdom. His desire for peace was an empty hope born of fear.
He would not pay the price to bring peace. War was certain.
Saïjaya again approached the assembly, his hands clasped, and said, “O great
king, it will be exactly as you say. That the kñatriyas will be destroyed by the
Gäëòéva bow is obvious. I cannot understand how you, who can clearly see this
truth, still allow yourself to be controlled by your sons. This is not the time to
give way to grief. It is your fault alone that has caused this disaster. You have
neglected the Päëòavas, who are like your own sons, and treated them harshly.
Sitting in the gambling arena you called out like a child, ‘What has been won?’
See now what you have won. Laugh now as you did then, O King. Now you
must face the vengeful Päëòavas and their friend, the Lord of all beings, Kåñëa.
The Kauravas are about to sink like a holed boat in a shoreless ocean. Your
hope for victory arises only from madness. Whoever despises the Päëòavas will
be destroyed. It is not proper that you now grieve, O Bharata. You have had
ample opportunity to prevent this calamity, but you repeatedly ignored all good
434

advice. Your lamentations are useless, O chief among kings.”
Saïjaya returned to his seat at the foot of the kings and ministers. Dhåtaräñöra
shook his head, tears running down his face and falling into his beard.
Duryodhana began to worry that the king might decide to give in to the
Päëòavas. He leapt to his feet and said, “There is nothing to fear, O great king.
You need not grieve for us. We are capable of winning the battle. When I
heard that Yudhiñöhira had amassed an army and was intent upon war, I
approached Bhéñma, Droëa and Kåpa. I sought their advice, asking if they felt
we should surrender or fight. Victory was by no means certain. Each of them
assured me, ‘You need fear no enemies. Let anyone come. We will curb their
pride with our sharp arrows. No one can defeat us in battle.’ Declaring their
loyalty to you, O King, they reassured me. I have faith in their words. Bhéñma
alone overpowered all the world’s kings at Kashi. Again, that hero subdued the
invincible warrior-sage Paraçuräma. How can the Päëòavas defeat him? What
power do they have? They do not have their kingdom or their wealth. We are
the lords of the earth. Now is the time for us to assert our supremacy and our
rightful position. This kingdom is yours, O best of men. How can we surrender
it to the enemy?”
As usual, Dhåtaräñöra’s mind was swayed by Duryodhana. It was true that
Bhéñma was an insuperable warrior. He had also been given a boon that he
would die only at his own will. No one could kill him. If he declared his
intention to fight with all his heart, then all was not lost. The king checked his
tears as Duryodhana continued.
“Why are you struck with fear simply upon hearing descriptions of the enemy?
Consider our own army, almost twice the size of theirs. Even Indra could not
overpower our forces. That Yudhiñöhira asks only for five villages shows that he
is afraid of our might. As far as Bhéma is concerned, do not be afraid of him.
None in this world can equal my mace fighting. I am a match even for
Balaräma, my tutor, and with a single blow I will dispatch Bhéma to Death’s
abode. I can break the Himavat mountain to pieces. I long to face Bhéma in
battle.”
Duryodhana scowled in anger at the thought of Bhéma. He had had the palace
artisans make an iron replica of Bhéma. Each day the Kaurava would smash the
iron statue with his huge mace. Soon he would have the opportunity to smash
Bhéma himself.
“As for Arjuna, how can he possibly be victorious when he fights with Bhéñma,
435

Droëa, Kåpa, Açvatthämä, Çalya, Bhurisrava and Jayadratha simultaneously?
Even Droëa single-handed is more than a match for him. Born from the
immortal Åñi Bharadväja, no one can even look upon Droëa when he is worked
up in battle. Then there is Kåpa, born from a powerful åñi. No man or god can
slay him. Then there is Karëa, whom I consider to be the equal of Bhéñma,
Droëa and Kåpa combined. Even Indra came to him out of fear and begged for
his natural armor. That lord of the gods has bestowed an infallible weapon
upon Karëa with which he will surely slay Arjuna.”
Duryodhana continued praising his forces and deriding the Päëòavas. Naming
all the kings on the Kaurava side, he breathed confidence into his father.
There was no possibility the Päëòavas could win the war. Dhåtaräñöra could
rest at ease.
In conclusion, Duryodhana asked Saïjaya, “With seven akshauhini divisions,
what does Yudhiñöhira hope to achieve? Does he really think he can overpower
us?”
Saïjaya smiled. “Yudhiñöhira and his brothers are all cheerful. I did not detect
any fear in them. Arjuna mounted his heavenly chariot as I was leaving and
said, ‘I have seen divine omens foretelling our victory.’ Looking at Arjuna clad
in mail and standing on his chariot as lightning sits within a cloud, I saw truth
in his words.”
Duryodhana laughed sarcastically. “You are always praising the Päëòavas,
whom we defeated at dice. Tell me about Arjuna’s chariot. What sort of horses
and banners are attached to it?”
Duryodhana had heard about Arjuna’s divine chariot, given to him by Agni.
Its steeds were given by the Gandharva chief, Citraratha. He listened as
Saïjaya described it.
“Arjuna’s chariot is of celestial origin and cannot be impeded. It is drawn by
white horses which move at the speed of the wind across both earth and sky.
Citraratha has granted him a boon that there will always be a hundred horses
no matter how many are slain.
“I can barely describe Arjuna’s banner. It was created by Viçvakarmä, and it
throws up a celestial illusion. It appears to extend in all directions for eight
miles. It is impossible to ascertain of what the banner is made, but it resembles
smoke mixed with fire. It has all the colors of Indra’s bow. The terrible monkey
Hanumän sits there, as do other celestial beings of terrifying form.”
Saïjaya described the other four Päëòavas’ chariots. When he had finished,
436

Dhåtaräñöra said, “O Saïjaya, which of the Päëòava warriors will contend with
which of mine?”
“Dåñöadyumna, born from fire, has reserved Droëa as his share. His brother
Çikhaëòé has marked out Bhéñma, while the pious Yudhiñöhira has determined
to slay his uncle Çalya. Duryodhana and his hundred brothers will belong to
Bhéma. Arjuna has named Karëa, Açvatthämä and Jayadratha. Whoever in
this world claims to be invincible, Arjuna will also slay. All of your grandsons,
O King, will be met by Abhimanyu. The deceitful Çakuni belongs to Sahadeva,
while Nakula will engage with Çakuni’s son Uluka and the hordes of mountain
fighters he leads. O leader of men, all the rulers and warriors in your army have
been assigned to one or another of the Päëòavas and their followers.
Therefore, do quickly what needs to be done, for the battle will soon begin.”
Dhåtaräñöra again became fearful. His mind swung between hope and despair.
He spoke again, trembling.
“All my foolish sons, who will face Bhéma, have already ceased to exist. The
other kings and rulers will all be slain by the Gäëòéva bow as moths are killed
when they enter fire. I see my army routed by the Päëòavas, whom I have made
into my enemies. Yudhiñöhira’s forces are like a formidable ocean my son
desires to cross with his two arms. Indra himself could not withstand such
heroes, who are cool and composed in battle and capable of breaking down the
Himälayas. Alas, my wicked son desires to fight them, ignoring my protests.”
Duryodhana rose to his feet. “Both parties are mortals. Why then do you
ascribe victory as belonging only to them? Think again about the heroes
arrayed on our side. Not even the gods combined could overpower them, what
to speak of the puny Päëòavas. O sire, I do not consider the Päëòavas capable
of even gazing at our forces. The kings and rulers who wish me well will take
hold of the Päëòavas as deer are held in a trap. They will be vanquished along
with all of their followers.”
Dhåtaräñöra sat shaking his head. His intelligence told him that the Päëòavas,
aided by Kåñëa, could not be defeated, but his heart was held by the strong grip
of attachment for his sons. His choked voice echoed around the hall. “See how
my son raves like a maniac, Saïjaya. How will he ever defeat Yudhiñöhira in
battle? Surely Bhéñma knows the truth about the Päëòavas’ strength since he
does not desire to fight with them. Tell us again of their prowess, Saïjaya. Let
us be in no doubt of the danger we now face.”
“Among the Päëòavas’ forces, Dåñöadyumna constantly incites them. He said,
437

‘Go, Saïjaya, and tell the Kauravas their annihilation is imminent. Tell them
they can only avert this calamity by sending a pure and honest man to
Yudhiñöhira to return to him his kingdom. Do not let Arjuna release the fire of
his anger at the Kurus. He is protected by the gods in heaven and by the
Supreme God Himself. He cannot be slain. O Kurus, do not even think of
fighting with him.’”
Dhåtaräñöra cried out, covering his face. “O Duryodhana, my son,” he wailed,
“turn your mind from war. One half of this wide kingdom is more than enough
for you and your ministers. Return to the Päëòavas that which is theirs. All
the Kuru elders see this as the only virtuous path and you should accept it, my
child. Apart from you and the small-minded son of a suta, I do not think there
are any here who desire war. Led by Karëa, Dushashana and Çakuni, you are
traveling the path to destruction. Come to your senses, dear son. Do not be
misled.”
Dhåtaräñöra’s words carried no authority. His plaintive cries were not taken
seriously by anyone in the assembly. He had clearly abdicated his power to
Duryodhana and would ultimately go along with whatever the prince decided.
When Dhåtaräñöra had spoken, Duryodhana stood gazing defiantly around the
assembly. He made his decision clear. “I do not depend upon any of the
warriors assembled on our side. Karëa and I alone can perform the sacrifice of
war, with Yudhiñöhira as the sacrificial beast. My chariot will be the sacrificial
platform and my weapons the paraphernalia. My shafts will substitute for kusha
grass, while my wide fame will be the clarified butter. We shall perform the
sacrifice in honor of the god of death and will come back crowned with a halo
of glory. Let the war begin. Either I will rule the wide earth after killing the
Päëòavas, or they will enjoy the kingdom after killing me.”
Duryodhana paused in order to add weight to his words. His voice, full of pride
and arrogance, reverberated around the assembly hall. “I can sacrifice my life,
my wealth, my kingdom, my everything, O King, but I can never live in peace
with the Päëòavas. I will not surrender to them even as much land as can be
pierced by the point of a needle.”
The hall remained silent after Duryodhana had taken his place on his throne.
Bhéñma and Vidura glanced at each other. Duryodhana’s words did not surprise
them. What could they say in reply? Only Dhåtaräñöra could check his son and
he was not doing that, despite his pitiful entreaties. He still had given no
strong order to return the Päëòavas’ kingdom, nor was he telling anyone else
438

to restrain Duryodhana. It was clear that destiny had ordained war.
Dhåtaräñöra broke the silence. “I grieve for all of you, O rulers, who are
following this fool to Death’s abode. I cast off Duryodhana forever. Soon the
Päëòavas will move among our forces like tigers through a herd of deer. My
army will fall like a helpless woman struck down by a wicked man. Beholding
the Päëòavas approaching like moving mountains, you will remember my
words. O my sons, if you do not conclude peace now, you will meet with
everlasting peace when you are struck by Bhéma’s mace.”
Duryodhana looked at Karëa and Dushashana. His old father may be terrified
by the thought of battle, but he could hardly wait. Alone or assisted by his
Dänava-inspired troops, he was ready. No other course was possible.
Dhåtaräñöra asked Saïjaya to repeat to him what Kåñëa had said. Saïjaya
related Kåñëa’s words. After this he described another meeting he had had
with both Kåñëa and Arjuna.
“I was invited to see them in Arjuna’s quarters. With my mind fixed on sacred
things I entered the innermost apartment in the palace, my head lowered and
my hands clasped in prayer. The two great souls, however, put me at my ease.
They were seated together on a golden bed bedecked with precious stones.
Kåñëa’s feet rested on Arjuna’s lap and Arjuna’s on Kåñëa’s lap. Draupadé and
Satyabhämä sat nearby like two shining moons. Arjuna pointed to a seat. I
touched it with my hand and sat next to it on the floor. Kåñëa and Arjuna rose
from their place, like a couple of sal trees. Seeing the two black-complexioned
heroes towering above me I was seized with fear. They were like Indra and
Viñëu together. I realized that whoever has them on his side cannot possibly
meet defeat.”
Saïjaya closed his eyes as he recalled the sight. He was silent for some
moments, then continued in a subdued voice. “After they had reassured me
and offered me foods and drink, I placed my clasped hands on my head and
told them of your desire for peace. O King, Arjuna then asked Kåñëa to make a
suitable reply, whereupon the Yädava leader spoke. His words were charming
and mild, but their import was terrible. They were calculated to inspire fear in
your sons’ hearts. He said, ‘O Saïjaya, say this before Dhåtaräñöra and all the
Kuru elders after offering them our respects and asking after their welfare. Tell
them that they should now perform auspicious sacrifices and make numerous
gifts to the Brahmins. Then they should make merry with their wives and sons,
for they will soon face a calamity. I am thinking of My debt to Draupadé, which
439

is still not paid. That chaste lady purchased Me for all time when she cried out,
‘O Govinda,’ amid the Kurus, who were afflicting her with pain.’”
Tears streamed down Saïjaya’s face as he thought of how Kåñëa gave Himself
completely to whomever sought His shelter. “Kåñëa then spoke the following
words: ‘The Kurus have made the wielder of the Gäëòéva bow, with Me as his
second, their enemy. Who would dare challenge us in battle, even if they were
assisted by the gods, unless their time had come? He who defeats Arjuna could
hold up the earth in his two arms. He could burn up all creatures and destroy
the heavens. Among all the beings within the three worlds, I do not see any to
equal Arjuna in battle. Surely the fight at the Matsya kingdom was sufficient
evidence of that––what to speak of his encounter with the Dänavas in the
nether world. Strength, agility, prowess, lightness of hand, untiring energy and
patience reside always in Arjuna and in no one else. Consider all this carefully
before beginning hostilities, O Kurus.’”
Saïjaya then told the Kurus that Kåñëa planned to come to Hastinäpura
Himself to encourage peace.
Dhåtaräñöra sat with his head bowed. He had spent many a long night
pondering Arjuna’s power, trying to weigh whether it could be countered by
any of the Kuru warriors. It was hard to decide. Now that Arjuna was united in
battle with Kåñëa, the odds had shifted dramatically. Kåñëa’s power was
impossible to estimate. He was said by the åñis to be the Lord of all divinities.
Opposing Him would surely mean opposing the gods themselves.
The blind king spoke out with apprehension. “These descriptions of Arjuna
and Kåñëa only convince me all the more of the folly of war. O Duryodhana,
think again. Think with whom you will be fighting. Great men always repay
their debts. Agni is indebted to Arjuna for his assistance at Khäëòava. He will
surely help Arjuna in the war. So will the god Dharma align himself with his
son, Yudhiñöhira. Bhéma is Väyu’s son and the twins are born of the two Açviné
gods. Thus it appears that we will be facing a force both human and divine. I
cannot see how we can win. Son, make peace with the Päëòavas. If you do not,
then the Kurus’ end has come.”
Duryodhana was losing his patience. All this agonizing was too much. The
prince jumped up in a rage. “O best of kings, why do you keep praising the
Päëòavas? They are mortals like the rest of us. How will the gods come to their
assistance? The gods are never impelled by base emotions. It is only by
indifference to worldly desires, the absence of avarice, anger and hatred that
440

they have attained their heavenly positions in the first place. They do not get
involved in petty human struggles based on emotional attachments. Were this
not the case, then how could the Päëòavas have undergone so much suffering?
And even if the gods do take their side, so what? I am the equal to any of them.
By my own mystic power I can stop fire from burning even if it wishes to
consume the three worlds. With incantations I can solidify water, enabling
chariots and infantry to march over it. I can break apart mountains and send
down showers of rocks accompanied by a gale like that which blows at the time
of destruction.”
As he praised himself Duryodhana became increasingly enlivened. He flailed
his arms and glared at the kings in the assembly. “You all know that in my
kingdom there are no natural calamities caused by gods. Due to my protection,
there are not even frightful beasts or snakes to assail my subjects. All the
citizens practice virtue and live peacefully under my rule. Neither the gods nor
the Asuras would dare protect anyone hated by me. Why did the gods not
prevent me from exiling the Päëòavas or from taking their wealth? Whomever
I desire to be happy or miserable meets with that end without fail. I am never
thwarted in my aims. O monarch, my words will not prove false. I am known in
this world as one who speaks the truth. The world witnesses my fame and glory.
I say this only to console you and not out of self-praise. You will soon hear of
the Päëòavas’ defeat, rest assured. I am superior to them in intelligence, might,
prowess, knowledge and ability. I shall destroy them.”
Duryodhana, who was now in the center of the hall, strode back to his seat.
Karëa applauded him and himself stood to speak, disregarding Dhåtaräñöra,
who had raised his hand to reply. Karëa’s voice rang around the assembly. “I
will take it upon myself to kill the Päëòavas. I have received the brahmastra
from Paraçuräma and the çakti from Indra. With these two weapons I will
destroy Päëòu’s sons. All of the other Kurus may stay with Duryodhana to
protect him. Leave the Päëòavas to me.”
Bhéñma laughed loud and long. “What are you saying, Karëa? Your intelligence
has obviously been dulled by death that now approaches you. Remembering the
incident of the burning of Khäëòava, you should restrain yourself, foolish one.
Your çakti weapon, of which you are so proud, will be burned to ashes when
Kåñëa’s discus hits it. The Supreme Person has already destroyed enemies far
greater than you, Karëa. Meeting with Him and Arjuna, you and all your
weapons will be ruined.”
441

Bhéñma reminded Karëa how he had been cursed by Paraçuräma that, when he
most needed it, he would not be able to remember the incantations to invoke
the brahmastra. Karëa had deceived the sage into thinking he was a Brahmin
in order to receive his teachings. When Paraçuräma discovered the lie, he
uttered this curse. Karëa would not be able to use the brahmastra weapon
when he was faced with imminent danger, and Arjuna would certainly not
have the same difficulty.
Karëa snarled. “Your praise of Kåñëa is proper, O Grandfather. I know Him to
be as great––even greater––than you say, but I can no longer tolerate your
cruel words toward me. Hear now the result of your harshness. I will not
engage in battle as long as you are present. Rather, I will lay down my weapons
until you are laid low. Then the world will see my prowess.”
Karëa stormed out of the hall. Bhéñma laughed again and turned toward
Duryodhana. “The suta’s son is a man who keeps his word. How will he now
fulfill his promise to wipe out the enemy troops? In this assembly I heard him
say, ‘All of you here shall be the witness. I will again and again kill thousands
and tens of thousands of enemy soldiers.’ How will he act upon it now? He is
passionate and arrogant. At the very moment he cheated the holy Åñi
Paraçuräma he lost all virtue and ascetic merits.”
Duryodhana was perplexed by Karëa’s sudden departure but, maintaining a
straight face, again asserted that he depended on no one. Whether or not
Karëa aided him, he would face the Päëòavas and win. When the prince
finally stopped boasting, Vidura rose from his seat and began to tell a story.
“There was once a fowler who set a net in the forest to capture birds. Two large
birds were trapped in the net, but they rose up to the sky, carrying the net with
them. The fowler saw this and ran after them. As he ran, an ascetic saw him
and said, ‘How strange that one who moves by his feet on the earth should run
after those who wander in the sky.’ The fowler replied, ‘Those birds united
have been able to take my net, but they will fall down when they quarrel.’ Sure
enough, before long the two birds began to fight and they dropped to earth
where the fowler caught and killed them. In the same way, brothers who fight
one another are soon overpowered by death. O Duryodhana, cousin brothers
should enjoy life together, eating and sporting but never quarreling.”
Vidura confirmed what had already been said of the Päëòavas’ power, trying to
dissuade Duryodhana from war. The prince said nothing. He already knew
Vidura’s opinion, and Vidura obviously favored the Päëòavas.
442

It was clear that the assembly had nothing more to say. Saïjaya had delivered
the Päëòavas’ messages and the Kurus had replied. Dhåtaräñöra’s pathetic calls
for peace were useless if he did not return even a portion of Yudhiñöhira’s
kingdom to him. Never once had he indicated that he was willing to do this.
Therefore, unless Kåñëa was able to change his mind, there would be war. One
by one the kings and ministers left the hall.
At last Dhåtaräñöra sat alone with Saïjaya. Having heard everyone’s opinions
publicly expressed, the king now wanted to hear his secretary’s opinion. Did he
think there was any chance of the Kurus winning the war? Saïjaya had seen
both sides and was able to assess their respective strengths. Although Saïjaya
had already stated that he saw little hope for the Kurus, still the king hoped
that in private he would give him a clue as to how they might win.
Saïjaya was worried that if he spoke alone to the king his opinion might not
be taken seriously. He knew that Dhåtaräñöra felt he was inclined toward
Päëòu’s sons. He therefore asked if he could call for Vyäsadeva, who was
present at the time in the palace. If Dhåtaräñöra saw that the wise åñi agreed
with Saïjaya’s opinion, perhaps he would take it more seriously.
The king agreed and also invited his wife Gändhäré to be present. When both
Vyäsadeva and Gändhäré had taken their seats near the king, Saïjaya turned
to address his spiritual master. “O my lord, please grant me permission to speak
to the king in your presence. He has asked about the Päëòavas’ strength.”
Vyäsadeva lifted his right hand in blessing. “O Saïjaya, you should tell him
everything about Kåñëa, for He is the Päëòavas’ real power.”
With his hands folded Saïjaya said, “O King, you have again and again asked
about the strengths and weaknesses of the Päëòavas. Their strength can be
measured simply by measuring that of Govinda, for His strength knows no
limits. If the entire world were placed on one side and Janärdana on the other,
then He would surpass the world on the point of strength. He can reduce the
earth and all its creatures to ashes in a moment. Where there is truth, where
there is righteousness and virtue, where there is modesty, and where there is
humanity––there you will find Kåñëa. And where there is Kåñëa, there will be
victory. He is the soul of all beings come to this world as if in play. The
Päëòavas are merely the instruments of His desire. That all-powerful being
desires to annihilate all the miscreant and irreligious elements in the world. O
King, your sons are such an element.”
Dhåtaräñöra reached out for his wife’s hand and held it tightly. Saïjaya went
443

on, “Keçava is the Lord of time, of death, and of moving and non-moving
beings. Appearing as an ordinary man by His own illusion, He comes to this
world. Those who know Him are not deceived.”
The old monarch was curious to hear more about Kåñëa. He had always known
that his secretary accepted Kåñëa as the Supreme Deity. Saïjaya was
Vyäsadeva’s disciple, who himself worshipped Kåñëa. The king was not sure.
Kåñëa was certainly extraordinary. It was astonishing how He had killed so
many powerful demons, and the åñis all extolled Him as the original divinity.
Yet He appeared so human. The king asked, “How is it that you accept Kåñëa
as the Supreme God? Why do you know Him as such and I do not? Please
explain this to me if you feel it is appropriate, Saïjaya.”
“Those who are too attached to matter cannot know that great personality,”
Saïjaya replied. “To them He remains a mystery, or they simply do not accept
His existence as God. I am not enamored of material things and have kept my
desires in check. At the same time, I carefully study the Vedas and faithfully
hear from holy men, such as my spiritual master, Vyäsadeva. Thus I have been
able to know Keçava in some part. You too may acquire this knowledge, O
King. Take shelter of Kåñëa, for He is your best well-wisher. Do not despise
Him or His advice. Your foolish son has no faith in Kåñëa and will lead you and
the Kurus to destruction.”
Gändhäré nodded in agreement. “Our wicked-minded son will certainly bring
destruction upon us. He is envious and vain and never listens to his elders’
advice. After enhancing the joy of evil men and my grief, he will die at Bhéma’s
hands. Only then will he remember his father’s words.”
Vyäsadeva, seated on an elevated seat spread with silk cushions, said, “O King,
you are dear to Kåñëa. Listen to my advice. Hear carefully from Saïjaya. He
can tell you the path by which Kåñëa can be known and accepted as one’s
shelter. Only due to excessive desire and hatred are men denied knowledge of
God. Coveting wealth and fame in this world, almost all men are fully absorbed
in illusion. Thus they come under the control of death again and again. A wise
man therefore gives up all attachments and takes to the path of liberation,
which leads ultimately to Kåñëa.”
Dhåtaräñöra asked Saïjaya to describe that path. After bowing before
Vyäsadeva, Saïjaya said, “Sense control is the beginning of the path.
Performance of sacrifice without sense control will not allow you to know God.
Renunciation of sensual desires arises from the awakening of true knowledge,
444

which is born of wisdom. Wisdom is gained by experience and by hearing from
the wise. True wisdom means controlling the senses. One with controlled
senses will experience pleasure within himself as he proceeds on the path of
self-realization. By this path can you attain Keçava, O King. Follow that path
with a genuine desire to know and please that most ancient of deities and
success will be assured.”
Dhåtaräñöra asked his secretary to tell him more about Kåñëa’s attributes and
qualities. Saïjaya told him of Kåñëa’s various names and Their different
meanings which describe Him as creator, sustainer and, ultimately, destroyer of
everything material and spiritual.
After hearing these descriptions Dhåtaräñöra became thoughtful. He dismissed
Saïjaya. After Vyäsadeva had also left, he sat alone with his wife. The old king
was perplexed. He could not deny Kåñëa’s supremacy. Saïjaya’s descriptions,
supported by Vyäsadeva, were lucid and thorough. It was obvious that opposing
Kåñëa and those backed by Him was sure to end in defeat. But if it was Kåñëa’s
desire that the Kurus be destroyed, then what could he do? It seemed that his
actions were all useless in the face of the Lord’s divine plan. Dhåtaräñöra sat
sighing and holding his head. Did Kåñëa really desire that his sons, relatives
and friends all be annihilated? Why, then, was He coming to Hastinäpura to
establish peace? It was a mystery the blind monarch could not unravel.

Chapter 45
The Päëòavas Consult Kåñëa
In Virata the Päëòavas received the Kurus’ response: no lands or wealth would
be returned. Dhåtaräñöra was pleading for peace, but he wanted to keep his
world sovereignty. Duryodhana was his usual obstinate and wrathful self.
Yudhiñöhira was not surprised. All that remained now was for Kåñëa to go to
Hastinäpura, as He had promised. “The time has arrived for You to show Your
friendship, O Lord.” Yudhiñöhira folded his hands as he addressed Kåñëa. “It is
known throughout the world that You are devoted to the welfare of Your
friends. Depending upon You we have asked the Kurus to return our kingdom.
I do not see anyone other than You who could get us through this difficulty. O
445

Mädhava, You are our only shelter.”
Kåñëa was seated slightly lower than Yudhiñöhira on a gold throne decked with
precious stones. His curling black hair fell around His smiling face. A diamondencrusted crown shone from His head, and His brilliant, shark-shaped earrings
flashed as He turned toward Yudhiñöhira. “Here I am,” He replied to the
Päëòava. “I am ready to do whatever you ask. What do you want to say?”
Yudhiñöhira was moved by Kåñëa’s response. What had he and his brothers
done to merit such support from Him? Here was the greatest of all personalities
ready to carry their message and act as an envoy for peace. All five brothers
gazed intently at Kåñëa’s face and tears pricked their eyes.
“You have heard Saïjaya describe Dhåtaräñöra’s mind and feelings, O Kåñëa.
He wants peace without giving us what is ours. That covetous man, partial to
his own sons, has a sinful heart. We lived for twelve years in the forest and, at
his command, a further miserable year in this kingdom. The Brahmins know
that we were true to our promise, but he has reneged on his agreement.
Following his foolish son’s advice, he desires to follow a deceitful course. He
will not even grant us five villages. He thinks he owns the world. He has no
shame. Because of his greed we have been reduced to poverty and are unable to
perform our kñatriya duties. Without wealth it is difficult for us to acquire
virtue. Asceticism and begging are not a kñatriya’s duty, O Kåñëa. We are
meant to rule over people and to maintain large treasuries in order to support
Brahmins and the needy. Alas, what greater misery is there than for a
prosperous man to lose his wealth? Death would be better.”
Yudhiñöhira looked at his brothers, who sat in silent agreement. At his
command they would have accepted even a village each, but Dhåtaräñöra
wanted them to remain beggars. The old monarch’s suggestion was outrageous.
It was unthinkable for a powerful kñatriya to beg. Even their having to beseech
the Kurus for their own kingdom was painful and humiliating.
Yudhiñöhira continued, “Although it would be a vicious act to take back our
kingdom by slaying our relatives, I cannot see any other course. Fighting when
the proper time comes is the hard duty of kñatriyas, but war means suffering for
all. Even if we win we will suffer repentance and grieve the death of our
relatives and friends. If we lose we will suffer extinction. Yet without a
kingdom we are as good as dead. Therefore I ask Dhåtaräñöra to peacefully
return to us what is already ours. Failing this, then war is the righteous course
of action for us, even though it be fraught with misery.”
446

Yudhiñöhira did not relish the prospect of a war with his elders. According to
sacred texts, one should always acquiesce to his superiors in an argument. He
asked Kåñëa to clear his doubts. “What is Your opinion, O Keçava? What is the
path of virtue that I should now tread? Is it right for us to fight with
Dhåtaräñöra and his followers? I doubt he will accept any peaceful approach
because he is too attached to his sons. He will simply laugh at our respectful
submission.”
“O Dharmaräja, whether or not to fight is not your choice. Rather, the choice
belongs to Dhåtaräñöra. For the good of you both I will go there and sue for
peace. If peace can be achieved, then I will have done something virtuous and
the Kuru and Päëòava armies will be freed from the death trap.”
Yudhiñöhira looked doubtful. “It is not my wish that You go to the Kurus, O
Kåñëa. Even if You address Duryodhana in a friendly way, he will not listen to
You. I am sure he will try to harm You in some way. What will be the use of
any of this if some harm befalls You?”
Kåñëa laughed. “I know Duryodhana’s vicious nature, but by going to the Kurus
and trying for peace, we will not be censured. No one will be able to say that
we did not do everything in our power to avoid war. Do not be afraid for Me.
All the earth’s rulers united could not stand before Me in battle when I am
angry. If the Kurus insult Me when I desire their good, then I shall consume
them.”
“As You wish, O Kåñëa,” Yudhiñöhira acceded. “Go to Hastinäpura. May all
good come from it and may we see You returned in good health with Your
object achieved. You are as dear a friend to me as to Arjuna. Relying on Your
friendship I am not anxious. You should speak to Duryodhana in a way which
will secure peace, even if it means we have to sacrifice virtue. I will accept less
than my rightful share, or even play another game of dice if necessary, if war
can be averted.”
Yudhiñöhira was confident that he would not lose another dice game, having
learned the secrets of the game from Våñaparvä in the forest. He was also
alluding to the fact that he would peacefully accept just five villages. He was
prepared to make any personal sacrifice in order to avoid fighting his relatives
and teachers. Yudhiñöhira was even beginning to wonder if it may not be better
to simply let the Kauravas keep the kingdom. Perhaps he could stay with his
brothers in a country belonging to their allies. He was certain both Kåñëa and
Drupada would be happy to give them some territory to rule.
447

Kåñëa’s face assumed a grave expression. “I know well both your intentions and
Duryodhana’s intentions. Although you would prefer peace by any means, it is
not a kñatriya’s duty to avoid a righteous fight. Rather, the creator has ordained
that a kñatriya must meet victory or death. He cannot gain his livelihood by
gentleness––begging or gathering fruits and roots in the forest. When the time
comes, he must show his power rather than retiring in a spirit of humility.”
Yudhiñöhira was almost too humble. Kåñëa knew that Duryodhana would only
take advantage of his mildness and tolerance if he displayed it. The language of
strength and threats was the only way to sway the Kaurava from his sinful
aims. It would benefit no one if Duryodhana was allowed to get away with his
cruelty and deceit. The world would be deprived of its most virtuous ruler and
would be led instead by a man given over to selfishness. Kåñëa reminded
Yudhiñöhira of the many insults the Kurus had offered the Päëòavas.
“Duryodhana has shown no remorse or shame for having sent you to the forest
clad in deerskins. Indeed, he and his brothers spoke harshly at the time. The
elder Kurus simply watched as you were cheated of your kingdom in the dice
game. Then the evil-minded Dushashana dragged the weeping Draupadé by her
hair into the assembly hall.”
Kåñëa’s eyes blazed as he recalled Draupadé’s violation. His stern voice echoed
through the hall. “All the kings present shed tears and censured Duryodhana
but did nothing. For that act alone he is fit to be killed by anyone, what to
speak of yourself. He is blamed and condemned by the Brahmins and all
virtuous men. Thus he is as good as dead already. Just as there is no sin
attached to killing a serpent, so there is no sin attached to killing him. Those
who would follow him into battle also deserve death for supporting one so
wicked.”
Kåñëa paused. Yudhiñöhira had rarely seen Him so angry. What hope was there
for the Kauravas when they had incited Kåñëa to such fury? He seemed about
to consume the entire cosmos by His mere glance. Yudhiñöhira saw Him
looking over at Draupadé, who had been moved to anger as He recalled
Dushashana’s terrible act. Tears dropped from her eyes and she breathed
heavily as Kåñëa went on speaking.
“By going to Hastinäpura I will remove all doubts. Everyone will see your goodheartedness and Duryodhana’s sinfulness. I will remind the Kauravas of all the
evils they have perpetrated against you. None shall call you sinful, for you ask
for peace. The world will blame the Kurus, headed by Dhåtaräñöra. I will ask for
448

peace without sacrificing your interests, O ruler of men. Hearing their reply
and understanding their intentions, I will then return.”
Kåñëa looked around the room. Everyone’s eyes were fixed on Him as He
turned back to Yudhiñöhira and solemnly concluded His speech. “Know that
war will certainly result. Duryodhana will not return to you any portion of
your prosperous territories. It shall only remain for you to kill he who has
already been killed by his own sins. And I shall assist you.”
Yudhiñöhira accepted Kåñëa’s speech. He knew that Kåñëa’s acts were always
meant for the good of all beings. If He deemed war as necessary, then it could
not be avoided––even if it meant killing the esteemed Kuru elders.
Kåñëa wanted to hear from all of the Päëòavas before He left. He looked across
at Bhéma. Realizing Kåñëa’s desire, Bhéma said, “I think You should say
whatever You can to achieve peace, O Madhusüdana.” His voice was amazingly
impassive. “But please be careful. Duryodhana is resentful, wrathful, arrogant,
and unable to hear good advice. Do not address him in harsh words or he will
react violently. Treat him with courtesy. It will be difficult to effect peace, but
please try Your best. Still, I foresee the imminent destruction of the Kurus.
Even as Kali was born among the Asuras, so has this wicked Duryodhana taken
birth among the Kurus. Try to assuage him with mild words, O Kåñëa, or our
race will be extinguished. Let there be peace among us, let us avoid the sin of
annihilating our relatives, and let us live together as brothers.”
Kåñëa was surprised. Glancing at Yudhiñöhira and Arjuna He began to laugh.
“O Bhémasena, your words are like coldness in fire or lightness in the earth.”
Bhéma frowned as Kåñëa went on, “What has brought about this change of
heart? Until now you have spoken only words indicative of war. You have
spent entire nights sitting with your face bent downwards, breathing hot sighs.
Running about and beating the earth, you sometimes appear insane. You spend
your time in solitude and nothing can give you delight. Suddenly you will laugh
out loud and at other times weep profusely. For long periods you sit with your
head between your knees with your eyes closed. All this is the work of wrath. O
Bhéma, you have sworn to kill Duryodhana and all his brothers. Why this
sudden display of mildness?”
Kåñëa smiled. “Alas, it seems that even the powerful are struck by terror when
the time for battle arrives. Surely you are seeing unfavorable omens and so you
desire peace. Seized by fear you have become like a eunuch, devoid of
manliness. O son of Kunté, the minds of men are inconstant and easily swayed,
449

like saplings moved by the wind. O hero, be firm. Do not give way to fear. I am
totally amazed to see you in this state. Without you, your brothers will sink in
an ocean of despair. Think of your noble lineage. You are a kñatriya and meant
to live by your might. This weakness of heart is unbecoming, O Bhéma.”
Like a first-class horse prodded by its rider, Bhéma quickly stood and said
loudly, “Do not think my mind has been swayed, O Kåñëa. I am cheerful at the
prospect of war. You know this well enough as we have lived together many
times. Or perhaps You do not know me, as one swimming in a lake does not
know its depths. Thus do You find fault with me. Who, knowing me as
Bhémasena, could possibly have spoken such words? Although it is always
condemned to praise oneself, I shall speak of my prowess in order to ease Your
mind.”
Bhéma held out his arms, which resembled a pair of elephant trunks. “Who is
there who having once entered within the circle of these arms could escape?
Even if he were assisted by Indra, the ocean, and the Himavat in person, he
would die. If the earth and heavens were to suddenly come against one another
in fury like two great mountains, I could hold them apart with my two arms,
along with all their movable and immovable creatures. All those who oppose
the Päëòavas I will trample under my feet. O Achyuta, although You do not
know me now, You will surely know me in the turmoil of battle. Your words
pain me like the lancing of an old boil. My strength is even greater than I have
described. When the time comes, You and the world will see me cutting down
the foremost warriors with their elephants, horses and chariots. I would not be
afraid even if the three worlds rushed against me. I spoke only out of mercy, O
Kåñëa, and could bear any sort of trouble to avoid annihilating the Bharatas.”
Kåñëa smiled broadly as Bhéma returned to his seat. “Desiring to know your
intentions, I spoke only out of affection. I was not finding fault with you
because I know you are capable of all you have said and more. I know the
greatness of your soul and the strength you possess. My words were only meant
to inspire you to be determined. Firm action will soon be required. Without
action a man cannot achieve his ends in this world. Although it is the ultimate
cause, destiny alone is not sufficient. One who acts with full knowledge of
cause and effect, without attachment to the results, can bring about his highest
goals. Those who remain idle, either out of ignorance or fear, do not achieve
success.”
Kåñëa turned toward Arjuna. “What is your view, O Dhanaïjaya? I shall leave
450

at dawn for Hastinäpura. Do you have any final thoughts?”
Arjuna had been silently taking everything in. He looked around the great
hall. The many kings and Brahmins present looked back at him as he began to
speak.
“I think Yudhiñöhira has said all that needs to be said, O Janärdana. But it
seems to me that You do not see peace as being easily obtained, owing to either
Dhåtaräñöra’s avarice or to our weakness. You consider too that man’s desires
are useless unless attended by action––that one should not simply depend on
destiny.”
Having stated his understanding of Kåñëa’s speech, Arjuna gave his response.
“I am in agreement. In my opinion, O Keçava, there is nothing unattainable to
one who acts in knowledge. I know You to be the best well-wisher of both
ourselves and the Kurus. Whatever You decide to do I will accept. If peace is
desired by You, then it shall be so; and if You desire war, then I am ready to
fight.”
Arjuna paused. His hand rested on the long sword by his side. Surely he had
been born only to wield weapons in combat. He could not honestly see any
chance of peace, even with Kåñëa going to Hastinäpura. Despite His power,
Kåñëa never compelled others to act against their own desires. He would offer
them wisdom, present logic and reason, but in the end everything would
depend upon Dhåtaräñöra and Duryodhana’s free will. There was nothing to
indicate that they would respond favorably. In all probability Kåñëa would
return insulted.
Arjuna’s voice rose in anger as he thought about it. “Without doubt the evilminded Duryodhana deserves to die. He and his brothers cruelly and
deceitfully robbed us of our kingdom and insulted the innocent Draupadé. I
cannot see him accepting any good counsel. Your words will be like throwing
seeds on barren land. If You think he should be destroyed, then do it at once,
O Lord, for there is nothing to be considered in this matter. Otherwise, let
their be battle! What kñatriya would turn away from such a fight, even if death
stares down upon him?”
Kåñëa nodded slowly. “It is exactly as you say, Arjuna. Peace and war both lie
in My hands, but I will not force either. Even the divine agency which causes
the results of actions allows men their free choice. Every man must accept the
consequences of his own actions. Blinded by attachment, men do not see the
final results of their acts, but the divine power always brings about those
451

results. I will convey in full Yudhiñöhira’s message to the Kurus. As you say,
Arjuna, Yudhiñöhira has already said everything that should be said.
Duryodhana is likely to be too vicious to accept My advice. He is unable to part
with even a tiny piece of land for a brief period. Thus there will be war. You
will be required to fight, Bhibatsu. Fix your mind on battle, for whomever you
determine to defeat is already vanquished. For My part, I desire to do whatever
is good for Dharmaräja. I will always follow the instructions of that pious king,
and I will also duly consider Duryodhana’s wicked acts.”
Kåñëa turned toward the twins. Both of them expressed their willingness for
battle. Sätyaki also spoke of his determination to fight. There was little doubt
in anyone’s mind that war was unavoidable. Duryodhana would simply laugh at
Kåñëa.
Draupadé was also seated in the assembly. The talk of peace had alarmed her.
For thirteen long years she had waited for the time when Duryodhana and his
brothers would receive justice. She wanted the battle to begin at once. Kåñëa’s
final peace mission worried her. What if He succeeded? It seemed her
husbands––even Bhéma––were ready to accept peace if Kåñëa could somehow
secure it without sacrificing their interests. How, then, would she be avenged
for her suffering at the Kauravas’ hands? How would her defiled honor be
restored? She addressed Kåñëa with anguish in her voice.
“O Achyuta, why are You going to Hastinäpura? What do You hope to
achieve? Has Duryodhana not made it clear that he will never return
Yudhiñöhira’s kingdom? Yudhiñöhira asked for five small villages, and still the
evil one would not agree. Not by peaceful means nor by surrender will we
attain our ends. Only by battle will we recover our kingdom. I cannot see any
point in Your going there, O Kåñëa, unless it is to annihilate those sinful men.
You should not show mercy at this time. It is said that the sin of killing an
innocent man accrues to a ruler who fails to kill one who is guilty. Do not let
Yourself be touched by sin, O Janärdana.”
Draupadé reminded Kåñëa of the pain she felt in the Kurus’ assembly hall. Her
voice was choked. “Shame to Arjuna’s skill in archery, and shame to Bhéma’s
strength that Duryodhana still lives for even a moment longer. O Lord, if I am
fit to be favored by You, if You feel mercy toward me, then direct the full force
of Your wrath on Dhåtaräñöra’s sons.”
Draupadé rose up from her seat behind the Päëòavas. Taking hold of her
ringlets of deep blue hair, she approached Kåñëa. “O lotus-eyed one, this is the
452

hair that Dushashana seized. If Bhéma and Arjuna are so mean as to desire
peace, then my old father and his sons will fight for my virtue. So too will my
heroic sons, with Abhimanyu at their head, come to avenge me. If I do not see
Dushashana’s hand torn from his body, then how can I ever experience peace?
For thirteen years my mind has been ablaze with thoughts of revenge. My heart
has been rent asunder upon seeing Bhéma inclined toward mildness.”
Draupadé stopped speaking. Hot tears fell on her breasts and she covered her
face with her delicate hands. Kåñëa consoled her gently. “Before long, Päïcälé,
you will see the Kauravas’ wives weep as you weep now. Those with whom you
are angry are already destroyed along with all their kinsmen and followers. The
gods have ordained it. Bhéma, Arjuna, the twins, Yudhiñöhira and I will kill
them. Do not doubt this. If Dhåtaräñöra’s sons do not heed My advice, they
shall lie upon the bare earth, their bodies food for dogs and jackals. O gentle
lady, stop crying. You will soon see your husbands regain their kingdom after
killing their enemies.”
Draupadé was pacified by Kåñëa’s words. There was nothing left to be said. It
was late afternoon and Yudhiñöhira adjourned the assembly. Kåñëa would leave
early the next morning. He rose and bowed to Yudhiñöhira, leaving the hall like
the sun going behind a cloud. The Päëòavas followed Him and gradually the
others dispersed, all reflecting upon Kåñëa’s momentous words.

Chapter 46
Kåñëa’s Peace Mission
Just before dawn, bards and Brahmins assembled outside Kåñëa’s bedchamber.
They chanted auspicious Vedic hymns as musicians played lutes and drums.
Inside the chamber Kåñëa had already risen and was performing His morning
rituals. After bathing and worshipping the sun and the sacred fire, He put on
yellow silk garments. The palace servants helped adorn Him with numerous
gold ornaments studded with priceless gems. As He paid His respects to the
Brahmins, giving them cows and gold in charity, Sätyaki entered. Kåñëa
greeted him cheerfully and said, “O hero, please prepare My chariot. Equip it
with both offensive and defensive weapons. Duryodhana lacks all scruples, and
453

so do Karëa and Çakuni. An enemy should never be disregarded, even if he is
weaker.”
Sätyaki detailed some soldiers to prepare Kåñëa’s chariot. They brought out the
car meant for high-speed journeys, which had two great wheels resembling the
sun and the moon. It blazed like fire and was decorated with moons and stars as
well as figures of sharks, animals, birds, and various kinds of flowers worked in
precious stones. The chariot was covered with tigerskins and rows of small
bells. A tall flagstaff of lapis-lazuli bore a large dark-blue banner emblazoned
with the emblem of Garuòa. Kåñëa’s four horses, Çaibya, Sugréva,
Meghapushpa, and Balahaka, all clad in mail, were yoked to it with harnesses
of jeweled leather.
Kåñëa came out of the palace and mounted the chariot with Sätyaki. His
charioteer, Däruka, urged on the horses and they moved off, being loudly
praised by crowds of citizens. Kåñëa saw by the roadside Brahmins offering Him
worship while musically chanting sacred Vedic hymns. As He proceeded along
the city’s main highway, the sky cleared and a gentle breeze began to blow. The
gods, Gandharvas, and celestial åñis assembled in the sky, offering prayers. The
Päëòavas and their allies followed the slowly moving chariot on foot. The
citizens threw flowers and rice on the road in front of the procession.
Conchshells, kettledrums, trumpets, and other instruments sounded on all
sides.
When Kåñëa reached the city’s outskirts He dismounted. Yudhiñöhira embraced
Him, wishing Him success. With tears in his eyes he said, “O Govinda, please
go to the pious lady who patiently awaits our return, passing her days in grief–
–she who is ever attached to the worship of the Supreme Lord, to whom fasts
and devotions are second nature, and who is charitably disposed to all beings–
–please offer her our deepest respects. Alas, when shall I be able to render my
mother some good? Please comfort her, O Mädhava, and tell her everything
about us.”
The last time the Päëòavas had seen Kunté was when they were going into
exile. She had followed them along the road, crying and stumbling in sorrow
and pain. Now it seemed they might not see her until after the war, if at all.
Each of them sent her a message through Kåñëa.
Yudhiñöhira continued, “Please also greet on our behalf our grandfather,
Bhéñma, and our preceptor, Droëa. The wise Vidura, who has unlimited
knowledge, we embrace with affection. Offer all the Kuru elders our respects
454

and love.”
Yudhiñöhira gave a final message for Dhåtaräñöra, then he walked respectfully
around Kåñëa with his hands folded. After this, Arjuna came forward to say
farewell. After embracing Kåñëa he said, “O Govinda, it has been decided that
You will demand for us one-half of the kingdom. If Duryodhana refuses, I will
certainly annihilate the kñatriyas. There is no doubt of that. Go now, O Lord,
and we shall remain always thinking of You. Everything will be done just as
You desire.”
After the Päëòavas had circumambulated Him, Kåñëa climbed back onto His
chariot. Spurred on by Däruka, the horses took off. As the Päëòavas stood
watching, Kåñëa’s chariot rapidly disappeared into the distance. A dust cloud
rose behind it, and the five brothers stared after Kåñëa until the dust settled
and they could no longer see Him.
Sätyaki looked around as they sped toward Hastinäpura. He saw various omens,
both earthly and celestial. Lightning flashed in the cloudless sky, and behind
them showers of rain fell. Rivers flowed backwards and the earth shook.
Sätyaki saw water gushing out of wells and fire blazing up on the horizon. The
atmosphere darkened and loud roars emanated from the sky, although no
beings were visible. Although Sätyaki saw all these terrible signs, the area
around the chariot was mild and calm. A cool breeze blew, carrying fragrant
lotus petals and drops of water. The road ahead always seemed smooth and free
of debris and thorns.
They passed through various provinces and were greeted and praised by
thousands of Brahmins. The Brahmins worshipped Kåñëa with offerings of
arghya and flowers. Beautifully dressed and ornamented women stood by the
roadside, ululating joyfully and throwing flower petals and fresh grains. Kåñëa
stopped to greet the people and receive their worship. At the end of His first
day’s journey He arrived at Brikasthala, where He spent the night in a spacious
house offered by the local people. They brought Him all kinds of food and
drink and He offered them blessings. Kåñëa and Sätyaki then took rest on
large, comfortable beds, still being praised by the Brahmins.
***
As Kåñëa approached Hastinäpura, a fierce wind blew up. The city was
ravaged. Huge trees were uprooted and buildings smashed. There were also
other signs of foreboding. The sky became black and there were repeated
crashes of thunder. Vultures and crows wheeled, crying loudly, while jackals
455

howled.
On the day before Kåñëa’s arrival, Dhåtaräñöra called an assembly to discuss
how to greet Him. He had been informed of Kåñëa’s arrival at Brikasthala.
Thinking of Vidura’s instructions, the old king said, “Kåñëa can fulfill all our
desires if we satisfy Him. On Him the world’s course depends. He is the Lord of
creation, the source of all power, wisdom and opulence. He is worthy of our
respect and worship in every way. Indeed, if we do not respect Him, then
misery will ensue. Let us prepare a welcome for Him befitting the gods. By
pleasing Him in this way we will obtain the fulfillment of our desires when He
arrives.”
Dhåtaräñöra suggested that they offer Him the best of residences, equipped with
everything enjoyable. They decided to offer to Him Dushashana’s palace,
which was the most opulent in Hastinäpura. The king then asked that various
kinds of wealth be prepared to offer as gifts. “I wish to present Him with
sixteen golden chariots, each drawn by excellent horses of the same color, eight
huge elephants with tusks like ploughs, a hundred virgins and the same number
of menservants. Thousands of deerskins, costly blankets and silks shall be
brought before Kåñëa, along with profuse quantities of gold and gems. Let all
my sons, with the exception of Duryodhana, go out to greet Him. The citizens
should line the streets and beautiful dancing girls and actors should perform
for His pleasure. Decorate the city with flags, festoons and garlands. Sweep all
the roads and drench them with scented water. Tomorrow we will declare a
festival in honor of Keçava.”
When Dhåtaräñöra stopped, Vidura said, “O King, you are respected in this
world as a man of virtue. Old in wisdom and knowing what is right, you desire
to please Kåñëa. This is good, but in my opinion you are not properly
motivated. You wish to win over the lord of the Yädavas by offering Him
wealth, yet you will not accede to His real desire that you surrender even five
villages to the Päëòavas. All your ministrations and gifts will prove useless if
you do not grant Yudhiñöhira his rights. For sure, the all-powerful Govinda will
not even cast His eyes upon your wealth. If you really want to please Him, do as
He asks. Act as a father should act toward his children. Do not bring about
your sons’ destruction by your own foolishness.”
Duryodhana glanced at Çakuni and stood to speak. “What Vidura has said
regarding Kåñëa is correct. Kind words and gifts will not separate Him from the
Päëòavas’ cause. Therefore, I feel we should not offer Him wealth. Although
456

Kåñëa is worthy of all this worship and more, He will simply see our attempts as
a sign of weakness. Our gifts of wealth, while demeaning us, will not sway Him
from His determination for war. It may even anger Him.”
Bhéñma shook his head. “Janärdana will not become angry whether He is
properly received or not. We cannot insult Him, nor can we win Him over.
Whatever He desires will happen and we cannot check it by any means. Our
only course of action is to abide by His wishes. Kåñëa will surely say only what
is conducive to the welfare of all beings. We should follow His direction. O
King, effect peace with the Päëòavas, for this is Kåñëa’s desire.”
Duryodhana, his eyes smoldering, retorted, “I will never be able to share power
with the Päëòavas. I have another idea. When Kåñëa enters this assembly, I
will take Him captive. With Him as my prisoner the Yadus, Vrishnis, Päëòavas,
and indeed the whole world will be at my disposal. We should think of some
means to effect this plan so that He will not suspect anything.”
Duryodhana had already discussed this idea with Çakuni and Karëa and had
already made arrangements, whether or not the court agreed. Taking Kåñëa
prisoner seemed to him the best course of action. The Päëòavas would never
dare attack them if they were holding Kåñëa.
As Duryodhana made his foolhardy suggestion the kings in the assembly
gasped. Dhåtaräñöra was shocked and said angrily, “O child, do not speak in this
way. This is against eternal virtue. A messenger should never be violated, what
to speak of one such as Kåñëa. He is our relative and is dear to us all. What
wrong has He ever done the Kurus? He should certainly not be made captive.”
Bhéñma’s furious voice then rang out. “Your son is on the verge of eternity, O
King. He chooses only evil and never good, although advised by numerous wellwishers. You follow him on his unrighteous path toward certain ruin. He will
cease to exist the moment he comes against Kåñëa, who can do anything He
desires without the least exertion. I dare not listen to any more words from this
sinful person.”
Bhéñma strode out of the assembly hall in a rage. Dhåtaräñöra then ended the
session and everyone left, censuring Duryodhana. His suggestion had gone
beyond the bounds of propriety. Surely Dhåtaräñöra would now see the folly of
supporting him. As they left the hall the kings and ministers looked at the
blind king, who sat in silence. What would he say when Kåñëa arrived the next
morning?

457

***
After a pleasant night in Brikasthala, Kåñëa and Sätyaki rose before dawn and
began their morning worship. They then left the village at sunrise. In less than
two hours their fast-moving chariot approached the outskirts of Hastinäpura.
Crowds of people lined the roads for miles outside the city, all hoping to see
Kåñëa. Bhéñma, Droëa, Kåpa, and the other Kuru elders also came out to greet
Him. All of them were beautifully attired and filled with joy to see Kåñëa’s
approach. He entered the decorated city, surrounded by the people. Along the
roads Kåñëa saw archways and other structures decked with precious gems.
From the balconies of the high, white mansions along the road ladies threw
fragrant flowers onto His chariot. Many instruments played and the blasts from
thousands of conchshells filled the air.
The roads were packed with people, and Kåñëa dismounted from His chariot to
pass through their midst. Fifty tall and well-armed soldiers walked ahead of
Him to clear a path through the crowds. As He went along the smooth stone
road, Kåñëa glanced about on all sides, smiling at the people. Loud shouts of
“Hail Govinda!” were heard everywhere. Slowly Kåñëa made His way toward
Dhåtaräñöra’s home, consisting of numerous large palaces arranged around
spacious gardens. He was led through the inner quarters, passing through a
number of gates guarded by young warriors holding bows and spears.
Kåñëa was brought directly to Dhåtaräñöra in the royal court and he
immediately honored Him with suitable words of praise. The king received
Him with the greatest respect and had Him seated on a jeweled golden throne
no less opulent than his own. Two young maidservants stood on either side of
the throne, fanning Kåñëa with chamara whisks.
After Kåñëa had been worshipped with the traditional rites of hospitality, He
stayed in the court for a short while, exchanging informal and joking words
with the Kurus. It was decided that there would be a full assembly the following
day when they would hear Kåñëa’s message. Taking Dhåtaräñöra’s permission,
Kåñëa then left the court and went to Vidura’s house to see Kunté.
Vidura was overjoyed to see Kåñëa approaching his home. His eyes flooded
with tears and he bowed at Kåñëa’s feet. Kåñëa raised him up by the shoulders
and embraced him with affection. Vidura gazed into Kåñëa’s face. “I cannot
describe the joy I feel upon seeing You,” he said. “You are the inner soul of all
embodied beings. I am honored beyond measure.”
458

Vidura showed Kåñëa into his home and, along with his wife, worshipped Him
with love. He asked after the Päëòavas, and Kåñëa told him all the news from
Virata. Vidura was happy to hear that the Päëòavas were well and that they
had many allies.
Kåñëa wanted to see Kunté at once, so Vidura showed Him to her quarters. As
He entered her room, Kunté stood up quickly and ran toward Him.
Remembering her sons, she cried aloud. Then she clasped hold of Kåñëa’s neck
and shed tears. Kåñëa consoled her and her tears gradually subsided. She
brought Kåñëa into the room and sat Him on a large couch spread with white
silk. As she offered Him arghya, Kåñëa saw that His aunt had become
emaciated through fasting and grieving. In one part of her spacious quarters He
saw Brahmins tending a sacrificial fire, their voices carrying through the room
as they chanted mantras. A deity form of Viñëu stood on a large altar,
beautifully dressed and decked with fresh garlands. Incense burned on the altar
and its pleasant fragrance filled the room.
Kunté had not seen Kåñëa since before her sons’ exile. Sitting near Him on the
couch she poured out her lamentations, her voice choked with sorrow. “Tell
me, how are my sons? O Keçava, those pious boys, even from their childhood,
were attached to serving their elders, were humble, kind, and always wished for
each others’ welfare. But they were robbed of their kingdom and sent to the
forest. How cruel is fate! They have brought wrath and joy under control, are
devoted to the Brahmins, and are speakers of truth; yet, abandoning their
wealth and opulence, they lived in exile. This has ripped open my heart. How
did they live in the forest, O Kåñëa? After living in palaces attended by
numerous servants, how did they survive in the wild? Formerly they would
sleep on the best of beds in well-appointed rooms. How could they lay down on
the bare earth? Alas, my children have suffered too much sorrow. Deprived of
their father as young boys, they then had to leave their mother and all their
friends and relatives.”
Kunté lamented at length. She described each of her sons, her voice rising and
falling in grief. “Shall I ever see them again?” she cried. “O Achyuta, tell me
how Draupadé is faring. She is dearer to me than all my sons. That noble lady
preferred her husbands’ company to that of her father and sons. It seems one
does not necessarily get happiness as a result of virtue, for she is the most
virtuous of all women and yet has had to suffer unbearable misery. When I
remember how she was dragged into the assembly my heart feels such agony.
459

Nothing has ever given me greater pain. Dragged by that dishonorable and
covetous wretch even as the Kurus looked on, she found no protector other
than Vidura. The virtues of the high-souled Vidura are an ornament for this
world.”
Kunté’s choked voice trailed off and she sat weeping for some time. Kåñëa
looked compassionately at her tear-streaked face. Even in old age she was still
beautiful, her fine features highlighted by her white widow’s silk covering her
head. She had not decorated herself since Päëòu’s death, but she still bore a
regal splendor and was obviously noble.
Taking several deep breaths, Kunté regained her composure and went on.
“When my sons were born, the gods spoke from the sky. ‘This one will be lord
of the world,’ the gods said at Yudhiñöhira’s birth. At Arjuna’s birth, the
heavenly voice predicted that he would slaughter the Kurus in battle. I do not
doubt these prophesies. The time has come for my sons to show their prowess.
This is the moment for which kñatriyas take birth. You should tell Yudhiñöhira
that his piety is decreasing daily. As long as the sinful Duryodhana and his evil
brother, the defiler of Draupadé’s virtue, remain alive and unpunished, he is
suffering a decrease of virtue. O Keçava, I do not grieve for the defeat at dice,
the loss of the kingdom, or even separation from my sons as much as I grieve
for the youthful Draupadé being brought in a single cloth before the Kurus and
insulted. How can I experience such grief? With You and the invincible
Balaräma as my protectors, as well as Bhéma and Arjuna, it is truly
astonishing.”
Kunté gazed at Kåñëa. She knew who He was––that somehow He had arranged
everything. Still, it was difficult to understand. Why had He allowed the chaste
Draupadé to be insulted? Why was the wicked Duryodhana allowed to rule the
world? Surely there was some divine plan underlying it all, meant for the good
of all men. Kunté remembered a proverb she had often heard from Päëòu: ‘Man
proposes, God disposes.’ She had also received instructions from the great
Vyäsadeva and other åñis, who had given her a transcendental understanding
of the Lord’s nature. The Lord fulfilled men’s desires in accordance with what
they deserved. Eventually, all of a man’s acts would bring about appropriate
reactions. Although it may seem that a sinful man prospered while a virtuous
man suffered, in the end sin always brought ruin while virtue brought success.
Kunté had little doubt. The destruction of the Kurus was imminent.
Kåñëa consoled His grieving aunt. “O Kunté, what woman is there in this world
460

like you? Born of a noble family, you married a lord of the earth and have given
birth to five great heroes. Your sons are like virtue personified. They have
controlled sleep, laziness, anger, joy, hunger and thirst. They do not desire any
mean pleasures. The happiness belonging to those possessed of true power is all
they desire. The greatly powerful seek either extreme happiness or extreme
suffering, and they accept nothing mediocre. Either they rule the earth or they
practice severe asceticism. Your sons have made this same choice. The time has
now come for them to assume rulership of the world. You will soon see them in
good health, with all their ends achieved, installed as kings and surrounded by
prosperity.”
Kåñëa conveyed to Kunté all of her sons’ messages. Comforted by His words she
replied, “Whatever You think is right and whatever You wish to be done
should be done without delay, O Keçava. Surely You are the greatest wellwisher of the world. O chastiser of enemies, I know the truth of Your
existence. You are the unlimited Brahman, the original and Supreme Person in
whom resides all power and opulence. Everything depends upon You. What
You have said must come to pass, for truth itself depends upon You. I bow to
You and pray for Your everlasting service. O Govinda, please be gracious to
me.”
Kåñëa smiled and spoke a few more consoling words before rising to leave. He
walked around Kunté, offering His aunt the same respect due His mother.
Leaving Kunté’s quarters, Kåñëa returned to Duryodhana’s palace. Without
hindrance He passed through the heavily guarded gateways and came to the
vast palace occupied by the Kaurava prince. It was comparable to Indra’s abode,
appearing like a mass of clouds and as high as a mountain. The white marble
building was decked with countless precious gems and gold engravings. Kåñëa
entered and went along the wide corridors, which were decorated with golden
images of the gods. He passed through three large divisions of the palace, each
designed and decorated in a different mood, and at last reached the central
hall. There He found Duryodhana seated amid a thousand kings and warriors.
Next to him were Çakuni, Karëa and Dushashana. They all rose to greet Kåñëa
as He entered the hall.
Duryodhana came down from his elevated seat and welcomed Kåñëa warmly.
He showed Him to a large throne covered with an exquisite silk carpet and soft
white cushions. When Kåñëa was seated he personally worshipped Him and
offered Him the traditional gift of a cow. His brothers also came and
461

worshipped Kåñëa, along with the other kings.
When the rites were complete, Duryodhana folded his palms and said, “We are
honored, O Govinda. What can we do for You? You may consider this wide
kingdom and all our wealth Yours. Please be gracious and accept an invitation
to dine with us. We have prepared Dushashana’s palace for Your residence,
which is superior even to my own.”
“I will not eat with you, O hero, nor shall I stay in Dushashana’s palace.”
Duryodhana smiled and spoke with forced humility. “Why do You refuse our
invitation, O Janärdana? Are we not as dear to You as the Päëòavas? Surely
You see both parties equally. Your relationship with Dhåtaräñöra is as close as
Your relationship with the Päëòavas. O Mädhava, please tell me why You will
not accept our hospitality.”
“Only those messengers who have gained their objectives should accept the
hospitality offered by those who have received his message.” He raised His long
arm and held out His palm toward Duryodhana. “After you have fulfilled My
wish, you may entertain both Myself and My followers.”
Struggling to control his anger, Duryodhana replied, “It is not befitting that
You treat us so, O Madhusüdana. Whether Your objects are achieved or not we
are bent upon pleasing You with our hospitality. You have denied us that
opportunity with no good reason, O best of men. We feel no enmity toward
You and therefore cannot understand why You snub us in this way.”
Kåñëa was grave. “I never abandon virtue from motives of desire, anger, hate or
attachment. One should eat another’s food if there is love between them or if
he is in distress. O King, you do not please Me and I am not in distress. For no
reason you have borne malice toward the Päëòavas from their childhood. Your
cousins are virtuous and devoted to the good of all beings. Whoever bears
malice for such blameless men bears malice toward Me. He who follows the
virtuous follows Me. Know that I am merged in the Päëòavas and cannot be
separated from them.”
Kåñëa looked intently, but without anger, at Duryodhana, who frowned. “O
Bharata, whoever becomes antagonistic toward a virtuous man, impelled by
lust or anger, should be known as the vilest of men. He does not keep his
prosperity for long. On the other hand, he who wins over virtuous men with
services and kind words, even though they may not be dear to him, gains great
renown in the world. Your food is defiled by wickedness. I will not eat it. I
prefer instead to stay with Vidura and eat his food.”
462

Leaving Duryodhana fuming, Kåñëa left the hall and returned to Vidura’s
house. All the Kuru elders visited Him there. They each offered Him their own
abodes, but Kåñëa thanked them and replied, “I am honored by the offer, but I
am content to stay with Vidura.”
Kåñëa and Sätyaki happily ate whatever food was prepared by Vidura’s wife,
after first offering a portion to the Brahmins. When the meal was over, Vidura
said, “Duryodhana does not much appreciate your visit, O Keçava. That
wicked-minded fool transgresses all religious codes. He is incapable of
accepting good advice and is bound for destruction. In his opinion he is wise,
but he follows nothing other than his own desires. He is an enemy even to his
friends. Having abandoned virtue he is fond of untruth and is simply a slave to
his senses. He will certainly ignore Your advice.”
As Vidura spoke his wife came into the room and offered Kåñëa herbs and
fragrant spices to purify His mouth after eating. She lit incense and took up a
chamara whisk to fan Kåñëa. He smiled at her and told her to sit with her
husband.
“Duryodhana has full confidence in Bhéñma, Droëa, Kåpa, Karëa, Açvatthämä
and Jayadratha. With his armies at the ready he does not even think of peace.
He thinks the Päëòavas will not be able to even look upon his forces. Lacking
all intelligence, he has firmly resolved to return nothing to the Päëòavas.”
Vidura did not like the idea of Kåñëa going into the Kauravas’ assembly. He
knew that He would only be insulted and even abused. Although Vidura knew
Kåñëa to be beyond insult, out of love he did not want to see it happen. Nor did
he want the Kurus to be further blighted by sinful reactions due to their
offenses.
“Duryodhana suspects your motives,” Vidura continued, as he pressed Kåñëa’s
feet. “He will by no means listen to Your submission. Surrounded by his
chariots and elephants, he feels invincible. He now considers the kingdom to
be his and his alone. He thinks You are biased toward the Päëòavas. Many of
the kings following him are already Your enemies. Out of fear of You they have
joined with Duryodhana. All of them are delighted at the prospect of fighting
the Päëòavas. How can You go into their midst, O crusher of enemies?
Although I know Your true position, power and invincibility, still I cannot see
the purpose of Your going there simply to be ignored. I speak only out of love,
reverence and friendship. My Lord, what is the use of describing the joy I feel
upon seeing You? You are the Supreme Soul and the very life of all beings.”
463

Kåñëa reached over and clasped Vidura’s hand. “You have spoken with wisdom.
You have spoken as a friend should speak to a friend. Your words are
conducive to morality and worldly good, like the advice of a father or mother.
What you have said is true, but listen to My reasons for coming here. Knowing
full well of Duryodhana’s hostility and wickedness, I have come here to do
something virtuous. He who liberates these men from the clutches of death will
earn great religious merit. The wise have said that if one attempts a virtuous
act with all his power but fails, he will still receive the merit of that act.
Therefore, with all sincerity I will seek to establish peace. This calamity has its
roots in the Kurus, for it has been brought about by Duryodhana and Karëa.”
Kåñëa rose from his seat and walked slowly across the room, His gold
ornaments and jewels glinting in the light of the oil lamps. “If one does not try
to save a friend from impending calamity, then he cannot be called a friend. A
friend should pull one away from acting improperly even if it means seizing
him by the hair. Therefore, it behooves Me to try to dissuade Duryodhana from
his purposes. If he disregards Me, at least I will feel that I did all a friend could
do. If the fool does not accept My advice, then he will have only himself to
blame for the consequences. Nor will men blame Me for having failed to effect
peace. If, without sacrificing the Päëòavas’ interests, I can bring about peace
between the cousins, then I will have done good to both parties. Otherwise, not
even all the rulers of the world can stand against Me any more than small
animals can stand against an enraged lion.”
Kåñëa spoke with Vidura through most of the night. They rested briefly. Then
as dawn approached, bards assembled outside Vidura’s house and recited hymns
from the Sämaveda to the accompaniment of cymbals, drums and conchshells.
Kåñëa rose immediately upon hearing the sound. He performed His morning
ablutions and went through His usual morning rituals, chanting incantations
to the fire-god and worshipping the sun as it rose. Even as He performed His
morning devotions, Duryodhana and Çakuni came to see Him. With folded
palms they informed Him that Dhåtaräñöra and the other Kurus were in the
assembly hall. “They are awaiting You even as the gods in heaven await Indra.”
Kåñëa replied that He would soon be ready, and Duryodhana said he would
wait outside. After he and Çakuni had gone, Kåñëa distributed charity to the
Brahmins from the many chariots filled with riches He had brought with Him
to distribute. He gave gold, gems, and fine cloth to numerous Brahmins, then
prepared Himself to go to the Kuru assembly. Däruka fetched His chariot and
464

it approached Vidura’s house with a deep rumble. After circumambulating the
sacred fire and the Brahmins, Kåñëa left the house.
Kåñëa, Sätyaki and Vidura mounted the chariot and it moved off. Duryodhana
and Çakuni followed in their own chariot. Behind them came Kåtavarmä and
other great warriors, some on chariots and others on elephants. Brahmins went
on foot, chanting auspicious prayers, and musicians played their instruments.
Thousands of young warriors came behind them, dressed in armor and carrying
swords, lances and axes. The streets were packed with citizens, all hoping to
catch a glance of the famous Kåñëa. Balconies were crowded with women, who
gazed down on Kåñëa’s chariot as it passed. They filled the air with a
continuous stream of many-colored flower petals.

Chapter 47
Duryodhana’s Obstinacy
In the hall, the assembled Kuru elders waited with anticipation. As they heard
Kåñëa’s chariot approach, the hall buzzed, and as Kåñëa dismounted from His
chariot, shouts of “Hail to Govinda!” and “All glories to Kåñëa, lord of the
Yädavas!” rang out.
Kåñëa caught hold of both Vidura’s and Sätyaki’s hands on either side of Him
and walked into the hall. Dhåtaräñöra rose, along with Bhéñma, Droëa, Kåpa
and others. Crossing the floor, Kåñëa greeted Dhåtaräñöra respectfully. The
king offered Him a beautiful throne encrusted with jewels. With His divine
vision Kåñëa saw numerous celestial åñis approaching the assembly from the
sky. He said, “Many åñis, hoping to witness what will happen here today, have
assembled. See, there is Närada Muni. Offer them suitable seats, for how can
any of us sit down while they remain standing?”
Dhåtaräñöra ordered his servants to fetch golden seats. The åñis entered the hall
like glowing planets descended from the heavens and accepted the seats. After
they had been worshipped with all respect, Kåñëa accepted His own seat and
was in turn worshipped by the Kurus. Vidura sat next to Kåñëa on a seat
covered with white deerskin and decked with gems. Opposite Kåñëa,
Duryodhana and Karëa sat together on a single throne. As the monarchs took
465

their places, Brahmins recited Vedic hymns to invoke an auspicious
atmosphere. Gradually everyone fell silent and gazed at Kåñëa. Seated on His
throne, He looked like a dark gem set in gold. There was perfect stillness in the
hall as everyone waited for Him to speak.
Kåñëa looked toward Dhåtaräñöra and said, “May there be peace between the
Kurus and Päëòavas, O Bharata. May no heroes be slain on either side. Only
for this have I come. O King, I have nothing more to say.”
Hearing Kåñëa speak reminded the assembly of the soft thunder of autumnal
rain clouds. All eyes remained fixed upon Him. “O King, you know as well as I
do the cause for the present situation. Peace lies in your hands. You have a
great responsibility. Your dynasty is famed for its virtue and nobility. The
Kurus are especially known for their knowledge of scripture, good behavior,
kindness, compassion, forgiveness and truthfulness. Do not allow your fine
heritage to be sullied. You are the Kurus’ leader and must bear the reaction to
any sinful acts they perform. A calamity now faces your race, caused by the
Kurus’ behavior. If you do not check it, O monarch, it will destroy the world.”
Kåñëa looked over at Duryodhana. The prince appeared distracted, looking
away from Kåñëa and rubbing his face with a hand covered in gleaming gems.
Kåñëa went on, “O King, your sons are not considering morality or even profit.
They are wicked and overcome by avarice. They are being unfair toward their
own friends. I do not think peace would be so difficult to achieve. It depends
upon you and Me. You should give an order and your sons should follow it. The
Päëòavas never ignore My advice. Set your sons on the path of peace and I will
do the same with the Päëòavas. Consider everything carefully, O King. Even if
you desire to rule this world, it is still better to establish peace with the
Päëòavas than to make them your enemies. At present, they see you as a
worshipable elder. They will wait upon you and protect you and even the gods
will not be able to assail you. You will not find better allies than the Päëòavas.
With them at your side, you would lead troops headed by Bhéñma, Droëa, Kåpa,
Karëa, Açvatthämä, Yudhiñöhira, Bhéma, Arjuna, and so many other great
heroes. Where is that fool who would fight such warriors?”
The blind king sat with his head bowed. Kåñëa’s speech was as he had
expected––cutting and painfully true. His throat was parched and he called for
water as Kåñëa continued.
“On the other hand, O King, what profit will there be in fighting with the
Päëòavas? What merit do you see in arranging for so many men to die? O best
466

of the Bharatas, just imagine what you will feel when you hear of the deaths on
either side. There is no question that both parties will not survive the war. The
kings you see here and the kings at Virata will slay each other mercilessly,
influenced by anger. O Emperor, rescue them from death. Save this world from
disaster. Let the feelings of affection you once bore for the Päëòavas again
flood your heart. Bring them here as your children. According to worldly
virtue, such fatherless boys deserve your protection, especially in their distress.
Now hear their message to you, which they asked Me to repeat in the
assembly.”
Kåñëa repeated what Yudhiñöhira had said just before Kåñëa departed. “‘At
your command, O King, we have spent thirteen years in exile expecting that
you would keep your word. As we have carefully kept our pledge, so we ask you
to keep yours. We have suffered greatly and now desire to return to our
kingdom. O Bharata, you know the principles of virtue. Act toward us as a
father should act toward his sons. We will act as your sons. You are our
worshipable elder. If you find us remiss in our duties, do not hesitate to correct
us, O King. Set us on the proper course and yourself follow the excellent path
of virtue.’”
Dhåtaräñöra shifted uncomfortably. His guilt at having mistreated Päëòu’s sons
bothered him more than anything else. They had been brought to him as young
children after their father, his brother, had died. It was true that he should
treat them no differently than his own sons. This was surely his greatest sin,
that he had neglected and even inflicted suffering on those deserving his
protection. Tears fell from his blind eyes as Kåñëa continued.
“In an assembly where virtue is overcome by vice, it is the duty of the members
of that assembly to remove it by all means. If vice is not removed, then it will
kill all those who have participated in it. If vice prevails over virtue, falsehood
over truth, then those who allow it will be ruined.
“What else could you do but return the Päëòavas’ kingdom? I desire both your
good and what is best for the Päëòavas. If My words are true, then let the
Kurus confirm them and release the kñatriya race from the shackles of death.
Make the large-souled, virtuous Yudhiñöhira your ally. Do not destroy these
kings for the sake of vice, nor morality for the sake of so-called happiness. Do
not mistake good for evil and evil for good. O lord of the earth, restrain your
sons, who are too attached to avarice. Kunté’s sons are ready to serve you and
to fight for you. This is My advice. Choose now that course which appears best
467

to you, O King.”
Everyone remained silent. Having listened carefully to Kåñëa, the kings were
speechless. No one could argue with anything He said. Only Duryodhana
found fault with Him, and he looked at Kåñëa with a sly smile.
Paraçuräma was among the åñis, and when Kåñëa finished speaking, he stood to
address the assembly. All eyes rested upon him as his voice rang out around the
hall. He wore a black deerskin and had matted hair. His dark eyes glowed, and
his body shone with a mystical luminosity. He told the assembly a story about
the ancient king Dambhodbhava. That king had possessed incomparable power
but had become excessively proud and arrogant. He searched continuously for
opponents to defeat in battle. One day, he heard that the two åñis, Nara and
Näräyaëa, were the most powerful men on earth. He went at once to
Gandhamädana where they were practicing asceticism and challenged them.
Although they declined, the king insisted. Finally Nara said, “Fight, then, if
you must, O kñatriya. Bring your entire army and all your weapons. I will soon
destroy your thirst for war.”
The king attacked the åñi with all his power. Nara pulled up a handful of grass
and, imbuing it with mystic power, hurled it at the king and his army. The
grass transformed into razor-sharp steel shafts that sliced off the ears and noses
of all the soldiers. So many shafts rained down upon them that they were
unable to move. Dambhodbhava fell at Nara’s feet and begged for mercy. The
åñi forgave him his insolence and instructed him to never again insult someone
without first establishing his opponent’s power.
Paraçuräma looked around the assembly. “Nara’s feat was wonderful. Näräyaëa
is capable of still greater deeds. Those two high-souled åñis are now present as
Arjuna and Kåñëa. Do not, like the vain Dambhodbhava, try to face them in
battle. Men suffer from eight vices that steal their life duration: desire, anger,
greed, vanity, insolence, pride, malice, and selfishness. Influenced by these
evils, men are bewildered and act like fools. O heroes, do not fall victim to
these vices and lose your lives. No one can defeat Arjuna within the three
worlds, and Janärdana exceeds him. Make peace with them and do what is good
for yourselves and the whole world.”
Then another åñi, Kanwa, spoke. Confirming what Paraçuräma had said about
Nara and Näräyaëa, he added, “One should not consider he who possesses
great physical strength powerful. Real strength lies in virtue. The Päëòavas are
virtuous. Furthermore, Kåñëa, the reservoir of all virtue, is on their side. Those
468

five heroes combined with Kåñëa are no less than Dharma, Väyu, Indra, and
the twin Açviné gods united with Viñëu. O Duryodhana, how will you even
look at them? Effect peace at once or be annihilated.”
Duryodhana was breathing heavily, his brow contracted. He gazed at Karëa
and laughed aloud when Kanwa stopped speaking. Slapping his thigh he said
defiantly, “I am whatever God has made me. It is He who created me and He
who decides my fate. I will do exactly as He has determined and nothing else.
What use is this discussion?”
The prince had little faith in any supreme power and his voice dripped with
sarcasm. He looked at Karëa, and both of them smiled. They were not
interested in the åñi’s words. Then Närada spoke. Like Paraçuräma, he narrated
an ancient history about a king who had suffered as a result of his own
obstinacy and ignorance. In conclusion he said, “O ruler of the earth, listen to
your well-wishers’ advice. Obstinacy leads to ruin. Abandon your anger and
vanity and make peace with the Päëòavas. Reflect carefully on this story I
have just told, which is full of profound instructions and is approved by
learned men. By understanding these instructions and by curbing desire and
anger, a man may attain sovereignty over the world. By acting otherwise, one
achieves only destruction.”
Duryodhana said nothing. Dhåtaräñöra lifted his hand and replied, “O Närada,
what you have said is true. I too wish for peace, but I am not the master in this
case.”
Dhåtaräñöra turned toward Kåñëa, who sat easily on His throne, one foot on the
seat and the other resting on the cushion at His feet. “O Keçava, I accept what
You have said as the truth. What You have said is for our benefit and the
benefit of the world. By following Your words we can attain heaven.
“But I am not my own master. O best of men, try to persuade my wicked son
Duryodhana, who disregards all scriptural injunctions and never does what
pleases me. He will not listen to me, and neither will he hear from Vidura,
Bhéñma, or any of his elders. Please instruct him Yourself, O Kåñëa. If You can
correct my son of crooked intellect and sinful heart, then You will have
performed Your duty as a friend.”
Kåñëa turned towards Duryodhana. “I will speak only for your good, O best of
the Bharatas. I desire your prosperity and happiness as much as you do. What
you are contemplating will make you suffer. Wise men in this world act only
for virtue and profit. Thus they fulfill their desires. What you are proposing
469

will not fulfill your desires. Your obstinacy is vicious, frightful and destructive.
It will hurt you, and there is no reason for it. Give it up. Pursue instead a
course that will benefit you, your brothers, your followers, your friends. O
chastiser of foes, make peace with your cousins. This will please your father
and all the Kuru elders. Your father has commanded you to seek peace. A good
man never neglects his father’s order. Nor does he ignore the advice of friends
who know what is good. One who disregards the orders of seniors and the
advice of well-wishers will be consumed as one who eats poisonous fruit dies.
He never achieves his goal and is ultimately left sunk in remorse.”
Kåñëa paused. He looked steadily at Duryodhana, who remained silent. The
prince looked downward and rubbed the floor with his sandaled foot. All eyes
in the hall were on him.
Kåñëa continued to speak in measured tones. “He who prefers the advice of
inferior men to that of learned elders meets dangers. Nothing can rescue him.
Who but you would abandon kinsmen who are equal in battle to Indra in favor
of incompetent and dishonest strangers? Peace with the Päëòavas is more in
your interests than union with wicked men. Even though you treated them
with deceit and harshness since they were born, they are prepared to forgive
everything and live with you as friends. O best of the Bharatas, do not show
anger toward your own relatives. Live for virtue and not only for pleasure.
Only then will you be able to achieve what you desire. Living in peace with the
Päëòavas, all your aims will be achieved, and your fame will spread far and
wide. How can you prefer the shelter of Karëa, Çakuni and Dushashana to that
of your noble cousins?”
Karëa felt insulted by Kåñëa’s words. He glanced at Duryodhana, who kept his
head lowered. Both men were finding Kåñëa’s speech hard to stomach. Both
were convinced that their cause was no less righteous than that of the
Päëòavas. How was Dhåtaräñöra’s claim to the throne any less than Päëòu’s, his
younger brother? Duryodhana’s right to the kingdom was at least equal to, if
not greater than, the Päëòavas’ claim. They would not be able to live together
in peace. That was clear. Then why should Duryodhana be the one to make
concessions? The Päëòavas left Hastinäpura long ago. Things were going on
well enough without them. It seemed that Kåñëa favored them, perhaps
because they were close friends. How could He say that He had Duryodhana’s
interest at heart?
Karëa turned his angry eyes toward Kåñëa, who, seeing both his and
470

Duryodhana’s defiance, said, “O hero, show me the man who is capable of
standing against the enraged Bhémasena.”
Having first cajoled, then cited the benefits of peace, Kåñëa ended by
explaining the likely results of a war with the Päëòavas. He hoped to instill
fear and dissension among the Kurus.
“Again, who can go into battle against Arjuna and return home alive? Why do
you seek war? What benefit do you see in slaughtering all these men? At
Khäëòava, Arjuna vanquished the gods and the Gandharvas, Asuras and
Nägas. What chance do you have? Will it be any different from what you
experienced when you came to attack the Matsya kingdom? Look at your
kinsmen and friends. Do not let them be killed for your own stupidity. Let not
the prosperous Kuru race be destroyed for your sake. Bring the Päëòavas here
in peace. They will surely install your father as the emperor and you as his
viceroy. That is your only chance to achieve lasting prosperity and happiness.
Do not ignore it. After making peace with the Päëòavas, you will attain a
blessed state.”
Duryodhana showed no sign of agreeing with Kåñëa’s words. He sat as if on
fire, resembling a heap of hot coals.
Seeing the prince unmoved, Bhéñma said, “Kåñëa’s words are those of a friend,
dear son. Follow his advice and do not be vindictive. If you ignore what Kåñëa
is saying, you will achieve neither prosperity nor happiness. He has told you
what will lead to virtue and profit; any other course will result in ruin. O King,
do not destroy the Kuru’s prosperity. Do not cause the death of all these
kñatriyas. Do not destroy your brothers. Do not destroy yourself. Do not drown
your parents in a sea of grief. Accept Keçava’s advice.”
When Bhéñma was finished, Droëa stood. “I too accept what Kåñëa has advised.
His advice is pregnant with virtue and will profit all of us. Duryodhana, follow
that advice. Do not insult Mädhava with your perverted understanding. Those
who now encourage you to fight will do little when the time comes. Rather,
like you, they will have to depend on others. Know from me that none of us are
capable of withstanding Arjuna and Kåñëa in battle. If you reject my words,
you will be left to grieve before long. You have heard all this again and again.
What point is there in repeating it? Do as you wish. I do not wish to address
you any more.”
The Kuru elders had lost patience with Duryodhana. It seemed that nothing
could make him see sense. That all these kñatriyas were soon to die seemed
471

inevitable. There could be no outcome other than what Kåñëa and so many
others had described.
After Droëa, Vidura spoke. He knew Duryodhana would not hear him, but he
wanted to show his solidarity with Kåñëa’s speech, as Kåñëa had requested. “I
do not grieve for you, Duryodhana. Rather I grieve for your old parents. With
only you to protect them, they will soon wander about without anyone. All
their friends and ministers will be slain like birds shorn of their wings. Because
they begot such a vicious son, they are destined to become beggars in this
world.”
Having heard his three chief ministers concurring with Kåñëa, Dhåtaräñöra
leaned forward on his throne. “The time has come to make peace, Duryodhana.
The great-souled Keçava has spoken the truth for our benefit and ultimate
salvation. With his help, we can attain our goals. Go with him in peace to
Virata and arrange to bring the Päëòavas here. Let the hostilities cease. Let
the virtuous Yudhiñöhira place his red-palmed hand on your back with
affection. Let the broad-shouldered Våkodara embrace you with goodwill. Let
Arjuna and the twins offer you respects while you offer them blessings. You
and they may enjoy sovereignty over the world together. I think that time has
arrived, dear son. Do not disobey me. Choose peace, for you cannot be
victorious in battle.”
Duryodhana was furious. Why was everyone afraid of the Päëòavas? Perhaps
he had been unfortunate when he had encountered them in the past, but that
would soon change. Now, aided by the Dänavas’ mystic power and the
combined might of the Kuru heroes, he was invincible. The prince looked at
his father. How could the old man order him in this way? Accept Bhéma’s
embrace? Bhéma was his mortal foe! Duryodhana shuddered at the thought.
And, having ruled over the entire earth, how could he be expected to now
offer his respects to Yudhiñöhira?
Duryodhana felt it was time he spoke his mind. Calming himself, he rose from
his seat and looked at Kåñëa. “Although You speak out of concern for me, O
Madhusüdana, You nevertheless criticize me alone. Why, O Keçava, do You
praise the Päëòavas and accuse me without properly understanding the
situation? You, Vidura, Bhéñma, Droëa, and my father have all found fault with
me, but not with any other. Yet in this matter, I do not find I have acted in any
way unworthy. I have not committed the slightest fault. Even after much
introspection, I see nothing wrong.
472

“The Päëòavas lost their kingdom at dice. They were not forced to play that
game. Even when their wealth was returned, they agreed to play a final game
and were thus exiled. Was that my fault? Why do they regard me as an enemy?
Even now, although they are weak and incapable, they threaten the Kurus.”
Duryodhana looked at Karëa, who clenched his fist in support. The Kaurava
prince continued. “We are powerful kñatriyas and will not bow down to any
man out of fear. I do not see anyone who can face the Kuru army in battle, O
Keçava. Why should I give anything to the Päëòavas under threat of war?
Rather, it is my duty to fight. If I lay down my body in battle, then I will
achieve a glorious destination in my next life. What kñatriya born in a noble
family would avoid battle out of fear of the enemy? No self-respecting ruler
would bow to one who threatened him with harsh words. I am not afraid of the
Päëòavas. O Mädhava, I will never give them any part of this kingdom. It now
belongs to Dhåtaräñöra and so it will remain. We are simply his servants.
Although he once gave away that which should not have been given, we have
rectified his error. When I was a child and dependent on others, the Päëòavas
were mistakenly given the kingdom. We will not make the same mistake
again.”
Duryodhana paused and glanced at his audience. He rested one hand on his
hip and the other on his sword hilt. He concluded, “O Keçava, this is my reply:
as long as I rule this kingdom on my father’s behalf, I will not give the
Päëòavas even that much land which can be pierced by the point of a needle.”
Duryodhana sat down, his eyes fixed on Kåñëa. Karëa lifted his huge arm,
smeared with red sandalwood paste, and placed it over Duryodhana’s shoulders.
Vidura looked at the two men and shook his head sadly. Dhåtaräñöra was the
only one who could prevent the impending calamity, but the old monarch
remained silent––hearing everything, seeing nothing. If the king desired peace
as he said he did, he would have to restrain his son forcibly. Duryodhana was
not going to listen to him unless he was prepared to back his words with action.
He would have to have the prince arrested. Otherwise, his words were empty.
Reflecting a moment, Kåñëa said, “You obviously desire the endless sleep of the
hero, and so you shall have it. Wait just a little longer. Then there will be the
massacre you desire.
“O fool! You think you have no blame, but everyone here knows the truth. You
were jealous of the Päëòavas’ prosperity, and you plotted with Çakuni to defeat
Yudhiñöhira at dice. Who else could have treated his brother’s wife as you
473

treated Draupadé? Draupadé is chaste, of noble birth, and is well-behaved. She
is dearer to the Päëòavas than their own lives. Still you insulted her before all
the Kurus.”
Kåñëa reminded Duryodhana how Dushashana had addressed the Päëòavas as
they left Hastinäpura, and how even before the dice game the Kurus had
antagonized them. To plead innocence was simply evidence of his arrogance.
Kåñëa was stern as He continued. “If you do not return their kingdom to them
willingly, you will have to return it to them when they defeat you in battle.
You have committed so many evil deeds toward the Päëòavas and now you try
to appear innocent. You have been repeatedly ordered by your elders to make
peace, but you ignore them. Only by peace will everyone be benefited,
including yourself. That it appears otherwise to you is a sign of your lack of
intelligence.”
Kåñëa’s speech had convinced even some of Duryodhana’s brothers.
Dushashana in particular had begun to favor peace. Remembering Bhéma’s vow
to tear out his heart, he addressed his elder brother. “If you are so foolish that
you will not willingly make peace, then the Kauravas will bind you hand and
foot and offer you to Yudhiñöhira.”
Duryodhana stormed out of the hall. Then Duryodhana’s one hundred
brothers and all of his ministers followed him.
After they had gone Bhéñma said, “One who abandons virtue and profit out of
wrath will soon be sunk in a sea of troubles. This prince lacks wisdom and
knowledge. He is influenced only by anger and greed. O Janärdana, I think the
kñatriya race is about to be annihilated, for his brothers and ministers follow
him out of folly.”
Kåñëa turned His lotus-like eyes toward Dhåtaräñöra. “This is the fault of all the
Kuru leaders. You should have restrained Duryodhana by force. O sinless men,
it is time for you to act. Listen as I describe what is in your best interests.
“You all know how Kaàsa, king of the Bhojas and Ugrasena’s wicked son, was
rejected by his kinsmen. In the end, I killed him. By this one act, the Yädavas,
Andhakas and Vrishnis all became happy. One man should be sacrificed for
the sake of a race, the race for the good of a town, the town for the benefit of
the country, and the earth for the sake of the soul. O Bharatas, after binding
Duryodhana, Karëa, Çakuni and Dushashana, make peace with the Päëòavas.
In this way the kñatriyas may be saved.”
This made Dhåtaräñöra even more uncomfortable. From Duryodhana’s birth his
474

advisors had insisted he reject his son. He had refused. Now he was tasting the
bitter fruit of his mistaken judgment. He was too attached to his son, and that
attachment had not weakened over the years. Duryodhana took advantage of
his weakness and ignored him. It seemed Duryodhana could be checked only if
he were executed, or at least imprisoned. Now Kåñëa was suggesting that they
carry this through. How could he contemplate such an option? He thought of
Gändhäré. Maybe the prince would listen to his mother.
He decided to ask her to enter the assembly. “O Vidura, please go and bring the
queen here. Then order my son to return to the assembly. Perhaps the wise
Gändhäré will be able to persuade him.”
Vidura left the hall and soon Gändhäré entered, maidservants leading the
blindfolded queen to her place next to the king. After being seated and
informed of the situation, she addressed Dhåtaräñöra.
“Your son is full of lust and greed. Only by your blessings has he obtained this
kingdom, which he in no way deserves. O King, although you know he is sinful,
you support him out of fondness. For this you are as much to blame for the
present situation as he is. It will be difficult now to check Duryodhana.”
As Gändhäré finished, Duryodhana returned, strode angrily across the hall,
bowed slightly to his parents, and sat down. He was still breathing heavily, his
eyes red.
Gändhäré spoke gently. “My dear son, listen as I offer advice meant only for
your benefit. It is my most earnest wish that you make peace with the
Päëòavas. Follow your elders’ guidance, my son, and reap the fruits of virtue.
You want to control the earth only because you are full of sense desire and
anger. You do not know that only by overcoming those two impulses can a man
attain success in life. One who is controlled by his senses cannot control a
kingdom. Only after conquering ourselves can we conquer the earth.
Otherwise, it is not possible. The uncontrolled senses are powerful enough to
kill a man, just as untrained horses can kill an incompetent driver. Prosperity
always attends the king who has mastered his passions and who stands ready to
chastise offenders, acting only after careful consideration. He who gives in to
desire and wrath will lose everything in the end. Such a man cannot even
attain heaven. Therefore, strive to control your senses, for in this lies your
greatest good.”
Gändhäré spoke from her own realization. Since the Päëòavas’ exile, she had
begun to practice asceticism. Feeling guilty for the way the Kurus had insulted
475

Draupadé, she fasted and performed constant sacrifices. She practiced penance,
praying that her licentious son might somehow be brought to his senses. But
that seemed impossible. His heart was steeped in greed and envy, but he could
not recognize these qualities in himself.
Imploring, the queen continued. “By joining with the virtuous and selfcontrolled Päëòavas, you can enjoy this earth for a long time. What will you
gain by fighting with them? Here is Kåñëa, who performs powerful acts with
little exertion. He is able to destroy all the kings alone. What then will happen
when He unites with Arjuna? You have heard this advice again and again. One
who ignores his well-wishers will only lament. But his enemies will rejoice.
“O child, your father gave the Päëòavas their due share afraid of a dispute.
Now you are enjoying the fruits of that gift. It was those heroes who subjugated
the world. Surely half the kingdom can satisfy your needs. Do not invite
destruction by igniting a dispute with the Päëòavas. They have suffered
enough these last thirteen years. Give them back what is theirs and save the
world from disaster. When Bhéñma, Droëa, Kåpa, Karëa, Bhémasena,
Dhanaïjaya and Dåñöadyumna come together in anger, all creatures will be
destroyed. Therefore, quench your greed and act with wisdom. This is my
advice to you, dear child.”
Duryodhana snorted. He had heard it all before. Everyone praised the
Päëòavas and criticized him. There didn’t seem to be anything he could say to
convince them otherwise. Seeing that his mother had finished, he again left
the hall. It was time to act.
He went straight to Dushashana’s palace. His brother was sitting with Karëa
and Çakuni. Slapping his thigh in anger he said to them, “It seems that Kåñëa is
swaying everyone’s minds toward the Päëòavas. He is urging the king to have
us arrested. I am worrying about this. Kåñëa is very persuasive.”
Duryodhana looked at Dushashana. “Kåñëa even turned your mind in the hall.”
Dushashana looked ashamed as his elder brother went on. “We must quickly
execute our plan to capture Kåñëa. Even as Viñëu seized Bali we will grab Kåñëa
and bind Him. When the Päëòavas hear of His capture, they will lose both
heart and energy for the fight, just like serpents whose fangs are broken. Let us
do it swiftly before the old man gives everything away again.”
Dushashana and Çakuni agreed, but Karëa was uncertain. “I do not believe we
will be able to capture Keçava, O King. If you wish to try, I will do what I can
to help, but I doubt we can overcome Him.”
476

Unlike Duryodhana, Karëa felt no anger toward Kåñëa, whom he respected as
a great warrior. Kåñëa had killed many powerful fighters. According to the åñis
He was an incarnation of the original Supreme Person. Karëa thought it likely.
He only joined in the plot to capture Kåñëa out of friendship for Duryodhana.
But he had little faith it would succeed.
Duryodhana laughed away his friend’s doubts. “Kåñëa will be unprepared for
our move. He has come without weapons and not expecting to fight. We can
catch Him off guard and have Him bound and taken away before He even
realizes what is happening.”
The prince had no doubts about his plan. Perhaps it may fail, but there was
nothing to lose. He had already declared open hostility against the Päëòavas.
The fight may as well start immediately; and if Kåñëa could be captured, then
the odds would shift dramatically in his favor. With the still uncertain Karëa,
he left to make the arrangements.
***
In the hall Sätyaki had watched Duryodhana closely. He noted that as the
prince left, certain key Kuru leaders had also departed. It was obvious that
Duryodhana was about to try something. Sätyaki knew that he had already
stated his intention to capture Kåñëa. It seemed he was about to try.
Leaning across to Kåñëa, Sätyaki whispered, “I think Duryodhana will now try
to seize You. He has taken a contingent of warriors out of the hall with him. I
am sure he will try to take Your life. O Keçava, this wicked man has lost all
sense of propriety.”
Kåñëa smiled and reassured Sätyaki. “Do not fear, My friend. All the kings on
earth together could not capture Me. Speak to Dhåtaräñöra and see what he
decides should be done.”
Sätyaki addressed the old king. “It seems your foolish son intends to make good
his threat to capture Mädhava. O leader of men, he and his evil counselors,
overpowered by desire and anger, seek to do something exceedingly mean. Yet
they cannot possibly succeed any more than children can take hold of blazing
fire.”
Vidura had also noted Duryodhana’s intentions. Rising from his seat he said,
“O King, your sons’ time has come. They are preparing to do something which
cannot be done. Even so, it is sinful beyond all limits to even contemplate it.
Standing against Kåñëa, they will die like worms falling into a fire. He will send
477

them all to Yamaräja’s abode as a lion destroys a flock of sheep.”
Kåñëa laughed. “Let them try! Maybe this is how this problem will be solved.
But do not worry. I will not do anything for which I can be censured. Although
I could slay them all outright, I will not do so. In any event, they have already
been killed by their own sinful desires. By coveting Yudhiñöhira’s wealth they
have weakened themselves and will soon be ruined. O King, let Duryodhana do
as he likes.”
When Kåñëa stopped speaking, Dhåtaräñöra’s voice boomed through the court.
“Bring my wicked son here at once and bring his ministers with him. I will
again try to bring him to the path of righteousness.”
Once again Duryodhana was brought back into the hall. He entered with
Karëa and Dushashana just behind him. Again he strode across the hall and
took his place.
Dhåtaräñöra was angry. “O you of inhuman conduct and extreme sinfulness,
having as your support only men of small deeds, you want to perpetrate an act
which is too difficult to accomplish and which is heinous beyond limit. Like a
child wanting to hold the moon, you desire to capture the lotus-eyed Kåñëa. All
virtuous men would condemn you. Anyway, it is not possible for you to carry
this through. Even the gods could not take Keçava prisoner. O fool, give up
your absurd notions and come to your senses immediately.”
Duryodhana was seething with anger. He said nothing. He had already ordered
his men to come into the hall as soon as Kåñëa rose to leave. Everyone else may
be afraid of the Yädava, but he was not. The prince glanced across at Kåñëa,
who sat smiling and at ease. Soon everyone would see just how strong He was.
Vidura, clearly remembering how the Kurus had violated Draupadé, could not
stand the thought of Kåñëa receiving similar treatment in the same hall. He
spoke again, trying one last time to influence Duryodhana.
“O Bharata, listen as I remind you once more of the many demons who have
tried and failed to overpower Kåñëa. The hugely powerful Naraka, who was son
of the Earth goddess herself, lived for thousands of years surrounded by his vast
forces. Kåñëa killed him easily. He also destroyed the five-headed Mura, who
struck fear into the hearts of the gods. When He was a child He killed Pütanä
and the evil wizards Arishta and Dhenuka. When He was seven years old He
held Govardhana Hill aloft with one hand.”
Vidura named various other Asuras and kings whom Kåñëa had defeated.
Finally, he said, “Kåñëa is the doer of everything. He is the cause of all causes.
478

From Him comes all power and opulence. He can do anything without the least
effort. O Duryodhana, you do not understand Govinda. His prowess is
incomparable and it will reduce you and your followers to ashes. Attempting to
take Him prisoner is ludicrous.”
Kåñëa looked at Duryodhana. “O Kaurava, out of folly you think Me to be
alone and vulnerable. O one of small intellect, see now as I show you the truth.
Here are all the Päëòavas, the Vrishnis, and the Andhakas. Here too are the
gods, the Adityas, Rudras, Vasus, and great åñis.”
Duryodhana could take no more. He jumped up and pointed at Kåñëa. “Seize
Him now!” At once his soldiers began running into the hall from all its
entrances. With swords and bows at the ready they closed in on Kåñëa.
Kåñëa laughed and as He did, His body suddenly flashed like lightning. He
began to grow in size and various gods issued from Him. Brahmä sprang from
His forehead and Çiva from His chest. The Lokapälas sat on His arms and Agni
appeared from His mouth. Then Indra and the Maruts appeared along with
hosts of Gandharvas, Yakñas and Räkñasas. From His two eyes came Balaräma
and Arjuna, who stood on His left and right sides. Behind Him stood
Yudhiñöhira, Bhéma, and the twins, and behind them were the Vrishnis and
Andhakas, headed by Pradyumna. Kåñëa’s mace, discus and club weapons
appeared, blazing brilliantly. His pores emanated light, sparks and clouds of
smoke.
The sight was too frightening. Almost everyone in the assembly closed their
eyes. Only Bhéñma, Droëa, Vidura and Saïjaya were able to look upon Kåñëa as
He manifested His universal form. The åñis also gazed upon Him, folding their
palms and offering prayers. The sky resounded with celestial drums and flowers
showered from the heavens into the hall.
Saïjaya described the event to Dhåtaräñöra, who said, “O Kåñëa, You are ever
doing good for the world. Therefore, it is right that You should bless me with
the eyes to see Your form. O best of the Yädavas, I pray for the sight to see
You.”
“O Kuru leader, let your eyes have sight,” Kåñëa replied, and immediately
Dhåtaräñöra could see Him standing within the great hall. He also saw
numerous gods approaching Kåñëa and worshipping Him with Vedic mantras.
Outside the hall a fierce wind blew. Huge waves moved over the ocean and
thunderclaps reverberated in the sky. The earth trembled.
The hall was in a tumult. Kåñëa withdrew His mystical form and again assumed
479

a two-armed form. Taking permission from the åñis, He left the hall, holding
the hands of Sätyaki and Kåtavarmä. The åñis, headed by Närada, rose from
their seats and vanished––their minds astonished. Dhåtaräñöra again became
blind and he sat in silent amazement.
As Kåñëa left, the Kurus followed Him with folded hands, like the gods
following Indra. Only Duryodhana and his ministers remained seated. They
were struck with wonder and unable to do or say anything. Their plan to
capture Kåñëa was obviously futile.
Outside the hall all the natural disturbances had stopped and a gentle breeze
was blowing. Kåñëa mounted His chariot and prepared to leave. As He sat upon
His golden car, spread with white tiger skins, Dhåtaräñöra came out of the hall.
Led by Vidura, he went up to Kåñëa and said, “You have seen the influence I
wield over my sons, O Janärdana. You have seen everything. Nothing has been
hidden from You. It is not proper to blame me, O Keçava, for I desire only
peace. I have no wicked intentions against the Päëòavas. You have heard me
speak to Duryodhana and seen his response. I have done my best.”
Dhåtaräñöra was surrounded by the Kuru elders. Kåñëa looked at all of them
and said, “You have also witnessed everything, how that uncultured man
walked out, even as he was receiving instructions meant for his good. You have
also heard the ruler of the earth state that he is powerless. With your
permission, I will now return to Yudhiñöhira.”
Kåñëa sat down with Sätyaki and Kåtavarmä on either side of Him. Däruka
urged on the horses and the chariot moved off. The Kurus watched it move
along the broad highway, cheered on all sides by crowds of citizens. Kåñëa
ordered Däruka to take Him back to Vidura’s house. He wanted to speak once
more to Kunté before He left for Virata.
Going before His aunt with Sätyaki, Kåñëa touched her feet and told her what
had transpired in the assembly. Kunté was not surprised. She had not expected
Duryodhana to listen. Fearing that Yudhiñöhira might be too forgiving, she
asked Kåñëa to exhort him to fight. She knew he would be loathe to fight with
his kinsmen and elders only to win a kingdom. As a kñatriya princess, Kunté
had been educated in the rules of conduct for warriors. She spoke for some
time with Kåñëa, citing the rules and making it clear that the proper course for
Yudhiñöhira was war. Her sons should harbor no doubt about it.
Again reminding Kåñëa of the prophetic voices which had foretold great things
for her sons at their births, Kunté said, “Let it be as the divine oracles
480

predicted. O Kåñëa, my sons must now fulfill their destiny and take control of
this earth. They will not achieve it through peaceful means. Nor can
Draupadé’s honor be restored unless my sons fight. For me this is the most
compelling reason for war. They must avenge their wife. They have not freed
themselves of that obligation. They failed to protect her in the vicious
assembly at the dice game. They must now rectify this wrong.”
Kunté bowed down and touched Kåñëa’s feet with her hands. Standing again
she concluded, “O Keçava, tell my sons that I am well. Go now on Your
auspicious way.”
Kåñëa stood up to leave. After walking respectfully around His aunt He bid her
farewell and left the room. Outside, He found Bhéñma and the other Kuru
leaders waiting to see Him off. Kåñëa bowed before them, exchanged farewells,
and mounted His chariot with Sätyaki. Then He headed out of Hastinäpura.
The Kurus watched as the chariot sped toward the city’s southern gate. Urged
on by Däruka, Kåñëa’s horses seemed to leap into the sky again and again. In a
short time He was out of sight. The Kuru chiefs turned and headed toward the
king’s palace. Kåñëa’s peace mission had failed. War was certain.

Chapter 48
To Kurukñetra
Early on the morning of Kåñëa’s departure, Karëa rose to perform his usual
worship of the sun-god. Since childhood he had been attracted to the sun-god
and had never missed his rituals and prayers. An hour before sunrise he
mounted his chariot and went to the Ganges, accompanied by numerous
Brahmins. Wearing only a loin cloth he waded into the shallows and faced
east, chanting Vedic hymns. On the river bank the Brahmins lit a sacred fire
and made offerings to Sürya on his behalf.
It was well known that Karëa would offer charity to anyone who approached
him after his worship. His vow to give anything to any petitioner was famous.
Indra had already taken advantage of the vow and divested him of his natural
armor.
Now Kunté approached him. The first time she saw the youthful Karëa enter
481

the arena of Droëa’s martial exhibition she knew he was her son. She also
knew he was ignorant of the fact. It was painful to see him rivaling constantly
with his brothers. She was mortified at the thought that they would soon try to
kill each other in battle. It was time to tell Karëa the truth. Perhaps he could
be convinced to join his brothers’ side.
Just as the sun rose, Kunté made her way alone to the Ganges. As she
approached the riverside she heard Karëa reciting prayers aloud. She looked at
him as a mother looks at her son. He stood facing the sun, his arms held over
his head and his hands joined together in prayer, a position he would maintain
until the sun had risen high into the sky. Kunté sat on the river bank and
waited for Karëa to finish. It was summer and the thin silk cloth covering her
head provided little protection from the heat. After she had waited for more
than two hours, Karëa finally completed his worship and turned around. He
was surprised to see Kunté before him, but he said, “You are most welcome,
noble lady. I am Karëa, the son of Adhiratha and Rädhä. I salute you with all
respect. Tell me what I can do for you today?”
Kunté rose and went toward Karëa with faltering steps. He had now stepped
from the river and stood dripping. As the Kuru queen approached him he saw
that her beautiful features appeared drawn. Her eyes darted nervously from
him to the ground. Clasping her hands together, she softly addressed him. “O
my child, you are not the son of Rädhä and Adhiratha.”
Her voice quavered and she paused to gain her composure. “Dear child, you
were not born a suta. Know that you are my son, conceived by the powerful
Sürya. When you were born, you blazed like your father, and you wore a
natural coat of armor and shining earrings. Out of fear for my reputation, and
my father’s, since I was still considered a maiden, I cast you away, stricken with
grief.”
Tears flooded Kunté’s eyes. It always cut her heart to think of how she had
abandoned Karëa at birth, but there had been no question of telling anyone
about it, even when he arrived at the arena that day. She had been gratified to
know that Adhiratha and his wife had at least cared for her son, and she
thought there would be no need to reveal the truth. Now he was about to die.
She had to try to save him. If he did not die, he would kill Arjuna, and Kunté
could not bear losing either son.
She looked into Karëa’s wide unbelieving eyes. “Not knowing of your birth,
you have not realized that the Päëòavas are actually your brothers. You now
482

serve Duryodhana. This is not proper, my son. You are being led by avaricious
and deceitful men who have stolen Yudhiñöhira’s kingdom. You will be ruined
if you continue to follow them. Instead, follow the virtuous path and join your
brothers.”
Karëa pressed his two strong hands to the sides of his head, as if to contain the
raging confusion that Kunté’s words had created. How could it be true? If she
had always known that he was the Päëòavas’ brother, then why had she not
said so sooner? Was this just some ploy to discourage him from fighting with
the Päëòavas? That seemed unlikely. Kunté was famous for her virtue and
truth. Her words must be true. As they sank in, Karëa felt rooted to the spot
where he stood. He was too amazed to speak
Kunté wiped her eyes and glanced up at the sun. Why had that blazing deity
put her through such pain? It had been an extremely difficult decision for her
to reveal the truth to her first-born son. She loved Karëa, but he would surely
find that impossible to accept. Whenever she had contemplated telling him,
the fear of his reaction had stopped her. Would he reject her out of hand, just
as she had rejected him? Now it no longer mattered. She was willing to risk his
rejection and anger if it meant saving his life.
“Let the Kurus see you join with Arjuna. When brotherly feelings are
established between you, the Kauravas will bow before you in fear and respect.
You and Arjuna, united like Balaräma and Janärdana––what will you not
achieve? O Karëa, surrounded by your five brothers you will shine like Brahmä
amid the gods. You are my eldest son. Child, do not call yourself a suta again.”
When Kunté had finished, Karëa heard a voice coming from the sun: “O
Karëa, Kunté speaks the truth. Follow her advice, for that will be in your best
interests.”
Karëa was convinced. He was Kunté’s son and Yudhiñöhira’s elder brother.
Suddenly it all made sense. Adhiratha had told him how many years ago he
had found him floating in a basket in the Ganges. Adhiratha said that he had
shone like a celestial, and he had thought the gods had sent him a child to
fulfill some divine purpose. He had brought the child home and raised him
with love. Later, when Karëa learned from the sun-god that his natural armor
was celestial, he had realized that Adhiratha was probably right––he must have
been conceived by some powerful deity. But he had never guessed the truth.
Karëa’s voice rose above the rushing sound of the river. “I do not doubt your
words, lady, but I cannot respect them. I do not see what virtue would lie in my
483

joining with the Päëòavas, nor do I feel that you were virtuous to have
abandoned me at birth. By doing so, you have destroyed my fame and renown. I
have been labeled a suta and denied the rites of a kñatriya, which were
rightfully mine. What enemy could possibly have done me greater harm?”
Karëa dropped to his knees, clenching his eyes and fists. He threw his head
back toward the sun. Hot tears wetted his face, contorted with grief and anger.
He had often wondered about the identity of his real mother, longing to one
day meet her. Now here she stood. Kunté. The Kuru queen and mother of his
hated enemies. But his own mother nevertheless. Feelings of love welled up in
Karëa’s heart, but he fought to deny them. Even in spite of Sürya’s words, it
was hard to accept that she had his interests in mind. Nor did he like the idea
of leaving Duryodhana at his most dire hour of need. Unlike Kunté, the
Kaurava prince had shown him real love and friendship from the very
beginning. How could he now suddenly abandon him and switch his affections
to the Päëòavas?
Karëa’s words grew sharper. “I cannot accept that you are my well-wisher. You
did not show me mercy at the proper time, and have come to me now only to
fulfill your own needs. I cannot do as you suggest. If on the eve of battle I leave
Duryodhana to join with the Päëòavas, then who will not call me a coward?
The Kauravas have granted all my desires. They have worshipped me. What
kind of man would I be to leave them now? They depend on me as men on the
sea depend on their boat. Now I must show my gratitude to Dhåtaräñöra’s sons.”
Karëa remembered his impulsive vow to Bhéñma in the Kuru assembly. He felt
guilty that he had abandoned Duryodhana even that much. Now he could not
fight until Bhéñma was slain. It was prophesied that Shikhandi would kill
Bhéñma. Then Duryodhana would need Karëa more than ever. There was no
question of leaving him now.
“I cannot prove untrue to my lord now. I will not abandon him. Yet your
appeal will not go in vain. With the exception of Arjuna, I will not kill any of
your sons in battle, even if I overpower them. When I kill Arjuna I will become
famous for my prowess. Even if he kills me, I will still earn world renown. Thus
you will always have five sons, O princess. Either Arjuna or I will survive, but
not both.”
Kunté stepped toward him and held out her arms with tears streaming down
her face. Despite himself, Karëa felt his powerful arms reach out to envelop
Kunté as if of their own accord. As mother and son stood embracing for the
484

first time in their lives, Kunté sorrowfully said, “O child, destiny is most
powerful. What you say will surely happen. The Kurus will be destroyed and I
will lose either you or Arjuna, if not more of my sons. When it is time to hurl
weapons, do not forget your promise. May you be blessed and may all be well
with you. I am leaving.”
Kunté stood back and looked at her first-born son one last time. Then she
hurried back toward the city. Karëa climbed onto his chariot and sat there
unmoving for some time. Kunté’s words repeated themselves in his mind again
and again. How different things might have been if she had kept him as her
son. But destiny had decreed a different path for him. His fate now lay with
Duryodhana and the Kauravas. There was no use lamenting for what might
have been. Karëa resolved not to reveal to anyone what had transpired
between himself and Kunté. It would only confuse the issue, and make his own
vows impossible to follow. With a troubled heart he set off toward the city.
***
Before leaving, Kåñëa asked to speak privately with Karëa. As He reached
Hastinäpura’s southern gate at around noon, He saw Karëa waiting for Him.
Kåñëa stopped and asked Karëa to mount His chariot with Him. He took Karëa
out of the city, speaking as they rode in the direction of Virata. Kåñëa
considered Karëa the most serious threat to the Päëòavas in the coming war.
Karëa’s charioteer drove his car behind Kåñëa with Sätyaki, who had
dismounted from Kåñëa’s chariot to give Him the privacy He desired with
Karëa.
Placing His hand on Karëa’s shoulder, Kåñëa said, “According to scripture the
child born of a mother before her marriage becomes her husband’s son. You
were born before your mother’s marriage, Karëa, and are therefore Päëòu’s
son. The Päëòavas are on your father’s side, and the Vrishni’s on your
mother’s. You are related to both these races, O best of men. O hero, come
with Me and become the king. The Päëòavas will worship you as their elder
brother, as I will, and all their followers. You will be anointed by the wives and
daughters of kings with water from golden pots. At the proper time, Draupadé
will approach you as a wife does her husband. Your five brothers will follow
behind you, even as the gods follow Indra. I too shall follow you, accompanied
by the Andhakas and the Vrishnis. Rule over this earth, O Karëa. Let the
bards and chanters sing your praises. Delight Kunté’s heart and take your
485

rightful place at the head of her sons.”
Karëa looked into Kåñëa’s smiling face. Surely He knew everything, as the
sages said, but it was difficult to accept His advice.
Karëa shook his head. “Undoubtedly Your words are meant for my good, O
Keçava. I now know that I am Päëòu’s son. Kunté has told me everything. But
she abandoned me and I was raised by Adhiratha and his wife. They have
loved me as parents, and have always seen me as their son. So too have I seen
them as my parents. They performed all the necessary rituals in my life. After
adopting me they later had more children, to whom I have become an elder
brother. They even selected my wives, and I have conceived sons and
daughters with those wives. I cannot break those relationships even to gain
both heaven and earth. Nor, O Mädhava, shall I break them out of fear.”
Karëa felt righteous. Following Kåñëa’s advice would mean transgressing
proper behavior. He gazed ahead at the rolling countryside as he continued.
“For thirteen years I have enjoyed sovereignty only due to Duryodhana’s favor.
I owe him a lot. Depending on me, he has formed an enmity with the
Päëòavas. I have been chosen to face Arjuna in combat. If I back down now,
then I will become infamous. O Keçava, I cannot let myself be labeled as a
coward, nor can I prove myself disloyal to Duryodhana. If I were given the
world to rule, I would immediately give it to Duryodhana. How could I live
with the Päëòavas after all that he has done for me?”
Karëa reflected on his feelings towards the Päëòavas. He respected
Yudhiñöhira, Bhéma, and even the twins. His hatred for Arjuna owed its origins
to the day he had been refused entry into Droëa’s school. When he came again
to Hastinäpura to compete in the exhibition, Droëa had not recognized him as
the boy he had turned away years earlier. He had told him then that he only
accepted royal princes in his school. Karëa was a charioteer’s son. Burning
with shame, he had gone away, vowing vengeance. Defeating Droëa’s best
student, Arjuna, would be the best way to exact that revenge. As soon as he
had seen Arjuna in the arena his heart had filled with envy. That envy had
not waned. Soon it would explode in a fight to the death. There was no other
course for him now.
“O Kåñëa, I do not hold much hope for our victory, but I shall not change sides
now. I know Yudhiñöhira is virtuous and pure-minded. He will preside over the
coming battle sacrifice in which Dhåtaräñöra’s sons will be the sacrificial
animals. The Päëòavas are pious men who deserve to rule the earth. The harsh
486

words I spoke to them and their wife previously were only for Duryodhana’s
pleasure. Remembering them now I am filled with remorse.
“Still, I will fight Arjuna, O Keçava; that is my duty as a moral man and a
kñatriya. It is likely that I will die, because I do not see the Kauravas winning.
This dispute will end when Arjuna kills me and Bhéma kills Duryodhana. This
battle will be so great that it will be remembered as long as the mountains
stand. It cannot be stopped.”
Kåñëa laughed. “Do you not then desire to rule the earth, O hero? Will you not
peacefully accept the kingdom in the way I have indicated? Without doubt, the
Päëòavas’ victory will soon follow. When you see the five brothers coming out
for battle, know that the terrible Kali age is approaching. Many men will be
destroyed. Go back to Hastinäpura and tell Droëa and Kåpa to make ready. It
will be the full moon in seven days. Let the battle begin on that day. The kings
under Duryodhana’s leadership will soon meet an excellent death at the edge
of weapons.”
Karëa could not understand Kåñëa’s purpose. Why was He asking him to defect
now? He knew that ultimately it would make little difference to the outcome of
the battle. Destiny had, it seemed, already determined everything.
Karëa looked at Kåñëa, who sat with His long, black hair flowing in the wind.
“Why do You confound me, O Keçava? Why would You lead me to folly? You
know everything. The destruction of the world is at hand, with Duryodhana,
Çakuni, Dushashana, and myself as its root cause. It will be as You say and no
other way. O Kåñëa, we have already seen the omens which portend
Duryodhana’s defeat. I even saw the Päëòavas in a dream coming out of the
fight successful. I saw Yudhiñöhira, clad in white silks, swallowing the earth. He
and his brothers ascended a palace of a thousand pillars. You were also there, O
Mädhava, by Arjuna’s side. On the other hand, the Kauravas and all their
followers, wearing blood-colored robes, were going south toward Yamaräja’s
abode. I and countless other warriors will soon enter the Gäëòéva fire. I know
it for certain.”
Kåñëa looked sadly toward Karëa. “This will surely come to pass, Karëa, since
you do not seem prepared to accept My advice. When destruction is at hand,
My dear friend, wrong appears as right and remains in the heart. What more
can I say?”
Karëa bowed his head slightly. “If I somehow survive the battle, I will see You
again, O Kåñëa. Otherwise, we will meet in heaven. It now seems to me that I
487

will see You only there, O sinless one.”
Kåñëa had Däruka pull up His chariot. He embraced Karëa, who then jumped
down and mounted his own chariot. Kåñëa, joined again by Sätyaki, urged on
His charioteer and sped away. Karëa headed sorrowfully back toward
Hastinäpura. Soon he would have to wage war against his own brothers. And
against Kåñëa, who was clearly his well-wisher, even if His advice was hard to
follow. Thinking still of Kunté’s words, and of his conversation with Kåñëa,
Karëa’s mind felt heavy. It seemed he was not destined to enjoy happiness and
prosperity in this life.
***
Soon after Kåñëa left Hastinäpura, Dhåtaräñöra decided to call one last council
to discuss strategy. War was now unavoidable, but the blind king was anxious.
Having seen Kåñëa’s universal form, he was filled with apprehension. Surely no
human could contend with such power. Perhaps there was still a possibility to
make a last-minute agreement. The king looked at his counselors. “O learned
men, we have all heard Kåñëa’s speech, and we have seen His superhuman
power. The Lord of all the worlds will now ride into battle with the Päëòavas,
whom we have made our enemies. My son has insulted them. Now He has left
us in anger. Surely we now face the greatest danger. Tell me what can be done
to avert disaster.”
Bhéñma shook his head. “Our fate is sealed, O King. We have abused Keçava,
who is worthy of even the gods’ worship. There is no more fortune for us. We
will have to take up arms in a contest that will divest the earth of innumerable
heroes. What need is there for further discussion? It only remains for us to
make arrangements for the war.”
Droëa and Kåpa agreed with Bhéñma, and Duryodhana smiled. The moment he
had been waiting for was near. Now there would be no more moralizing and
useless talk. It should have been obvious to everyone from the start that the
only way to deal with the Päëòavas was on a battlefield. Kåñëa had shown
supernatural power. So what? He was not even going to fight. In any event,
there were many heroes on the Kaurava side who were masters of mystical
weapons. He was not afraid.
Vidura saw Duryodhana’s smirk and felt unable to constrain himself. He leapt
to his feet and glared at the prince. He could not forgive him for insulting
Kåñëa. “You must now return Yudhiñöhira’s legitimate share of the kingdom.
488

Yudhiñöhira has no enemies and he has been more than forbearing. He is
waiting with his younger brothers, among whom is the revengeful Bhéma,
breathing like a snake. Surely you are afraid of him.”
Duryodhana looked angrily at his uncle. Vidura continued, “Lord Kåñëa, the
Supreme Lord, has accepted Kunté’s sons as kinsmen. He lives in Dwärakä with
the Yadu kings and princes, who have conquered unlimited rulers, and He is
their Lord. Surely you fear Him.”
Vidura turned to the king. “O ruler of the earth, by your inaction you are
supporting offense personified, Duryodhana, as your cherished son. But he is
envious of Kåñëa. Because of this, you are devoid of all auspicious qualities.
Relieve yourself of this ill fortune as soon as possible by punishing him and
thus do your whole family good! Otherwise, we are all doomed.”
Duryodhana could take no more. From his childhood he had seen his uncle
favor the Päëòavas. It seemed he had no affection for him and his brothers.
Now he had gone too far. Duryodhana leapt up, his body swelling with rage, his
lips trembling.
“Who asked him to come here, this son of a maidservant? The deceitful
Khattwa is no friend of the Kurus. He is so crooked that he works secretly in
the interest of the enemy, plotting against those who have supported him. Toss
him out of the palace and leave him with only his breath!”
Dhåtaräñöra was shocked at his son’s outburst. He raised a hand to silence him,
but Vidura smiled and rose to his feet. Without saying anything, he lifted his
bow, which he had never drawn in anger, and walked toward the door. He had
been wondering how he would avoid having to fight against the Päëòavas.
Here was his opportunity. Leaning his bow against the door to signify that he
would not fight for the Kurus, he walked out of the hall and headed toward the
city’s northern gate and the åñis’ ashrams. His mind was fixed on holy
pilgrimage.
The other Kuru elders censured Duryodhana, who merely laughed. Dhåtaräñöra
then ended the assembly. It was time to prepare for war.
***
When Kåñëa returned to Virata, Yudhiñöhira and his brothers greeted Him
warmly. Kåñëa then described everything that had transpired in Hastinäpura,
except for the private discussion with Karëa. Kåñëa knew that if Yudhiñöhira
were informed of Karëa’s actual identity, he would not fight with him. It had
489

to remain a secret for the time being.
The Päëòavas were not surprised at the description of Duryodhana’s refusal to
accept good advice. They were not even surprised to hear how he had
repeatedly stormed out of the court like an angry child.
Sitting amid the Päëòavas and surrounded by other monarchs, Kåñëa said, “I
employed every means of diplomacy, from conciliation to the creation of
disunion. I told them that you would abandon pride and become Dhåtaräñöra’s
servants if the Kurus made peace with you. They could keep the kingdom and
give you but five villages. When they still refused, I resorted to threats and
displaying My superhuman powers. I tried to frighten Duryodhana, but he
remained fixed in his foolishness. He would not offer you any part of the
kingdom. Therefore, there is only the fourth means of diplomacy left. You
must punish them. That is all they will understand. You will not regain your
kingdom without war, O great heroes. Already Duryodhana’s forces are making
their way to Kurukñetra, for they have selected that place for the battle. The
kings will all be massacred. They are all within the pale of death.”
Yudhiñöhira was grave. He looked around at his brothers and the assembled
kings. “O heroes, you have heard Kåñëa’s words. All that is left is to prepare our
armies for war. The time has come to select a general to command our forces.
We have already made seven warriors leaders of our divisions: Drupada, Virata,
Dåñöadyumna, Çikhaëòé, Sätyaki, Chekitana and Bhémasena. Which of these
should take overall command? Sahadeva, what is your opinion?”
Yudhiñöhira looked at his younger brother. As was the custom, he wanted to
hear individual opinions, starting with the youngest and ending with the eldest
among them. Sahadeva replied, “I think we should select Virata. He is bound to
us by family ties; he is a ruler endowed with prowess and conversant with
virtue. The mighty Matsya king is difficult to vanquish in battle. We have long
depended upon him and can do so again in the upcoming battle.”
Yudhiñöhira turned toward Nakula, who said, “That one who in maturity,
knowledge of scripture, patience, nobility of birth, and respectability is the best
of all; he who is ever devoted to truth; who has learned the science of weapons
from Bharadväja; who challenges Droëa and who has performed austerities to
bring about his destruction; that monarch who stands surrounded by his sons
and grandsons like a tree with a hundred branches––the mighty Drupada
should stand at the head of our army.”
Then it was Arjuna’s turn. His voice rang out. “He who by virtue of his
490

austerities and his gratification of the åñis came out of the blazing fire armed
with weapons and adorned with golden armor; he who himself resembled the
fire and who then ascended a celestial chariot and went about roaring like a
cloud; he who possesses the strength of lions and is capable of slaying a lion
because he has the heart, chest and shoulders of a lion; he who shines like the
sun and is beautiful to behold; he who speaks the truth and has controlled his
senses; he who was born for Droëa’s death––Dåñöadyumna should lead our
forces. No one can pierce him with weapons and he will be able to withstand
Bhéñma, whose arrows fall like thunderbolts or like Yamaräja’s messengers. I do
not see another who can stand against Bhéñma except Dåñöadyumna. Therefore,
let him be our commander!”
Bhéma said, “We should be led by Çikhaëòé. He was born for Bhéñma’s
destruction, as the åñis have told us. When he stands ready for battle,
displaying his celestial missiles, he resembles the great Paraçuräma. In my view,
the man has not been born who can overcome him when he mounts his
chariot, clad in mail and lifting his weapons. Only he will be able to slay
Bhéñma.”
Having heard from all his brothers, Yudhiñöhira said, “Keçava alone knows the
truth and untruth of all things, and their strength, weakness and other
inherent qualities. He whom Kåñëa, lord of the Dasarha race, names will be our
commander and no other. Kåñëa is the root of our victory or defeat. On Him
depend our lives, kingdom, success, happiness and misery. My dear brothers,
Keçava is the Lord and ordainer of all things. Let Him speak and let us abide by
His decision. It is almost night. When He has named our commander, let us
rest. In the morning, after worshipping our weapons and the Brahmins, we will
march to Kurukñetra.”
Kåñëa said, “Any of the heroes named are capable of leading our army. All of
them are competent and can inspire fear even in Indra––what to speak of
Dhåtaräñöra’s sons. Although weak due to their sinfulness, Duryodhana and his
brothers consider themselves strong. Duryodhana’s attitude will soon change
when he sees the mood of Arjuna, Bhéma, and the twins. When Abhimanyu
and Draupadé’s sons, along with Drupada, Virata, and all the other chiefs come
out for battle, Duryodhana and his brothers will repent their folly. I have
endeavored to secure peace, and thus we have paid our debt to virtue. We
cannot be blamed for what is about to happen. It is time for war. As far as
leading our army is concerned, I agree with Dhanaïjaya. Let the mighty
491

Dåñöadyumna become the general.”
When Kåñëa was finished speaking, the assembled kings and kñatriyas shouted
their agreement. They were enlivened at the prospect of a fight. None of them
hesitated to accept Kåñëa’s choice of a general. Then they all retired for the
night. The next day they would march toward Kurukñetra, a journey of six or
seven days.
***
As the sun rose over Virata, the air was filled with the clamor of men and
animals. Warriors rushed about in all directions, and shouts of “Yoke up!” and
“Load the weapons!” were heard everywhere. Numerous conches were sounded,
firing the men with enthusiasm, and Brahmins chanted auspicious hymns to
invoke good fortune for the army. Elephants trumpeted and chariot wheels
rattled. Drummers beat drums as the huge army began the trek to Kurukñetra.
In front of the army marched Bhéma and Mädré’s two sons, clad in shining
mail. Behind them came Dåñöadyumna, surrounded by Draupadé’s sons and
Abhimanyu.
The soldiers were cheerful, and they shouted with joy. Yudhiñöhira rode in
their midst. He was mounted on a golden chariot and dressed in golden armor.
He held his great spear. By his side rode Arjuna, with Kåñëa as his charioteer.
On numerous chariots around Yudhiñöhira, his treasury was carried, along with
the servants and attendants of the army. Behind the army came a long line of
supply chariots holding provisions, spare weapons, and other goods. Thousands
of physicians and surgeons were also in attendance.
As the army traveled, the Päëòavas arranged for charity to be distributed to
Brahmins along the way. They passed near many villages and colonies, but they
carefully avoided temples and hermitages so as not to defile any holy places
and thus bring misfortune upon the army. Brahmins continuously recited
Vedic mantras along the length of the procession of millions of men.
Stopping each night at sunset and camping wherever they were, they went by
slow marches. On the sixth night they reached Kurukñetra, where they camped
around lake Hiranvati. In the center of the encampment servants erected a
large tent for the Päëòavas. This tent would also serve as the battle
headquarters. Surrounding it, Kåñëa, Dåñöadyumna, Drupada, Virata, and the
other army chiefs had tents erected. The provisions were also placed in wellguarded tents near the center. The armor, weapons and chariot parts placed in
492

piles resembled large hills, as did the heaps of grains, ghee, honey and other
foodstuffs.
Many thousands of elephants had been assembled, looking like moving
mountains and wearing coats of steel covered with spikes. There were also
fighting machines of all types which were capable of throwing rocks, iron
pellets, burning oil, lances, and red-hot iron shot.
After conferring with Kåñëa, Dåñöadyumna, and his own brothers, Yudhiñöhira
had the army settle to await the commencement of battle. Some miles away
they could hear the Kaurava forces rumbling like thunder in the distance. All
that was required now was a meeting between the leaders of both armies in
order to agree on a day for the fighting to begin.
***
When Kåñëa had left Hastinäpura, Duryodhana went to his counselors and
said, “Having thwarted our attempts to capture Him, Kåñëa has gone back to
the Päëòavas. Without doubt, He will be angry with us and will incite the
Päëòavas to fight to their full power. There will be a battle which will make
our hair stand on end. We should not lose time in arranging our forces. Have
them proceed at once to Kurukñetra. Let the road between here and there be
leveled and cleared. We ourselves should prepare to depart.”
The ministers, headed by Karëa, Çakuni and Dushashana, got up from their
seats and put on fine headdresses. Happy at the prospect of a battle, they
slapped their arms and laughed. They brought out their weapons and had them
loaded onto their chariots. The entire city of Hastinäpura was filled with the
commotion of men preparing for battle. The city resembled an ocean with cars,
elephants and horses for its waves, and gleaming weapons for its foam. Drum
beats and conch blasts were the ocean’s roar, and the city’s palaces were the
mountains along its shore.
Duryodhana rejoiced at the sights and sounds coming from his army. He
personally oversaw the loading of weapons onto thousands of chariots. As well
as bows, arrows, axes, spears, clubs, maces and spiked bludgeons, there were
massive pots of molasses and sand, which would be heated and then hurled at
the enemy. There were large baskets full of poisonous snakes. Devices for
throwing every kind of missile were loaded by the thousands. Chariots were
filled with bullets, bombs and other explosive weapons. The sight of all the
weapons and missiles cheered the heroes and frightened the weak-hearted.
493

The warriors gathered, wearing glittering robes embroidered with gold and
adorned with gems. Powerful men clad in mail and masters in the use of
weapons were appointed charioteers for more powerful fighters. The chariots
were equipped with every kind of weapon, as well as drugs and herbs for curing
wounds. Each chariot was drawn by four horses with bells and pearls strung
around their necks. Tall standards had flags attached to them, and on the
chariot turrets were ornaments, shields and swords, their blades pointing
outwards. They looked like moving fortresses and were difficult to approach.
The great war elephants were decked in armor decorated with jewels and
wreaths of pearls. Seven men rode on the back of each––two who were expert
bowmen, two swordsmen, two bearing hooks and one armed with lance and
trident. The elephants rocked as they moved. Following them were thousands
of horsemen, clad in mail and ornaments and holding up flags. The horses were
the best of their species, all under full control and free from the habit of
scratching the ground with their forefeet. Behind the horsemen came even
more infantry, their polished armor shining in the sunlight. For every chariot
there were ten elephants; for every elephant, ten horsemen; and for every
horseman, ten foot soldiers.
As Duryodhana presided over his eleven akshauhinis, each containing over
twenty thousand elephants, his heart swelled with pride. Seeing the endless
procession of men he wondered how the Päëòavas would be able to even look
upon them. He selected first-class warriors to lead each subdivision, and as
leaders of the akshauhinis he appointed Kåpa, Droëa, Çalya, Jayadratha,
Sudakñiëa, Kambhoja, Kåtavarmä, Açvatthämä, Bhüriçravas, Çakuni and
Bählika.
When all the arrangements were under way, Duryodhana approached Bhéñma
and asked humbly, “Without a commander-in-chief, even a large army is
broken in battle like a swarm of ants. Division leaders seldom agree and are
usually jealous of one another. You surely know the story of how the kñatriyas
of the Haihaya race, although they were few, were able to defeat in battle the
Brahmins united with the vaiçyäs and çüdras. When the Brahmins asked the
kñatriyas why they were successful, they replied, ‘In battle we listen to the
commands of only the wisest person, but you were separated and followed your
individual whims.’ When they heard this, the Brahmins selected a suitable
leader and were victorious over the kñatriyas.
“We too need a leader. O Grandfather, you are equal to Shukra himself. You
494

always wish me well and always follow the path of righteousness. Therefore,
become my general. To the Kurus you are like the sun among luminous bodies,
Kuvera among the Yakñas, Indra among the gods, Meru among mountains, and
Garuòa among birds. If you protect us, not even the gods in heaven can assail
us. March at our front like Kärttikeya leading the celestials and we will follow
you like calves following a cow.”
The noble Bhéñma looked down at Duryodhana, who stood with his hands
clasped tightly. “It may be as you say, O ruler of men, but as you are to me, so
are the Päëòavas. It is equally my duty to look after them. Still, I will fight on
your behalf as I have promised.”
Bhéñma remembered long ago a vow he had made to his father to always protect
the king in Hastinäpura, even though he himself would never be monarch.
How could he have known it would come to this? Thus when Duryodhana had
approached him some months ago to secure his assistance in the war, he had
felt obliged to agree.
Looking across to the great throne in the hall, where his own father had once
sat, Bhéñma continued, “I do not see the warrior who can match my strength––
except Arjuna. He is possessed of wisdom and he knows the mantras for all the
celestial weapons. But he will not encounter me in an open fight. I can quickly
strip this world of men, gods and Asuras by the strength of my weapons. I will
slay ten thousand warriors a day. However, O King, I will not slay any of the
Päëòavas.”
Bhéñma added, “There is one other condition to my accepting leadership of the
army: either Karëa fights or I fight. The suta’s son and I cannot fight together.”
Karëa retorted, “I have already vowed that I will not fight while you are
fighting. When you have been slain, O son of Gaìgä, then I will fight with the
wielder of the Gäëòéva bow.”
Duryodhana gathered Brahmins and had them perform the rituals to install
Bhéñma as commander-in-chief. Hundreds of drums and conches were sounded
as his head was anointed with sacred water. The assembled warriors roared in
delight. With Bhéñma as commander, who could defeat them? He was capable
of annihilating armies single-handedly, and he could not be killed unless he
chose to die.
Outside the hall, however, frightful omens were seen as Bhéñma was installed.
Showers of blood fell from the sky and the earth shook. Fierce whirlwinds blew
and trees toppled to the ground. Incorporeal voices cried out, meteors shot
495

across the sky, and jackals howled. Afraid, Hastinäpura’s citizens made
offerings to the gods.
Bhéñma came out of the hall looking like the full moon. Worshipped by
Brahmins, he mounted his chariot and set off for Kurukñetra at the head of a
large division of soldiers.
The Kuru army encamped on the western side of Kurukñetra. They resembled a
vast sea, the soldiers in flashing armor looking like water sparkling in the
sunlight. Warriors roared and conch blasts continuously sounded. At last the
time for which a kñatriya always longs had arrived. They would either be
victorious in battle or die and attain the heavens.
End of Part One

Part Two
Chapter 1
The Armies Prepare
After installing Dåñöadyumna as his commander-in-chief, Yudhiñöhira and his
generals consulted Kåñëa. They had heard that Duryodhana had requested
Bhéñma to be the Kurus’ commander-in-chief and that he had accepted.
Yudhiñöhira then asked Arjuna to be his army’s chief general, working
immediately under Dåñöadyumna. He wanted to ensure that Arjuna’s
incomparable expertise was utilized fully in the battle. The seven divisions of
the Päëòava army were then placed under their seven commanders.
As the Päëòavas were speaking about the arrangements, Balaräma arrived. He
entered Yudhiñöhira’s tent in the company of Akrüra, Uddhava, Sämba,
Pradyumna, and other leading personalities from Dwärakä. In his blue
garments and garlanded by golden flowers, Balaräma looked as majestic as
Mount Kailäsa. Kåñëa stood to greet Him, and all the kings did the same. They
worshipped Him with affection. Yudhiñöhira took Balaräma’s hands and
greeted Him warmly, showing Him to a fine seat.
After Balaräma had saluted elders such as Drupada and Virata, He took His
496

seat and said, “Many men are about to be slaughtered. Surely fate has ordained
it and it cannot be avoided. It is the hour of death for all these kñatriyas. The
earth is about to become a mass of clay thickened with flesh and blood. I hope
you heroes will emerge alive and well. Repeatedly did I request Kåñëa to act
equally toward both Kauravas and Päëòavas, but He chose to favor you.”
Kåñëa looked at His elder brother and smiled. Balaräma glanced across at Him
as He continued. “Keçava has set His heart upon your interests, and especially
the interests of Dhanaïjaya. Your victory is assured because Kåñëa desires it. I
cannot at any time act separately from Him. Therefore I will play no part in
the war. Both Duryodhana and Bhéma are My pupils at mace fighting, and both
are equally dear to Me. I cannot bear to fight against either. Therefore I have
decided to leave the area and go on a pilgrimage to the holy places because I
know I would not be able to sit by and indifferently watch the massacre.”
Balaräma stood up and placed His helmet on His head. Taking leave of Kåñëa
and the Päëòavas, He left, followed by the Yädavas who had come with Him.
Soon, the Päëòavas received another visitor. It was Rukmé, King Bhéñmaka’s
son and Kåñëa’s brother-in-law. He arrived with a full akshauhini division of
warriors. To please his sister he had decided to offer his assistance to her
husband’s side. Twanging his bow he strode into Yudhiñöhira’s tent where the
Päëòavas received him respectfully. He said, “O great ruler, if you are afraid at
the prospect of war with the Kurus, then I am here to help you. There are none
who can match my prowess. Your enemies will not be able to bear my might.
Whatever part of their army you allot to me as my share will be ground into
the earth. Even Bhéñma, Droëa and Kåpa cannot face me. I will defeat the
Kurus and deliver you the earth.”
Arjuna could not tolerate Rukmé’s proud speech. He laughed. “I was born in
the Kuru race, I am Päëòu’s son and Droëa’s pupil, and I have Keçava’s
assistance. How can I be afraid of the enemy? O hero, when I faced the
Gandharvas, who was my friend then? When I fought the furious Dänavas in
the nether worlds, who came to my aid? Then again in the battle with the
Kurus in the Matsya kingdom, who was my helper? I am not afraid, Rukmé. We
have no need of your help. Go wherever you please, or stay here if you like.
Either way we will fight with the Kurus and win.”
Seeing the other warriors agreeing with Arjuna, Rukmé scowled. Taking up his
bow he marched out of the tent without a word. He then took his soldiers to
Duryodhana. If the Päëòavas did not want him, then he would fight with the
497

Kauravas. At least he had offered his help to Yudhiñöhira first. Actually, he was
just as happy to fight for Duryodhana. Rukmé still remembered his sister’s
svayaàvara in which he had wanted her to select Çiçupäla. Kåñëa had come
and kidnapped Rukméëé. Rukmé had then chased Kåñëa and fought with Him,
only to be defeated and humiliated. Maybe now he could exact his revenge.
Going before Duryodhana, he repeated the words he had used when speaking
to Yudhiñöhira. “Do not be afraid of the Päëòavas, O King, for I am here to
help you.”
Duryodhana also rejected him. “I have no need of your help,” he laughed.
“What fear do I have of the Päëòavas, surrounded as I am by the world’s
greatest heroes, and being a mighty warrior myself?”
Rukmé left the Kauravas and returned home, deciding to play no part in the
war. If no one wanted his help, then he would not fight. Let them annihilate
one another without him.
***
After Rukmé left, Duryodhana summoned his counselors. He had Çakuni’s son
Uluka come as a messenger to the Päëòavas. Assured of his superior position,
the prince wanted to mock his enemies and to show his contempt for their socalled army.
Duryodhana said, “O Uluka, go to the Päëòavas and speak these words in
Kåñëa’s hearing: ‘The time has now come for action. What we have expected
for a long time is finally come to pass. We are about to fight a frightful war
between ourselves, and you have caused it. Prove now the truth of all the
boastful words you sent through Saïjaya. Let us see your actual power.’”
Duryodhana’s black eyes narrowed. Standing up as he spoke, he pointed at
Uluka. “Say this to Yudhiñöhira: How do you pose as a virtuous man, O
descendent of Bharata? You now desire to destroy the world for the sake of
wealth. One who presents himself as pious while secretly concealing wicked
intentions is said to be like the cat in the famous story of old. Listen to the
story my father heard from Närada Åñi.
“Once there was a cat who went to the Ganges. Standing on the bank with
upraised paws he said, ‘I shall practice virtue.’ After some time, the birds began
to trust him and even praise him for his devotions.
“That cat continued with his austerities, and in due course the mice also saw
the cat’s peaceful demeanor and long-time pious practices. They decided to
498

take shelter of him, although he was naturally their enemy. They said, ‘We
seek your protection. You are our refuge and our best friend. Be like an uncle
to us and save us from our antagonists. You are virtuously inclined and have
adopted a pious course.’
“The cat reluctantly agreed. ‘I will do what I can for you, but I also need your
help. My austerities have made me so weak I cannot move. Therefore, some of
you must assist me to reach the riverside each day so that I can bathe.’
“The mice agreed to this and began to live around the cat. Every day a number
of them would go to the river with him and the cat would eat them. Thus the
cat grew fatter and stronger, while the mice diminished in number. Soon they
realized what was happening. One wise mouse among them pointed out that an
animal living on fruits and roots cannot have hairs in its feces. He concluded,
‘This cat only makes a show of devotion. His real business is eating mice.’
“The mice fled in all directions and the wicked cat also went back to where he
had come from. O Yudhiñöhira, you are behaving in the same way toward your
kinsmen. Your words mean one thing while your acts are quite different. Give
up your disguise as a gentle and harmless man. Come out and fight like a true
kñatriya. Dry your mother’s tears by winning victory in battle––if you can.
Remember our former antagonism––the poison, the lac house, the insult to
Draupadé. Show us your real strength.”
Duryodhana laughed. He derided the Päëòavas in various ways, mocking their
power and praising his own. He reminded them of all the vows they had taken.
Now they should fulfill them.
Duryodhana remembered Kåñëa’s universal form, which He had exhibited in
Hastinäpura. “Tell Väsudeva that His display of illusion does not scare me. I
too can show many forms, but what is the use of such things? O Keçava, come
in that mystical form to the battlefield and we will see what difference it will
make. I know Your power and I know Arjuna’s. I know the Gäëòéva bow and
the inexhaustible quivers he holds, as well as about the fiery chariot Agni gave
him with its celestial banners. Still I challenge You. Indeed, I could face a
thousand Kåñëas and a hundred Arjunas and still have them flee in all
directions. Even knowing everything about Your power, I shall deprive You of
Your kingdom without fear.”
Duryodhana began to pace as he delivered his arrogant message. Karëa,
Dushashana and Çakuni cheered his brave speech and encouraged him to say
more. Duryodhana reminded the Päëòavas of the dice game and their exile at
499

his hands. “Is this not sufficient proof of my superiority? Bhéma must have been
tired as he cleaned pots in Virata’s kitchen; Arjuna wore bangles and braided
hair; Yudhiñöhira became Virata’s servant––these are the ways a kñatriya
punishes others weaker than himself. I have no fear of the Päëòavas, nor of
Kåñëa, nor of any of the fools who have chosen to fight beside you. I will not
return even the smallest part of your kingdom.”
Uluka memorized every word in the mood with which it was spoken, although
Duryodhana spoke for almost an hour. He concluded, “Let the battle begin
tomorrow. Then you will see your folly. Like a frog in a well who cannot know
the ocean, you cannot know how vast are my forces. One who wishes to defeat
Bhéñma, Droëa, and Kåpa would be able to rend a mountain with his head or
swim across an ocean. When you see the Kuru forces assembled like a great sea,
then will your desire for the kingdom disappear. All thoughts of ruling this
world will vanish. Like a man who has never practiced devotion yet desires
heaven, so is your hope for winning this kingdom. Tomorrow we will see who
should be the earth’s rightful ruler.”
Duryodhana then told Uluka to deliver the message at once. Uluka mounted
his chariot and rode over to the Päëòavas’ camp, with Duryodhana’s words
ringing in his head. He knew his message would incite the Päëòavas’ fury, and
he approached Yudhiñöhira with apprehension. “Please see me only as an
envoy. Knowing the law in relation to messengers, do not become angry when
you hear my words. I will only speak what Duryodhana has told me to say and
nothing more.”
Yudhiñöhira smiled and showed Uluka to a seat in his tent. “Do not fear. You
may speak freely here. Tell us what the small-minded Duryodhana, driven by
greed and lacking in foresight, has said.”
Uluka looked around the tent. All the Päëòava chiefs were present. With their
bright armor and colorful silks they resembled glowing planets decorating the
firmament. They were all watching him and waiting for the message.
When Uluka had finished, the Päëòavas leapt from their seats. Speechless
with rage, they stared at each other and ground their teeth. Their breath came
in hot blasts and they seemed like infuriated serpents. Bhéma’s eyes turned red
and he looked across at Kåñëa, who laughed and said, “O Uluka, go back to
your master and tell him we have heard his message and understood its
meaning. Let it be as he says. The battle will begin tomorrow.”
Having heard Duryodhana’s abusive words, the assembly of kings resembled
500

the storm-tossed ocean. They rose up roaring and slapped their arms.
Rubbing his hands together, Bhéma roared, “O fool, we have heard your words,
intended to rouse us to action as if we were weak and inactive. Uluka, carry my
reply back to your master.
“O Duryodhana, only due to respect for our elder brother have we tolerated
you for so long. The virtuous Yudhiñöhira has offered peace. You have refused.
Pushed by your own fate, you now desire to meet Yamaräja. The battle will
certainly begin tomorrow. I have vowed to slay you and all your brothers. Do
not doubt my power to carry out this vow. The ocean may transgress its banks,
the mountains may split asunder, but my words will not prove false. O you of
little sense, not even the gods and demons combined can save you now. I will
drink Dushashana’s blood and grind the rest of the Kauravas into the earth.
Any kñatriya approaching me in anger will go at once to Death’s abode. I swear
by my soul that I speak the truth.”
Sahadeva then stepped forward. “Tell this to the fool who gives you orders:
‘Only because of you has this dispute arisen. You were born for the destruction
of your own race, and indeed of the world. Goaded on by Çakuni, you have
always acted with evil intentions toward us. You will soon be slain by me before
all your warriors.’”
Duryodhana’s message was creating a tumult in the Päëòavas’ tent. The kings
and warriors shouted and waved their weapons at Uluka. Arjuna calmed them.
Then he turned to Bhéma and said, “O Bhémasena, be patient. Those who have
made you their enemy will soon be destroyed. Nothing can save them. There is
no need to rebuke Uluka. He is only an envoy. What fault can an envoy
commit? The words he spoke were not his own.”
Arjuna looked at the assembled kings. “You have all heard Duryodhana’s foul
speech directed even toward Kåñëa. With your leave I will give my response.”
By now, Uluka was trembling. Arjuna said, “Tell Duryodhana: ‘Tomorrow you
will have my reply delivered by the Gäëòéva. Only eunuchs use words.’”
Arjuna took his seat by Yudhiñöhira’s side, who then said, “I have heard your
master’s words, Uluka. Tell him this in reply: ‘O fool, you have ever adopted an
evil course with us. Although you lack power, you now challenge us to war.
Depending on others’ prowess you utter threats. A real kñatriya fights his
enemies depending upon his own power. Since you are unable to do so, why do
you roar so much?’”
Seeing that Yudhiñöhira had finished, Uluka rose from his seat to depart. Kåñëa
501

checked him. “Also say this to Duryodhana: ‘O sinful one, you think that I
shall be of no consequence in this war as I will not fight. Do not make such a
miscalculation. I will act as Arjuna’s charioteer and you will see him
everywhere, destroying your forces as fire burns dry grass. Even if you go
beyond the three worlds or enter the nether regions, you will see Arjuna’s
chariot there tomorrow. You also think Bhéma has indulged in idle threats, but
you can consider that he has already drunk Dushashana’s blood. Neither
Yudhiñöhira nor his brothers are in the least afraid of you. You are strong only
in speech.’”
As Kåñëa stopped speaking, Arjuna leapt to his feet. He was not satisfied with
the curt response he had given to Duryodhana. He spoke again. “Tell this to
your master: ‘O worst of men, having installed Bhéñma as your commander, you
are boasting that Arjuna and his brothers will never attack him. But I will
make him my first target.’”
Arjuna’s voice seethed with restrained rage as he went on. “Although the
worshipful grandfather’s senses are under control and he possesses great
wisdom, he has taken your side and chosen to die. I will not hesitate to direct
my arrows toward him. O Duryodhana, your hopes are in vain. You are
arrogant, harsh, inhuman, addicted to vice, partial, and you hate virtue. You
will soon receive the consequences of your nature. When I am angry and have
Kåñëa as my second, what hope can you have for success? Your relatives will
soon lament your death. When you are struck down by Bhéma, you will recall
your foolishness.”
When Arjuna sat down, Uluka bowed before Yudhiñöhira, anxious to depart.
Reassuring him, Yudhiñöhira said, “Say this to Duryodhana also: ‘You have
judged me improperly. I do not desire to harm even worms or ants––what to
speak of my relatives. Thus I was prepared to accept only five villages to avoid
this war. It is only due to you that this calamity has arisen, O man of meager
understanding. Overpowered by lust you could not accept Kåñëa’s advice, and
for that reason you rant like one deprived of his senses. What is the use of your
words? Come out and fight along with all your friends. Death awaits you.’”
Bhéma wrung his hands together and breathed heavily. Although he would
have accepted a peaceful solution to the conflict, he could not deny his joy at
the prospect of finally confronting the sinful Kauravas. Uluka’s message had
stoked his long-cherished anger to the point of distraction. But he would have
to wait until morning. It would be a long night. Suppressing his rage, Bhéma
502

spoke again to Uluka even more harshly. “This is my final word to
Duryodhana: ‘O sinful one, either remain in Hastinäpura or lie in the belly of a
vulture. Those are the only choices left for you now. I swear by truth that my
words made in the council hall will come to pass. I will drink Dushashana’s
blood and I will smash your thighs. Know me as the death of all Dhåtaräñöra’s
sons.”
As Uluka turned and bowed to the assembled kings, Dåñöadyumna’s voice rang
out: “O Uluka, tell Duryodhana that I was born to kill Droëa. He and all his
followers will die at my hands. There is no doubt. What more need I say?”
Uluka went out of the tent backwards, bowing from the waist with his palms
folded. He ran over to his chariot and leapt aboard, urging his horses back to
the Kaurava camp.
Yudhiñöhira began to move his army into position on the battlefield.
Dåñöadyumna appointed specific tasks to the principal warriors. Each chariot
fighter was to protect the divisions of foot soldiers from the enemy charioteers.
Equals should fight equals. The chiefs of the army were allotted chiefs on the
opposing side. Bhéma would fight with Duryodhana, Sahadeva with Çakuni,
Nakula with Açvatthämä, Çikhaëòé with Bhéñma, Uttamauja with Kåpa, and
Dåñöadyumna would engage with Droëa. Abhimanyu, whom he considered as
powerful as Arjuna, was ordered to engage with all the kings supporting
Duryodhana, while Arjuna had the task of protecting the entire army.
Gradually the Päëòava forces arrayed themselves. By evening, everyone was in
position, ready to march into battle the next morning.
***
Duryodhana was sitting amid all his generals when Uluka returned and
delivered the Päëòavas’ replies. The prince sneered and turned to Bhéñma.
“The war begins tomorrow, O Grandfather. What should be done now?”
Bhéñma, having surrendered himself to the certainty of war and the
hopelessness of making Duryodhana see sense, replied, “After bowing before
Kumära, the god of war, I will act as your general. I am as capable of organizing
armies as Båhaspati. Conversant with every means of attack and defense
employed by men, gods and demons, I will confound the Päëòavas. I will fight
according to the rules laid down in holy books, all of which I know. Let your
fears be gone.”
Duryodhana did not like hearing that he might be afraid. “I am not afraid even
503

of the gods and Asuras united. O you of long arms, I tell you this truly. How
much less afraid am I when I have you as my commander and Droëa by my
side? O best of men, with you fighting for me, I think kingship of the gods
would not be hard to attain.”
Duryodhana paused reflectively. Surely his army was invincible, especially
under Bhéñma and Droëa’s leadership; but the Päëòavas had so far proved
difficult to overpower, even without the support of an army. Now they had
amassed seven divisions of warriors ready for war, and the brothers, protected
by the wily Kåñëa, would fight filled with rage. He had made sure of that. The
Kaurava looked inquisitively at Bhéñma. “I desire to hear from you about the
strengths and weaknesses of the enemy and also of ourselves. Please tell me
everything you know.”
Sitting before a large number of warriors in Duryodhana’s tent, Bhéñma said,
“O King, listen as I describe who are the rathas, maharathas, and atirathas in
your army. There are thousands of rathas on your side, each capable of
contending with a thousand warriors at once. There are also numerous
maharathas, who can stand against ten thousand, and many atirathas, who can
face an almost unlimited number of opponents. You, O son of Gändhäré, are an
atiratha, and your brothers are all maharathas. All of you are skillful elephant
and chariot drivers, and expert with weapons. You will slay Päëòava forces in
large numbers.”
Bhéñma then described the strength of every principal warrior on the Kauravas’
side. He described Kåtavarmä, Çalya, Kåpa, Droëa, Açvatthämä, and Bählika as
atirathas. When he came to Karëa, usually considered an atiratha and upon
whom Duryodhana pinned his hopes, Bhéñma said, “Because of Paraçuräma’s
curse and the loss of his celestial armor, he is no longer powerful. Although he
brags of his prowess and you have elevated him to a higher station than he
deserves, he is of little consequence. In battle he becomes confounded and is
too soft on the enemy. In my opinion, he is only half a ratha. When he comes
before Arjuna, he will not escape with his life.”
Droëa agreed. “It is so. What you say is never false.”
Karëa started up from his seat, his eyes angry. “O Grandfather, you are ever
given to piercing me with your sharp words. What sin have I committed that
you derive such pleasure from insulting me? I tolerate it only for Duryodhana’s
sake. In my opinion, you too are only half a ratha. I do not speak an untruth
when I say that you are the enemy of the entire universe. You are the Kurus’
504

enemy in the guise of a friend. Who else would seek to create disunion among
our forces and sap their energy by mean descriptions of their power? By saying
that one is greater than another, based upon your own estimation, you simply
discourage the fighters. You are moved only by desire and hatred.”
Karëa’s voice filled the tent. He could no longer tolerate Bhéñma’s stinging
words. Clenching his fists, he turned toward Duryodhana. “O King, abandon
this wicked man at once! If you do not, he will soon destroy your army by
sowing the seeds of discord. What use are his estimations? Let me go out to
meet the Päëòava armies. They will soon be routed like bulls meeting a tiger.
Bhéñma boasts of being able to fight the universe, but his words are vain and
empty. He is old and senile. His intelligence has become like a boy’s. Reject
him at once and choose me. Alone I can slay the Päëòavas and all their
followers.
“But I will not do it while Bhéñma is still on the battlefield. The glory and fame
of a victory goes to the commander and not to the individual fighters. I will do
nothing to increase Bhéñma’s fame. When he is killed, I will come out and
display my prowess.”
Bhéñma looked contemptuously at Karëa. “The time for battle has arrived.
Long have I known this calamity would come. Now the burden of this battle,
vast like the ocean, rests upon my shoulders. I have no desire to create dispute
among our men. For this reason only do you still live, O son of a suta. Although
I am now old and you are young, I would still immediately destroy your desire
for battle and take your life.”
The Kuru commander felt his anger rising. “Good men do not approve of selfpraise, but I will say something now because I have lost my temper. When I
attended the svayaàvara at Kashi, I single-handedly overpowered all the kings
on earth. What have you done? You are an ill-starred man, and since your
arrival the Kurus have met with disaster. Prove your words in battle. I will see
your actual strength when I see you escape from Arjuna, O man of wicked
intelligence.”
Duryodhana leapt up. “Be peaceful, O son of Gaìgä. I need both you and
Karëa in this fight. No doubt you will both perform heroic deeds. Leave aside
this petty squabbling and tell me more of the strengths and weaknesses of the
two sides. The fight will soon begin.”
Still glaring at Karëa, Bhéñma began to describe the Päëòavas’ strength. “The
pious king Yudhiñöhira is himself a mighty maharatha. He will roam about in
505

battle like fire itself. His brother Bhémasena is powerful beyond measure. His
strength is not human, and in a fight with either mace or arrows he is without
equal. The two sons of Mädré are peerless fighters. Remembering their hard
suffering in the forest, they will release the poison of their anger on your men.
O King, all five Päëòavas are great-souled devotees of the Supreme Lord. They
are invincible. They have all practiced asceticism and are devoted to virtue.
Their prowess is incomparable, as you saw at the Räjasüya when they
conquered the earth. Even as children you saw their extraordinary strength,
and that is when you first became envious of them. In my view, you should
avoid them in battle.”
Bhéñma looked intently at Duryodhana as he spoke. “Regarding the coppereyed Arjuna, who has Näräyaëa as his ally, I say this: No brave warrior in
either army can match him in any way. Even among the gods, Gandharvas,
Nägas, Räkñasas and Yakñas he has no equal, what to speak of among men. He
has the Gäëòéva bow, a divine chariot drawn by horses that can fly at the
speed of the wind, impenetrable celestial armor, and two inexhaustible quivers.
He knows every celestial weapon. He will wreak havoc in your army, O King.
Only myself or the preceptor can advance against him. There is no third
warrior capable of standing before him when he pours forth his showers of
arrows. But he is young and fit, while both Droëa and I are old and worn out.
He now waits for battle with Keçava at his side.”
All the kings in Duryodhana’s tent heard Bhéñma’s description of Arjuna and
felt shorn of power. Bhéñma described the other fighters on the Päëòavas’ side.
Having named many of them as atirathas and maharathas, he spoke about
Çikhaëòé. “You have all heard that he is destined to kill me. But he was born a
woman and I will not, therefore, face him in battle. Listen now as I tell you his
history, which I have heard from Närada Åñi.”

Chapter 2
Çikhaëòé’s Destiny
(as told by Bhéñma)
As you know, I long ago accepted a vow neither to occupy the throne nor to
506

have children who could lay claim to it. My father, Çantanu, then married the
beautiful Satyavaté and had two sons, Citräìgadä and Vicitravérya. He died
before his sons were grown and I was left as their protector. Citräìgadä was
killed in a battle with the Gandharva king, and Vicitravérya was left sole heir
to the throne.
As he came of age, I thought it time to find him a wife. I heard that the king of
Kashi had arranged a svayamvara for his three daughters, Amba, Ambikä and
Ambälikä. I decided to ride into Kashi on my chariot, prepared for battle.
Kings and princes had assembled at the svayamvara from all over the world, all
hoping one of the girls would choose to marry them.
Upon seeing this, I remembered that the wise approve of many kinds of
marriage, but for a kñatriya the best is when the bride is snatched from an
assembly of warriors after defeating them in a fight. I then announced to the
kings that I had decided to carry away all three princesses for my younger
brother, and challenged them to prevent me if they could.
Then I took all three maidens onto my chariot and sped away. The kings were
at first surprised, then furious. They pulled on their armor and mounted their
chariots. Soon hundreds of them were in pursuit. Thousands of arrows
showered down upon my chariot, but I dexterously avoided them all. As the
princesses trembled in fear, I took up my own bow and turned to face the kings.
I countered the shower of their shafts with my own. At the same time, I
pierced every one of my antagonists. So swiftly did I shoot my arrows that my
foes were completely confounded and could only applaud my prowess. Some
were killed and others had their weapons smashed and their armor torn off.
They retreated and fled in various directions.
Shalva, however, continued to chase me. He was determined to win the hand
of one of the maidens, and he rushed after me shouting, “Stay, stay!”
Provoked, I faced him. A furious but short-lived battle ensued. I soon
overpowered Shalva and destroyed his chariot, although I decided not to kill
him. I then returned to Hastinäpura with the three maidens.
When I arrived in Hastinäpura, the eldest princess, Amba, approached me and
said, “I had already chosen Shalva as my husband. He too accepted me in his
heart and my father agreed to the match. I would have chosen him in the
svayaàvara, but you kidnapped me and I did not have the opportunity. O
knower of virtue, tell me what I should now do.”
I asked her to wait while I discussed the matter with the Brahmins. It was
507

concluded that Amba should be allowed to go to Shalva’s city and offer herself
to him. We gave her an escort of priests and maidservants, and sent her to
Shalva. When he saw her, however, he said, “O lady of fair complexion, I no
longer desire to accept you as my wife, for you have already been taken by
another. You were led away cheerfully by Bhéñma before all the other kings.
How can I, who must lay down the law for others, now accept you? You have
been touched by another. According to holy books, I cannot now accept you as
my wife.”
Amba tried to change Shalva’s mind, pleading that she had not been happy to
be kidnapped. She had gone to Shalva at the first opportunity. The king was
adamant. He would not accept her. He told the disappointed princess to return
to Hastinäpura. Weeping like a she-osprey she thought, “What woman in the
world could fall into greater trouble than the predicament I now face? I have
been robbed of my friends, Shalva has wronged me, neither can I now return to
Hastinäpura, and neither can I go home in such shame and rejected by
everyone.”
Reflecting on the cause of her troubles, Amba decided that I was to blame. She
wanted revenge. Rather than return to Hastinäpura, she chose to go to a
hermitage and stayed the night. In the morning, the åñis saw her weeping and
inquired about her sorrow. The lady told them everything and asked them to
help her, but the åñis replied, “We have renounced all worldly action. What
can we possibly do to help your cause?”
Amba asked that they allow her to remain with them and to engage in
asceticism. She had decided that the calamity that had befallen her was the
result of her past sins, and that by practicing penance, she could become freed
of them.
The åñis consulted among themselves. Some thought Shalva should have
accepted her, while others proposed that I should marry her. Eventually they
decided that she should return to her father, for a woman must always be under
the shelter of a husband, son or father. But Amba refused to go. She said she
would never return to her father’s city and suffer disgrace.
While the åñis thus sat pondering about what to do, the royal sage Hotravahana
arrived at the hermitage. He took special pity on Amba because he happened
to be her maternal grandfather. He became enraged that I had stolen her and
thus ruined her life. With his lips trembling in anger he said, “O Amba, you
have grieved enough. Do not go to your father’s house, for that will only
508

increase your grief. You should place your case before the great Paraçuräma. He
is my good friend and well-wisher. For my sake he will surely remove your grief.
Either he will convince Bhéñma to accept you, or he will slay him in battle.
Only this sage is powerful enough to do either.”
It so happened that Paraçuräma was due to arrive at the hermitage the next
day. He arrived early in the morning, clad in black deerskins and surrounded
by his disciples. With an axe over his shoulder and a bow in his hand, he was a
frightening sight. Long matted locks hung down to his shoulders, and his eyes
blazed like fire. After he had been properly received and worshipped by the
other sages, he sat down with Hotravahana and was told of Amba’s plight. He
called for her and said, “You are as dear to me as you are to Hotravahana. Tell
me what I should do for you. If you like, I can order Bhéñma to accept you. If he
will not, then I will consume him and all his ministers in battle. Or, if you
prefer, I will order Shalva. Tell me your decision, O princess.”
Amba replied, “It seems that Bhéñma is the cause of my present calamity. I
think you should slay him. I have become so vengeful that I now wish only to
bring about his death. O great sage, kill that covetous and mean-spirited man
for my sake.”
Paraçuräma was reluctant to take up arms against me and said, “I will only use
my weapons if the Brahmins request it. This is my vow. I can, however, make
either Bhéñma or Shalva accept my order. Therefore, select one of them as your
husband, fair maiden, and I will do the rest.”
Amba had already concluded that all she wanted was for me to die. She asked
Paraçuräma again and again to challenge me to a fight. At that time another
åñi, Akritavana, feeling compassion for Amba, also requested him to fight.
Because a Brahmin requested him, Paraçuräma finally said, “All right, I will go
to Bhéñma to seek a solution by peaceful means. If he will not accept my words,
then I will certainly slay him.”
The following day he made his way to Hastinäpura with Amba. I worshipped
him with all respect, and then he said with anger in his voice, “O Bhéñma, in
what consciousness did you kidnap Amba? Although you took her by force, you
then sent her away. You have robbed her of her virtue, for no other man will
now accept her. Therefore, you should accept her either for your brother or for
yourself.”
I replied, “I cannot by any means take back this maiden, for she has given her
heart to another. It is always wrong for a virtuous man to accept such a woman.
509

I cannot renounce my duty out of fear, greed, attachment or pity. This is my
vow, O Räma.”
The sage blazed. “If you do not act according to my instructions, then I shall
slay you and all your ministers.”
He said this repeatedly, and I tried in many ways to calm him with gentle
words. Realizing that he was bent upon fighting, I asked, “Why do you wish to
fight with me, O best of your race? In my childhood I was your pupil, and you
taught me the military arts.”
Paraçuräma replied, “Although I am your preceptor, you have not obeyed my
command. There is only one way to gratify me: either accept this maiden and
perpetuate your race, or prepare yourself for death.”
But my guru’s words found no place in my heart. I replied, “O lord, what you
are commanding me to do I cannot do. What is the use of laboring for it? What
foolish man would accept into his house a woman sighing for another?
Furthermore, I have made a solemn vow never to marry. I see no virtue in your
order. The god Väyu has stated that a preceptor may be abandoned if he is
vain, has swerved from the right path, or does not know his proper duties. I see
no sin in fighting with you on this occasion rather than accepting your order.
You are asking me to engage in an unrighteous act only for your profit.
Witness now the strength of my arms and my superhuman prowess. Let us go to
Kurukñetra. Slain by my arrows, you will attain the glorious regions you have
earned by asceticism, O you whose only wealth is devotion.”
By then, I was myself infuriated. I added, “You boast that you have conquered
the entire kñatriya race, but today I will prove that boast false. When you
defeated the kñatriyas, I had not yet been born, nor anyone like me. You
consumed straw. He who will end your boasts and your desire for battle has
now been born. I will destroy your pride. Do not doubt it.”
The sage smiled. “It is fortunate, O Bhéñma, that you wish to fight. I will thus
curb your arrogance. We will fight at Kurukñetra. There your mother Gaìgä
will see you thrown down and turned into food for vultures. O ruler of the
earth, your mother does not deserve to see such a sight, but it must be so, for
you are foolish and overly proud.”
I bowed before the sage and said, “Be it so.” After performing propitiatory rites
to invoke the Brahmins’ blessings, I mounted my chariot and headed out of the
city. Equipped with all my weapons, I shielded my chariot with a white
umbrella and yoked my white horses, which can move with the speed of the
510

wind. As I moved off, bards and singers eulogized me. I arrived at Kurukñetra
and saw Räma waiting there, grasping his huge bow. Thousands of his followers
were present, and around the battlefield stood numerous åñis. In the sky I saw
the gods, headed by Indra. Celestial music sounded and flowers fell from the
heavens.
My own mother, assuming her divine human form, came before me and asked,
“What do you wish to do, my dear son?”
When I told her, she reproved me. “You should not fight with a Brahmin. Do
not fight Jamadagni’s son. His strength is equal to that of Çiva. He
exterminated the kñatriya race. You know all this. Why, then, have you come
to fight with him?”
I explained to my mother all that had happened and made it clear that I would
not now turn back. She then implored the sage not to fight with me. I was,
after all, his disciple, which is nondifferent than his son.
The sage said he was determined to teach me a lesson. Helpless to stop either
side, my mother retired from the battlefield, feeling anxious for my sake.
I looked across at Paraçuräma and saw that he had no chariot or coat of mail. I
called out, “How can I fight you while you stand upon the earth, O Räma?
Mount a chariot and put on your armor, for I will now release my weapons.”
Räma laughed back, “The earth is my chariot, the Vedas are my horses, and the
wind is my driver. The mothers of the Vedas––Gäyatré, Savitri, and Sarasvaté–
–are my armor. Well protected by all of them I shall fight, O delighter of the
Kurus.”
The sage immediately covered me on all sides with a thick shower of arrows.
Repelling his shafts, I saw him mount a blazing chariot that resembled a city.
Celestial horses were yoked to it and it was protected and ornamented by
golden armor and decorations. The chariot was wonderful to behold and had
been created by his will. Clad in brilliant armor, he stood upon it looking like
Yamaräja surrounded by the personified astras. His disciple, Akritavana, who
had requested him to fight, had become his charioteer, and he dexterously
wheeled the chariot about as Räma now called out, “Come! Come!”
I repelled another two showers of arrows. Then I dismounted my chariot.
Putting down my weapons, I went over to the sage and prostrated myself on
the ground. “Whether you are my equal in battle or my superior, I will fight
with you, my lord, even though you are my preceptor. Bless me that I may
obtain victory.”
511

Räma smiled. “O best of the Kurus, your behavior is proper and I am pleased by
it. If you had not come to me in this way, I would have cursed you. I cannot
bless you to gain victory since I myself want to vanquish you. Go and fight
fairly and with patience, O hero.”
I returned to my chariot and blew my conch, signaling the start of the battle.
Both of us hurled every kind of weapon at each other. Each desiring victory,
we fought furiously. Laughing, I released broad-headed shafts which chopped
his bow into fragments again and again. Other arrows passed clean through his
body and came out dripping blood, entering the earth like hissing serpents, but
by his spiritual power the sage maintained his life and fought back with
fearsome energy.
Covered with blood, Räma stood in his chariot like a mountain pouring forth
lava. He responded with well-sharpened arrows that struck me like
thunderbolts. Pierced in my vital organs, I trembled and held onto my flagstaff
for support. I summoned all my patience and, regaining my composure, released
a hundred deadly shafts at Räma. Struck by my arrows, Räma fell senseless to
the floor of his chariot.
I was immediately seized by remorse. “What have I done! I have slain my own
preceptor, a virtuous Brahmin.” I dropped my weapons and held my head in
anguish, but Räma soon rose again, his charioteer having expertly removed the
arrows and tended him. The sun set and we retired for the day, coming
together in the evening as friends.
The next day at sunrise we faced each other again on the battlefield. Räma
shot blazing arrows with serpent-like mouths. I cut them down with my own
arrows even as they sped through the air. The sage then resorted to celestial
weapons, which I countered with my own. During the violent exchange of
weapons, I was suddenly caught on the chest by a dart that rendered me
unconscious. My charioteer quickly removed me from the battle and all of
Räma’s followers, along with Amba, sent up a cheer.
After some time I regained consciousness and ordered my charioteer to take
me back into battle. He urged on my horses, which seemed to dance as they
bore us toward Räma. As soon as I saw him I fired hundreds of straight-flying
arrows that screamed through the air, but Räma cut every one of them into
pieces with his own arrows and they fell uselessly to the ground. Then I sent
hundreds more shafts at Räma, even as he was countering my last assault. He
was caught off guard and knocked unconscious. As he fell from his chariot a
512

loud cry of “Alas” went up from his followers.
Seeing him dropped to the earth like the sun fallen from the sky, the Kashi
princess, along with his many disciples, ran over and comforted him. They
sprinkled his face with cool water and uttered benedictory hymns. Räma slowly
rose and looked across at me, seated on my chariot. Enraged, he shouted, “Stay,
Bhéñma. You are already killed!”
Even before remounting his chariot, he shot an arrow which seemed like the
rod of death. It hit my right side and sent me spinning. As I reeled Räma killed
my horses. He simultaneously covered me with a thousand more arrows.
Without becoming confounded, I countered his attack with lightness of hand.
As I struck down his arrows my charioteer quickly fetched fresh horses for my
chariot. A terrible exchange went on between us. Our celestial arrows met in
mid-air and stayed there without falling. The sky became covered with a
network of arrows that screened the sun. Räma shot thousands, then tens of
thousands, then millions of arrows at me, which I duly countered with divine
weapons. A great fire appeared in the sky, reducing the surrounding forests to
ashes. As we fought on in this way, the sun set and the battle subsided.
We fought for many days, utilizing every celestial weapon and all forms of
combat the Vedas describe. Räma released missiles which can hardly be
described. They assumed diverse forms and came from every direction. I was
continuously whirling in my chariot, repelling his weapons and trying to
counterattack with my own. Both of us sought gaps in our opponent’s defenses,
and we both defended ourselves closely. The battle raged through the day, and
at night we rested. We were both extremely exhausted from the fighting.
On the twenty-third day of the battle, Räma fought with redoubled strength.
All of a sudden he fired a number of arrows which fell upon my horses and
charioteer like venomous serpents. They were all slain and I was left standing
on an immobile chariot as Räma shot arrows charged with death at me. As I
fought off his shafts, Räma fired a powerful missile that came at me like a
streak of lightning. It caught me on the chest and threw me backwards off the
chariot. I fell on the ground a full fifty paces away.
Thinking me dead, Räma roared like a thundercloud and all his followers
cheered. The Kurus who had accompanied me were overwhelmed with sorrow.
As I lay there stupefied, I saw eight brilliant Brahmins with celestial forms
surrounding me. They raised me off the ground and gently supported me.
Sprinkling my face with cool water, they said, “Do not be afraid. You will soon
513

be successful.”
Revived and comforted, I stood up and saw my chariot yoked to fresh horses
that my mother was tending. I touched her feet and worshipped the memory of
my ancestors. Then I ascended the chariot and sent her away. I took the reins
and continued fighting. I managed to catch him with an arrow of great power
that pierced him deeply. He dropped to his knees and his bow slipped from his
grasp as he fell down senseless.
I then saw many inauspicious omens. The sky rained blood and meteors fell.
The sun was eclipsed, high winds blew, and the earth trembled. But Räma was
only stunned. In a short while, he got back to his feet and continued the fight.
Both of us threw our fiercest weapons at each other until the sun set, when we
again retired for the night.
That night, as I lay on my bed, my mangled body being tended by physicians, I
thought that the battle would never end. I prayed to the gods that they would
show me some way to overcome Räma. Then, while I was sleeping, I again saw
the eight Brahmins who had visited me on the battlefield. Comforting me
again, they said, “Fear not, O son of Gaìgä. You are our own body and we will
give you all protection. You will surely vanquish Räma. Here is a weapon which
was known to you in your previous birth. Manufactured by Viçvakarmä, it is
called the Prashwapa, and no one on earth knows it––not even Räma. Call it
to mind in the battle tomorrow and it will come to you. Räma will be thrown
down by that weapon, but not killed. He cannot be slain, but he will be
defeated and rendered unconscious by the Prashwapa. You will then be able to
revive him with the Samvodhana weapon.”
The luminous Brahmins vanished and I awoke with joy. The sun rose and the
battle began again. Encouraged by the celestial Brahmins, I was enlivened and
fought with renewed energy. After a furious exchange of weapons I thought of
the Prashwapa. The mantras suddenly appeared in my mind, but as they did I
heard a tumultuous uproar of heavenly voices: “O Bhéñma, do not release the
Prashwapa missile.”
Disregarding them, I placed the weapon on my bow and aimed it at Räma.
Suddenly, Närada Åñi appeared before me. “The gods are stationed in the sky
and they forbid you to use this weapon. Räma is an ascetic, a Brahmin, and
your preceptor. O son of Kuru, do not humiliate him by any means.”
As Närada spoke I again saw the eight Brahmins in the heavens. They smiled
and said, “O best among the Bharatas, obey Närada. This will benefit all
514

creatures.”
Paraçuräma, seeing the irresistible Prashwapa upon my bow and not realizing
that I had been forbidden to release it, shouted, “Alas, O Bhéñma, I am
vanquished!” and he dropped his bow. His father, Jamadagni, along with other
heavenly åñis, then came to him and ordered him to stop fighting. They told
him that I was one of the eight Vasus and that he could not slay me in battle.
Jamadagni said, “Arjuna, the powerful son of Indra, will later cause Bhéñma’s
death. Brahmä has ordained this.”
So the battle ended. Severely wounded, I went before my preceptor and
prostrated myself at his feet. After this he said to Amba, “O princess, you have
seen me exert myself to defeat Bhéñma. Still I have not been able to overpower
him. Therefore, you may go where you please. There is nothing more I can do.”
The maiden replied mournfully, “Be it so, O holy one. You have done your best
on my behalf and I am grateful. Still, my heart burns with revenge. I will
practice asceticism. In this way I will gain the power to personally bring about
Bhéñma’s death.”
My preceptor was highly pleased with my prowess and he blessed me that I
would be without any equal in battle. After Amba had bowed before him, he
left with all his followers.
Amba then entered the forest. She went to the Yamunä and performed severe
penance. I knew everything because when I returned to Hastinäpura I
appointed men to watch over her constantly. They gave me regular reports. For
one year she stood on the river bank without eating. Emaciated and roughskinned, bronzed by the sun, her hair matted––she stood with hands upraised.
After one year she broke her fast by eating a single dry leaf. Then she
remained waist-deep in the water for another year, standing on one foot, fired
with indignation.
For twelve years she went on in this way. Neither her relatives nor anyone else
could convince her to desist. Then she left the Yamunä and wandered at will,
visiting the sacred hermitages of many åñis. All the while she continued her
austerities, bathing three times daily, meditating silently, and fasting. Her
appearance changed from gentle to fierce, and she began to glow with ascetic
power.
One day as she was bathing in the Ganges, my mother said, “Why do you
perform such terrible penance, O maiden?”
Amba replied, “I desire to destroy Bhéñma, who is so powerful that not even
515

Paraçuräma could defeat him. Thus I am set upon achieving insuperable power
by my austerities.”
My ocean-going mother became angry upon hearing her words. “O lady, you
act crookedly. You will not be able to attain your object because you are so
weak. O daughter of Kashi, if you hold to your determination, I will curse you
to become a terrible river in which water flows in you only during the rainy
season. May you be full of crocodiles and other fierce aquatics.”
After saying this and pretending to smile, my mother vanished, leaving Amba
in her waters. Still, the princess did not desist. She performed even more
severe austerities, abstaining from all food and water and controlling even her
breathing. She wandered on, and when she arrived at Vatsabhumi, she fell
down and began to run as a river. It is recorded that the river in Vatsabhumi
runs only during the rainy season and is unapproachable due to its many
crocodiles and dangerous fish.
By merit of her austerities, however, only half of her body became a river while
the other half continued as before. She went on with her asceticism, and after
some time the åñis at Vatsabhumi approached her. They asked her what she
desired and when she had explained they said, “You should seek Mahadeva’s
favor, for that deity can fulfill any desire.”
Amba supplicated Çiva and he soon appeared before her asking to know her
desire. When she asked the god for the power to kill me, he replied, “You will
slay him.” Amba then asked how it would be possible, since she was a woman.
Çiva replied, “My words can never be false. O blessed one, you will become a
man and kill Bhéñma in battle. You will remember all this in your next life.
Born in Drupada’s line, you will become a maharatha, quick in the use of
weapons and highly skilled and fierce in battle. This will come to pass soon.”
When Çiva vanished, Amba gathered wood and built herself a funeral pyre in
the sight of all the åñis. Setting fire to it, her mind burning with wrath, she
hurled herself onto the pyre, crying, “For the destruction of Bhéñma!”
So, Çikhaëòé was Amba in his last life. He was born first as a woman and then
attained his present form. Listen as I tell you how this occurred.
Drupada’s queen was childless for a long time. Together, she and her husband
worshipped Çiva for a child. He prayed for a powerful son, but Çiva told him
that his wife would give birth to a daughter who would later be transformed
into a man. Although Drupada beseeched the god for only a son, Çiva replied,
“It shall be as I have said, for it has been decreed by destiny.”
516

Soon after, Drupada’s queen conceived. In due course she gave birth to a
daughter. Remembering Çiva’s words, Drupada announced that a son had been
born. He had all the rituals performed for a boy. No one saw the baby; only a
few trusted palace staff knew the truth.
Drupada raised his child with love, teaching her writing and all the arts. He
also had her instructed in bowmanship and other martial skills. When she
became a youth, the queen asked Drupada to find her a suitable wife. Drupada
was anxious. The child had not been transformed into a son. Were Çiva’s words
false? But his wife was fixed. Mahadeva’s promise cannot fail. Çikhaëòé will
become a male, and therefore should marry a woman.
Drupada was convinced by the queen’s faith and arranged for a marriage. He
chose the daughter of Hiranyavarman, king of the Dasharnakas. That king was
unconquerable, and he was happy to give his daughter to Drupada’s son. No
one suspected anything when the wedding ceremony was performed. The
youthful Çikhaëòé, beautiful like a god, appeared dressed as a boy in fine armor.
She remembered the events of her previous life and Çiva’s words, so even
though she had been born a woman, she conducted herself as if she were a
man.
But it was only a matter of time before Hiranyavarma’s daughter discovered
the truth. She sent messengers to her father to inform him that Drupada’s son
was actually a woman. Her father was furious. He sent an emissary to Drupada
saying, “I am insulted by your wickedness. How could you have accepted my
daughter in marriage for your own daughter? I am preparing now to come and
punish you for this act. Soon I will slay you and all your ministers.”
Drupada was caught like a thief. There was nothing he could say. He tried to
convince Çikhaëòé’s wife that her “husband” would in fact soon become a
male, but all to no avail. The girl’s father amassed a large army and marched on
Kämpilya. Drupada was alarmed. He said to his wife, “Fools that we are, we
have brought a great calamity onto our heads. We are in danger. What should
we do now, in your opinion?”
Drupada and his wife concluded that their only recourse was to worship the
gods. Drupada supplicated the deities, while Hiranyavarma advanced on his
country.
Meanwhile, Çikhaëòé, in sorrow at the danger she felt she had brought on
them all, left the city. Resolved to take her own life, she entered the forest in
an area that was home to a powerful Yakña named Sthuna. Finding his abode, a
517

white palace washed with lime, she entered it and sat down to practice
austerities. A few days later, Sthuna returned and saw her sitting there, her
body reduced from fasting. Kind by nature, he asked her why she was
performing asceticism. The Yakña said, “Tell me if I can do anything to help
you.”
Çikhaëòé replied, “No one can give me what I desire.”
But Sthuna didn’t agree. “I can surely give you whatever you wish, O princess. I
am Kuvera’s attendant and can grant boons. I will bestow even the
unbestowable. Tell me then what you desire.”
Çikhaëòé related the whole story in detail, concluding, “The only way to save
the present situation is that I attain my manhood, O faultless one.”
The Yakña, saddened by her story and feeling afflicted by destiny, considered
her request carefully. Finally he replied, “Truly this must be so. I will, however,
make a condition. I am able to grant your wish only by changing my sex with
yours, but you must return my manhood after a short time.”
Çikhaëòé agreed to return to Sthuna as soon as Hiranyavarma left Kämpilya.
The two then exchanged sexes and Çikhaëòé went back to her father’s palace.
When Hiranyavarma’s army arrived at Kämpilya, he dispatched his priest to
Drupada, saying, “Come out and give me battle, vile one. You have cheated
me.” But by then Çikhaëòé had returned in a male form. Drupada said, “There
has been a mistake, O holy one. The king has been misinformed. See for
yourself my son’s gender.”
The surprised Hiranyavarma had a number of beautiful maidens sent to
examine Çikhaëòé. When they informed him that Drupada’s son was indeed
male, he entered Kämpilya with a glad heart. He stayed with Drupada for some
time and finally returned to his own country, happy in his newfound alliance
with Drupada.
Sthuna had concealed himself in his palace, waiting for Çikhaëòé’s return. As
he waited, Kuvera happened to pass by, coursing through the skies in his
heavenly chariot. He saw Sthuna’s palace, shining beautifully and adorned
with colorful banners, gems, and garlands. Descending, he approached the
palace, but when no one came out to greet him he angrily asked his attendants,
“What fool lives here? Why does he not greet me?”
Some Yakñas then informed Kuvera what had transpired. They told him that
Sthuna was hiding in shame in his palace. Kuvera replied, “Bring that foolish
one here. I will punish him.”
518

Sthuna came out. In his woman’s form he stood bashfully before his master,
Kuvera. “Why have you acted in this way?” Kuvera asked. “You have
humiliated the Yakñas by giving away your sex. Therefore I curse you not to
regain your masculinity. Çikhaëòé too will not regain her female form.”
The other Yakñas felt compassion for Sthuna. After all, he had acted only out
of kindness. They asked Kuvera to set a limit on his curse so that Sthuna would
not be always punished.
Kuvera said, “When Çikhaëòé dies, Sthuna will regain his male form. Let him
be free of anxiety.”
The powerful Kuvera, who can travel long distances in a moment, then left
with his followers. Shortly afterwards, Çikhaëòé returned. “O Sthuna, as we
have agreed I will now return your manhood.”
Sthuna replied, “It has been ordained that manhood shall be yours for this life,
O noble one. Be pleased to return to your abode.” Hearing this, Çikhaëòé
returned in joy to Kämpilya.
***
When Bhéñma finished telling the story, he added, “Thus Çikhaëòé, formerly
Amba, hates me, but because he was first born a woman, I will never raise
weapons against him. I have vowed this: I will not fight with weapons against
women, or those who bear women’s names, or even those who appear like
women. O Duryodhana, I will not fight with Çikhaëòé even if he attacks me,
desiring my death.”
Duryodhana nodded. He looked at Bhéñma with respect. Even though the
grandfather was often cutting and harsh toward him, the prince could not
deny his nobility. Placing his hand on the royal scepter, Duryodhana said, “O
son of Gaìgä, we will now have to fight the mighty Päëòava army. Abounding
in heroes equal to the universal protectors, the army will be as difficult to cross
as the ocean. Tell me, O Grandsire, how long you feel it will take you to
annihilate them.”
Bhéñma’s old leathery face, adorned with a flowing white beard, broke into a
smile. “It is fitting that you should ask, Duryodhana. A leader must know both
the strengths and weaknesses of both the enemy and himself before beginning
to fight. Hear then of the utmost power I will display in this war. Using
ordinary weapons on ordinary soldiers, and celestial weapons on those versed
in them, I can slay ten thousand foot soldiers and one thousand charioteers a
519

day. Or it may be more. If I become fired with anger when I release my
weapons, I can destroy many more men than that. However, you should know
that I will only fight fairly.”
Bhéñma reminded Duryodhana of the rules of battle, which he would not break.
For example, heroes should never use divine weapons to kill lesser warriors.
The fight should always be equal. Even if one possessed celestial weapons, he
should contend only hand-to-hand with a weaponless enemy if such became
necessary.
Bhéñma’s hand touched his bow. “In this way, O King, by fighting ceaselessly
throughout the day, I can slay the enemy army in one month.”
Cheering Bhéñma, Duryodhana turned toward Droëa. “O preceptor, what
about you? How long do you think it would take you to overcome the enemy?”
Like Bhéñma, Droëa smiled at Duryodhana. “I am old and have lost some of my
strength. Still, I will exert myself fully and consume the Päëòava army by the
fire of my weapons. I also think I can annihilate all the warriors in about a
month.”
Kåpa said it would take him two months, and Açvatthämä, bolder, said he could
do it in ten days. Karëa said he could annihilate the enemy in five days, at
which Bhéñma laughed and said, “You may speak in such strains only so long as
you do not encounter Arjuna with his weapons and his conch, guided by
Väsudeva. Say whatever you will, son of Rädhä, for talk is cheap.”
Karëa frowned, but remained silent. Duryodhana continued questioning his
generals and commanders, ascertaining their power and determination to fight.
The Kauravas discussed their battle plans well into the night. Soon after
sunrise the fight would begin.

Chapter 3
Into Position
Early the next morning, Yudhiñöhira made his final preparations. His spies had
reported to him everything that had taken place in Duryodhana’s tent the
previous evening. Anxiously he said to Arjuna, “You have heard how Bhéñma
claims he can slay our army in one month. Droëa has said the same. All the
520

Kaurava heroes have stated their determination. Karëa even suggested that he
could defeat the armies in five days. Tell me, O Phälguné, how long you think
it would take you to kill them.”
Arjuna glanced across at Kåñëa. “The Kuru warriors are all high-minded heroes
who are expert in wielding weapons, but do not be anxious, dear brother. Our
enemies will not have the chance to slay us. I say truly that, with Kåñëa’s aid, I
can uproot the three worlds in a moment. I possess Çiva’s personal weapon,
which alone is capable of annihilating the creation. None of the Kauravas
know this weapon. Of course, it would not be proper for me to use it against
them, but there will be no need. We shall gain victory by the mere strength of
our arms.”
Arjuna indicated the many kings present with a sweep of his hand. “Besides
me, you have numerous heroes on your side. By ranging among the enemy
ranks in our chariots we will soon cause great destruction. Of course, we also
have you, O King. Surely whoever you cast your angry glance upon will
immediately be consumed like dry leaves in a fire. I do not see how the
Kauravas can win this war.”
Comforted, Yudhiñöhira continued to arrange for the first day’s battle. His
commanders surrounded him, clad in armor. All had been purified by sacred
rituals and had bestowed wealth upon the Brahmins. With their ornamented
swords swinging by their sides, they left the tent one by one to lead their
respective divisions into position. The early morning sun rose to reveal the
vast Kurukñetra field covered by the two armies. They seemed like two great
oceans drawn against one another. The sound of the armies filled the heavens
like the low rumbling of clouds in autumn.
When everything had been finalized, Yudhiñöhira himself left the tent,
followed by his brothers and Kåñëa. On all sides they saw cheerful troops
preparing their weapons and chariots. As the Päëòavas and Kåñëa mounted
their cars, crowds of Brahmins praised Yudhiñöhira and offered prayers to
Kåñëa.
According to their battle plan, the Päëòava army arranged and rearranged
itself in different formations, moving their leading warriors about the field and
confounding the Kauravas. In response, the Kauravas also moved their
divisions about in various ways, so that the Päëòavas would not easily see their
plan of attack. As the two immense armies maneuvered around the field, a
huge dust cloud rose into the sky, screening the morning sun. The thousands of
521

elephants made the earth vibrate as they moved across the field, resembling
dark clouds. The formations of chariot fighters, with their polished golden cars,
seemed in contrast to the elephant divisions like clusters of brilliant luminaries
in the night sky.
Behind both armies their encampments stretched for miles, looking with their
rows of tents and shops like two large towns. They were bustling with cooks,
servants and tradespeople going about their business. All the warriors had left
for the battle, which would last until sunset.
Gradually the two armies closed on each other. Hundreds of thousands of
conches filled the air with their blasts. The beating of drums and blowing of
trumpets created a cacophony of sound which mixed with the elephants’
majestic cries. Countless banners fluttered from chariots, appearing like waves
of bright colors amid the assembled troops.
The commanders of the two sides met to agree on the rules of battle. Warriors
should only fight with equals and with equal weapons. None should strike
another without warning, but should first challenge him. One who surrendered
or one fleeing from the fight should never be struck down. The many servants
on the battlefield, carrying weapons and other paraphernalia, were not to be
killed.
The commanders spoke for some time. When all the rules had been established,
Dåñöadyumna became thoughtful. Duryodhana and his henchmen had never
shown much regard for righteousness. Why would they now observe rules,
especially if the battle was not going their way? As Bhéñma and his generals
were about to leave, Dåñöadyumna voiced his doubts. “We will respect these
stipulations, but I make one provision. If the Kauravas forget our agreement
and fight without respect for the rules, then we too shall adopt whatever
tactics we deem appropriate. We will not, however, be the first to break the
conditions.”
“So be it,” Bhéñma replied. He took his leave from Dåñöadyumna and the
warriors returned to their positions to prepare for the start of the battle, which
would be signaled by both commanders-in-chief blowing their conchshells.
***
Dhåtaräñöra sat anxiously in his palace. There was nothing he could do now but
wait. Wanting to share his feelings with someone, and missing the association
of Vidura, the old king called for Saïjaya and said, “Tell me what is now
522

happening, O Saïjaya? Have the two armies reached Kurukñetra? Destiny is
more powerful than all of a man’s endeavors. Even though I tried to restrain
my son, aware as I am of the horrors of war, I was unsuccessful. Why was that,
O wise Saïjaya? Although I can see Duryodhana’s folly, still I have not been
able to stop him. Surely this war has been divinely ordained. Besides, it is
always honorable for a kñatriya to die in battle.”
Saïjaya felt he did not have much more to say. He had tried many times to
point out how the blame for the disaster facing the Kurus rested not only with
Duryodhana but with the king himself, yet the king seemed unable to admit it.
“O King, surely a man who meets with calamities as a result of his own acts
should not blame either the gods, destiny or others. Each of us receives the just
results of our own actions. O leader of the Kurus, you have failed to act
virtuously. The Päëòavas have borne your sons’ persecution, always hoping
that you would deliver justice in the end. But you have not done so. Now all
that is left is for you to hear of the Kuru heroes being slaughtered.”
As Saïjaya spoke, Vyäsadeva suddenly entered the chamber. The åñi, who
could see past, present and future, said, “O great king, your sons and all the
other kings have now arrived at the end of their lives. They have assembled for
battle and will all kill one another. Remembering the changes that are
inevitably brought about by time, do not grieve. O child, if you wish to see the
battle, I will give you the ability.”
Dhåtaräñöra sighed. “I do not desire to see my sons die, O great sage. Simply let
me hear of the battle.”
“Then I shall bestow the ability to see upon Saïjaya,” Vyäsadeva replied. “By
my grace, he will be able to see everything that takes place at Kurukñetra. With
celestial vision he will see even things that are concealed and all that happens
at night. He will feel no exhaustion for the duration of the war. As for victory,
that will occur wherever there is righteousness. Regardless of who wins,
however, you should know that almost all the warriors on both sides will be
slain. This is what the omens say.”
Vyäsadeva described the portents, earthly and celestial, which predicted
destruction. Thousands of carnivorous birds were alighting on treetops, crying
in glee. Herons, uttering harsh cries, were flying toward the south. The sun was
screened by tri-colored clouds at both twilights. In temples the images of gods
perspired and trembled, and sometimes dropped from their positions. “All this
indicates a great slaughter. Many heroic kings will sleep forever, embracing the
523

earth as if she were a lover.”
Vyäsadeva also described how the planets were aligned in malefic formations.
After speaking for some time he concluded, “Know that these signs point
toward an annihilation of the kñatriyas. There can be no doubt.”
Dhåtaräñöra lifted his face toward the åñi. “Surely this war has been divinely
ordained. O sage, will not all the kñatriyas attain the regions reserved for
heroes, thereby experiencing unending happiness? By giving up their lives in
battle certainly they will achieve fame in this life and joy in the next.”
Vyäsadeva did not answer immediately. He concentrated his mind in
meditation, then replied, “Time destroys the universe and all its creatures.
Nothing in this world lasts forever. Only virtue lasts along with the soul when
all else has been destroyed. Therefore, point your sons to the right path. All of
you should follow Kåñëa’s will. That eternal being has personally shown virtue’s
proper course, but you did not accept it. The slaughter of men, especially
kinsmen, can never produce good. The Vedas always condemn it. You are still
able to prevent what is about to transpire, my son, but you do not because you
are attached to the kingdom. Your virtue is quickly fading. You have allowed
your son, who has been born as Death personified for your family, to lead the
Kurus to ruin.”
Dhåtaräñöra hung his head as his father continued to criticize him in strong
words, his voice breaking the still silence of the empty chamber. “What is the
value of a kingdom gained through sin and earning only sin, O King? Protect
your good name and your virtue. You will then be able to attain heaven. Let
the Päëòavas have their kingdom and let the Kurus have peace.”
Dhåtaräñöra was embarrassed before the sage. His pathetic voice pleaded in
reply. “O Åñi of immeasurable power, your words are without fault. I also know
what you know. Please believe that I am not inclined toward sin. My sons will
not obey me. I have tried my best. Do not forsake me. You are able to protect
my fame and virtue. See me as an ordinary man whose intentions are good but
whose power is limited. O great one, you are the respected grandfather of all
the Kurus. Be gracious to me.”
Vyäsadeva could understand that there was nothing more he could do to help
the Kurus. He stood up to leave. “O King, I am leaving. Is there any last thing
you desire to hear from me?”
“Yes, there is one thing. What signs portend victory for an army?”
The king still hoped that somehow his sons might emerge victorious. He
524

wanted to know if there were any indications of it. After all, the Kaurava
forces were almost twice the Päëòavas’.
Vyäsadeva told him which omens indicate victory. Understanding
Dhåtaräñöra’s mind he said, “The size of an army is of little consequence.
Indeed, a large army which is broken and routed is difficult to regroup. More
important is the courage and camaraderie of the soldiers. Even fifty welltrained men, who do not retreat and who know each other well, can defeat an
entire army. Victory in any battle is always uncertain. Therefore, it is always
superior to negotiate for peace. The result obtained by negotiation is best, that
obtained by disunion is indifferent, and that obtained by war is the worst. Even
the victors suffer heavy losses.”
The åñi then took his leave, the sound of his wooden sandals on the marble
floor echoing through the chamber. Dhåtaräñöra sighed repeatedly as Saïjaya
began to describe what was happening at Kurukñetra.
***
On the battlefield, Yudhiñöhira spoke with Arjuna. “In comparison to the
enemy, our troops are but few. In such cases, Båhaspati has recommended the
needle formation. Quickly array our forces in this way, O Dhanaïjaya, or in
any other way you see fit.”
Arjuna stood before his brother clothed from head to foot in impenetrable
armor. In his hands he held the Gäëòéva, which gave off an iridescent glow.
Nearby stood his fire-colored chariot, with Kåñëa holding the reins of his pure
white horses. He looked at Yudhiñöhira, who shone in his own brilliant armor
and jeweled helmet. “I will arrange our forces in the unassailable Vajra
formation, which Indra designed. I will station Bhéma at the head. Simply upon
seeing him, the enemy will flee like so many terrified animals seeing a lion.
There is no man who can even cast his eye on Våkodara when he is enraged.
He will be our shelter as Indra is the shelter of the celestials.”
Arjuna mounted his chariot and set out to make the arrangement. The leading
chariot divisions moved quickly forward and formed themselves into a long
point, with Bhéma, Dåñöadyumna, Nakula, Sahadeva and Dhristaketu at its
head. Hundreds of thousands of soldiers wielding swords, spears and axes
accompanied those generals. Flanked by great elephants clad in steel armor,
the army thundered forward. Behind the point they opened out into a larger
group, filled with horsemen and infantry. The formation was protected in the
525

rear by Virata and his entire akshauhini of troops.
Nakula and Sahadeva guarded Bhéma’s left and right sides, while Abhimanyu
and Draupadé’s sons protected him from behind. Not far behind them came
Çikhaëòé, protected by Arjuna and advancing with firm determination to kill
Bhéñma. Yudhiñöhira took up his position in the center of the army. He was
protected all around by many chariot fighters, and he appeared like the sun
surrounded by bright planets.
The warriors’ standards rose above the troops like palm trees decorated with
gold and silver. Above them all was Arjuna’s huge banner, with Hanumän at
its top shouting out his fearful battle cry. As the army advanced, Bhéma
whirled his mace and roared. He seemed to scorch the Kauravas by his glance.
Even his own troops were afraid of him.
Once the Päëòava forces were arrayed, they stopped to await orders. The two
commanders had yet to blow their conches before the fighting could begin.
The Päëòavas looked toward the eastern side of the battlefield, where the
immense Kaurava army spread out across the entire horizon as far as the eye
could see. A strong wind began to blow, carrying sharp stones and pebbles, and
the sky thundered, although no clouds were visible. Meteors fell and the earth
trembled. A thick cloud of dust rose and obscured the sun.
Seeing the Päëòavas’ Vajra formation, Bhéñma arrayed the Kaurava troops in a
counter-formation. With his white headdress, white banner, white bow, and a
white umbrella over his head, he looked like a white mountain. Duryodhana
rode in the midst of the army, riding an elephant the color of a blue lotus.
Above his seat a large white umbrella sheltered him. His great mace rested on
his shoulder and his bow was by his side. He was eulogized by bards and singers,
and was protected by hundreds of thousands of troops.
All of Dhåtaräñöra’s sons were in the division under Bhéñma’s command and
personal protection. Countless kings and princes from every part of the globe,
surrounded by their armies, advanced toward the Päëòavas. Behind all the
troops came Droëa, riding on a golden chariot yoked with red horses.
Gazing across at the Kaurava army with Bhéñma at their head, Yudhiñöhira
again became apprehensive. He turned to Arjuna. “O mighty-armed hero, it
seems to me that Bhéñma has arranged his troops in an impenetrable formation.
Nor do I see any possibility of overpowering the grandfather. He has limitless
strength and unfading glory. Who can approach him in battle? How can
victory be ours?”
526

Yudhiñöhira appeared disconsolate and dejected. Arjuna offered words of
encouragement. “Listen, O King, as I tell you how only a few men can
overpower a vast army. Båhaspati explained this in days of yore when the
celestials fought the demons. Those who desire victory do not conquer by
prowess but by truth, compassion, piety and virtue. Fight with assurance, dear
brother, for victory is always where righteousness is found.”
Yudhiñöhira still seemed doubtful. Was his cause even righteous? It seemed to
him that his desire for the kingdom was at the root of this war. Arjuna, sensing
his misgivings, continued. “We have Kåñëa on our side. He is righteousness and
truth personified. Närada said that victory is certain to go to Kåñëa and
whomever is on His side. Indeed, it is one of the Lord’s eternal attributes. His
might is infinite. He is the original person, beyond and above this mundane
world with all its politics and suffering. I do not see the cause for your sorrow
when that Lord of the celestials is on your side and wishing you success.”
Thinking of Kåñëa, Yudhiñöhira felt pacified. He looked at his troops. “It is
exactly as you say, Arjuna. Kåñëa desires this conflict and thus we should not
hesitate. Tell our men to fight to the best of their power, with fairness and
with the desire to attain heaven.”
Yudhiñöhira then distributed charity to the numerous Brahmins who had
accompanied him onto the battlefield. He was surrounded by åñis, who walked
around him chanting hymns in his praise and invoking auspiciousness for the
battle. Having been given gold, cows, fruits, flowers and cloth, they left the
field, uttering prayers and Vedic mantras.
Arjuna’s chariot moved to the front of the army. Kåñëa said, “There stands
that mighty hero among men Bhéñma, who has performed hundreds of
sacrifices, who scorches his foes in battle, and who will soon attack our troops
like a lion. Innumerable troops protect him as clouds cover the sun. Make him
your target, Arjuna, for none other can face him.”
Kåñëa told Arjuna to offer a prayer to the goddess Durgä so that she would
empower him. Arjuna alighted from his chariot and knelt down with folded
palms. With his face to the east he chanted hymns from the Vedas to
supplicate the powerful goddess of the material energy. As he prayed, the
goddess appeared above him in the sky. “O son of Päëòu, you will surely attain
victory. You have the invincible Näräyaëa to help you. No foe can defeat you,
not even the mighty Indra.”
Durgä vanished and Arjuna rose to his feet. Considering himself blessed, he
527

remounted his chariot with a joyful heart.
Seeing that both armies were in position and waiting for the battle to begin,
Bhéñma raised his conch and sounded a great blast. At once the sounds of
hundreds of other conches reverberated around the battlefield as all the
leading warriors joined with him. Drums, bugles, trumpets and horns were all
suddenly sounded, creating a tumult.
Arjuna and Kåñëa took out their conchshells. They blew long and mighty
blasts that resounded across the battlefield. Bhéma, the twins, and all the other
leading Päëòava fighters also sounded their conchshells. Hearing the celestial
sound, the Kauravas felt their hearts quake, but Bhéñma was cheered. His eyes
flooded with tears as he recognized the sound of Kåñëa’s transcendental conch.
Here was the eternal Lord of all the worlds prepared to protect His devoted
servants by personally coming into battle with them. Bhéñma gazed across at
Arjuna’s chariot. It was a cruel destiny that had brought him into opposition
with Kåñëa and the Päëòavas. Surely duty was all-powerful.

Chapter 4
The Bhagavad-gétä
The first maneuvers of the battle began. Arjuna took up the Gäëòéva and said
to Kåñëa, “O infallible one, please draw my chariot between the two armies so
that I may see the enemy and how they are positioned. Go forward, O Lord, so
I can see who is desirous of fighting with us today. Let us see those fools who
wish to please the evil-minded son of Dhåtaräñöra.”
Kåñëa drove the horses forward and the fine chariot moved into the center of
the field. Kåñëa smiled. “Just behold, O Arjuna, all the Kurus assembled here.”
Arjuna looked across the field. Kåñëa could understand Arjuna’s mind. The
long-awaited time for war had arrived––a terrible fratricidal war. There was
now no turning back. Suddenly seeing the horror of it before him, Arjuna
gazed at his relatives and friends arrayed across from him––men who were like
fathers, brothers, sons and grandsons, as well as teachers, uncles, friends, inlaws and well-wishers.
Arjuna was overwhelmed with compassion. How could he possibly have looked
528

forward to killing his own kinsmen and friends? He felt weak, and addressed
Kåñëa in a trembling voice. “My dear Lord, seeing my friends and relatives
before me in a fighting spirit, I feel my limbs quivering and my mouth drying
up.”
Arjuna’s bow slipped from his hand and his body shook. His skin was burning
and he felt his hair standing on end. “O Keçava, I do not think I can carry on
in this fight. I am forgetting myself and my mind is reeling. It seems to me that
only evil and misfortune will result from this battle. How can any good come
from killing one’s own relatives? What value is victory if all our friends and
loved ones are killed?”
Arjuna dropped to his knees. There was no question of fighting. It had been
different when he faced the Kauravas on Virata’s field. At that time, he had no
intention of killing them. He had only wanted to teach them a lesson. This
time, however, either the Päëòavas or the Kauravas would not be returning
home. Tears streamed from his eyes as he revealed his mind to Kåñëa. “O
Govinda, I have no desire for a kingdom bereft of my kinsfolk. When I see my
teachers, fathers, sons, and so many other near and dear ones standing before
me, my thirst for the fight completely deserts me. Even though they may be
desiring my death, I cannot possibly think of killing them. O Janärdana, I
would not slay them even in exchange for the three worlds, let alone this earth.
I can see no happiness arising from this battle.”
Sweat covered Arjuna’s brow. His breath came in heavy sighs. The sight of old
and respected personalities such as Bhéñma, Droëa, Çalya and Bählika, all of
whom he loved dearly, filled him with grief. The many young princes, sons of
the Kauravas and their allies, were all like his own sons, and he felt compassion
for them too. Even Dhåtaräñöra’s sons were pitiable because they were so
foolish. How could there be any virtue in killing them?
Arjuna implored Kåñëa. “In my opinion we will be overcome by sin if we slay
such aggressors. Our proper duty is surely to forgive them. Even if they have
lost sight of virtue due to greed, we ourselves should not forget religious
principles in the same way. If we kill the learned family elders, the traditional
rituals will be forgotten, and they are essential for religious life. Without
tradition, the whole of society will gradually become godless. By slaying the
men, we will leave the women unprotected. They will then be prey to sinful
men and unwanted children will be born. Who will train these children? O
Kåñëa, I will be responsible for all these social anomalies and will be worthy of
529

a permanent residence in hell.”
Remembering his moral training, Arjuna based his arguments on Vedic
statements. It seemed to him that killing his relatives was clearly immoral,
particularly killing his elders, who were responsible for maintaining the
religious traditions in his dynasty. Surely they should never be killed, especially
for the dubious cause of winning wealth and kingdoms.
Arjuna wept. “I would rather the Kauravas killed me, unarmed and unresisting,
than raise my weapons against them for the sake of my own happiness.” He
threw down his weapons and slumped in his chariot.
Kåñëa was still smiling mildly as He looked at His grief-stricken friend. This
was an uncharacteristic display of timidity from such a fearsome warrior. He
replied to Arjuna firmly. “How have these impurities come upon you at such a
critical time, O Arjuna? This is not at all befitting a man who understands
life’s true values. It leads not to higher planets but to degradation and infamy.
O son of Kunté, do not yield to such impotence. It is quite unbecoming. Give
up this petty weakness of heart and arise, O chastiser of enemies.”
Arjuna looked with surprise at Kåñëa. What could He mean? He had simply
dismissed all his arguments. Kåñëa had never given improper or disastrous
advice at any time. He was the personification of all religious principles.
Arjuna was perplexed. Why had Kåñëa disregarded the religious considerations
he had raised? Of course, for a kñatriya it was always religious to fight and
check miscreants, but these were not ordinary wrongdoers. Bhéñma, Droëa,
Kåpa, and so many others were highly respectable men who carefully followed
their religious duties.
Still shaking, Arjuna asked, “My dear Kåñëa, although it is right to kill sinful
enemies, how can I fire arrows at men who are worthy of my worship? I would
rather become a beggar than win this world at the cost of their lives. Even if
they are afflicted with greed, they are still my superiors. What religious
principle sanctions slaying them? If we win the war then all our ill-gotten gains
will be tainted with their blood. It seems to me that winning will be no better
than losing. Victory is in any event uncertain, but in this case it is not even
desirable. How could I live after causing my relatives’ death? Yet they are
standing before me with upraised weapons.”
Arjuna could see no way out of his situation. The Kauravas were clearly intent
on killing him and his army. Still, he had no heart for the fight. Nor did it
seem religious. At the same time, his religious arguments had no effect on
530

Kåñëa. What was his duty now? There was only one person who could help
him. He looked up at Kåñëa, who sat peacefully with the reins in His gloved
hands. It was by Kåñëa’s help that Arjuna and his brothers had survived so
many difficulties. He was without doubt the wisest person. He would know
what to do.
Deciding to surrender himself to whatever Kåñëa advised, Arjuna said, “O
Kåñëa, I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure due to
weakness of heart. Surely I am being consumed by miserly and selfish
considerations, but I am not able to overcome them. In this condition I ask You
to please tell me what is best for me. Now I am Your disciple and a soul
surrendered unto You. Please instruct me. I can see no means to drive away
this grief. Even winning a prosperous kingdom equal to that of the gods will
not assuage my sorrow. O Govinda, I will not fight.”
Arjuna fell silent. Now it was up to Kåñëa to convince him. On the other side
of the field Bhéñma looked with interest at Arjuna’s solitary chariot in the
middle of the two armies. Why was Arjuna not in position? He seemed to have
dropped down in his chariot. Something was going on between him and Kåñëa.
Bhéñma raised his hand to hold back his forces. Was Kåñëa considering a final
peace effort, even on the battlefield? Surely not. The conches had already been
blown to signal the beginning of the fight. Whatever Kåñëa was doing, Bhéñma
wanted to respect it. Bhéñma decided to wait until Arjuna’s chariot moved off
again before giving the order to charge. Yudhiñöhira was also holding his forces
in check, so there was no need for immediate action.
Kåñëa now smiled more broadly. He was pleased that Arjuna, His dear friend,
was ready to accept Him as teacher and guide. Holding up His hand in blessing,
He said, “Although you are speaking learned words from the scriptures, you are
still mourning for something unworthy of grief. A wise man laments neither
for the living nor the dead. Both you, I, and all these assembled kñatriyas have
always existed and will always exist. We are eternal souls, passing from body to
body. Even in this life we see how the body changes, even though we remain
the same person. In the same way, when death comes, we are given a new body.
A self-controlled person is not bewildered by such a change.”
Kneeling at Kåñëa’s feet, Arjuna felt immediate relief. As usual, Kåñëa had
gone straight to the heart of the matter. Arjuna listened attentively as Kåñëa
continued. “O son of Kunté, happiness and distress come and go constantly like
winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception alone, O
531

Bharata, and one should tolerate them without being disturbed. A person
capable of such tolerance is eligible for liberation from all misery. The great
seers who know the truth have concluded from a careful analysis that the soul
and spiritual reality are unchanging, and that the temporary material body is
ultimately without any basis in truth. The soul pervades the body and is
indestructible. No one can destroy the immeasurable and eternal soul, but the
body is sure to come to an end. Therefore, fight without any compunction for
your relatives’ bodies, O Arjuna.”
Arjuna understood well enough what Kåñëa was saying. The soul was surely
eternal; but was that a good argument to use when he was about to kill? Death
and subsequent rebirth were painful experiences for the soul.
Out of love for Arjuna, and understanding his doubts, Kåñëa said, “Neither he
who thinks the living entity the slayer nor he who thinks it slain is in
knowledge, for the self slays not nor is slain. For the soul there is neither birth
nor death at any time. He is never created. Unborn and ever-existing, he is not
slain when the body is slain. Knowing this, how can you ever be the cause of
anyone’s death? Indeed, the body’s death allows the soul to receive a new body,
just as a person puts on new garments after discarding the old.”
Arjuna understood that Kåñëa was reassuring him that his beloved relatives
would not be the losers. By killing their bodies, Arjuna would free them from
the pain and suffering brought on by their present karma, and they would then
be given a new start in a better body, probably in the higher planets. But
Arjuna worried about the celestial weapons he would use, fearing they might
somehow hurt even the soul.
Kåñëa answered that doubt. “There is no weapon, be it fire, wind or water, that
can damage or cut the soul. The soul is unchanging and impervious to all
material effects. The soul is described by the Vedas as invisible, inconceivable
and immutable. The body is only the outward dress of the indestructible soul.”
Arjuna remained silent. Even knowing Bhéñma and Droëa to be eternal souls,
he still grieved at the prospect of their death. Kåñëa had already instructed him
that such distresses were unavoidable and had to be tolerated, but it would not
be easy.
Kåñëa smiled affectionately at His friend. “Even if you believe the self to be the
same as the body, you still have no reason to lament, O mighty-armed hero.
The body is matter, and material objects are always being created and
destroyed. What wise man laments for the inevitable changes to matter which
532

are wrought by time? Whatever you believe, the effects of time cannot be
checked. Death follows birth, and birth follows death in due course. Simply
perform your duty without lamentation, for you cannot change the course of
time, which is ultimately the cause of everyone’s death.”
Arjuna reflected on Kåñëa’s words. It was difficult to comprehend the soul’s
existence. That it was undying and indestructible had been made clear, but its
actual nature remained a mystery.
Without pausing Kåñëa concluded His instructions about the soul. “Those who
know the soul consider him amazing. He is described in the Vedas as amazing.
Even persons who have heard all the descriptions of the soul still fail to
understand him at all. Nevertheless, O descendent of Bharata, he cannot be
slain at any time. Therefore, give up your useless grief for your relatives.”
Kåñëa changed tack and began to address Arjuna’s fear that he would be
tainted by sin if he killed his elders. “You are a kñatriya, Arjuna, and it is thus
your foremost duty to fight according to religious principles. You should not
hesitate. Rather, you should embrace this opportunity, for it opens the way to
heaven for you. If you do not fight, you will incur sin for neglecting your duty.
Thus you will lose your good reputation. You will become infamous, and for a
respectable person dishonor is worse than death. No one will think you
desisted from fighting out of compassion. They will think you fled in fear and
will thus lose their respect for you. What could be more painful than that?”
Hearing his commitment to his warrior duties challenged, Arjuna shifted
uncomfortably. The thought that he might be acting sinfully was painful, and
the loss of his good reputation would be intolerable. Kåñëa continued.
“O Pärtha, in this battle there are two possibilities: you will either be killed and
thus attain heaven, or you will defeat your enemies and win the earth.
Therefore, fight with determination. This too is My desire. O Pärtha, fight
because it is your duty without thought for happiness or distress, loss or gain,
victory or defeat. In this way you will never incur sin.”
Arjuna felt his heart opening as he absorbed Kåñëa’s instructions. Kåñëa had
countered his fears that he would suffer and become sinful by fighting.
Actually, it would be sinful not to fight.
“I have told you some existential truths about the soul, O son of Kunté. Listen
now as I speak about working without desire for the results, and thus without
entangling yourself in karmic reactions. This is the path to liberation. Once
you are on this path you will not fall back again into the abyss of material
533

existence. Those on this path only desire to serve the Supreme and are resolute
in performing their religious duties. Those who seek worldly happiness,
however, are constantly overwhelmed by diverse temptations.
“Only unintelligent men are attracted to those sections of the Vedas that speak
about material happiness. Desiring sensual pleasures, opulence and power, they
think there is nothing more to life. They become bewildered by such desires
and cannot fix their minds upon yoga practice. Do not let yourself be attracted
by anything in this world, O Pärtha. Be free from all the dualities of happiness
and distress. Established in the self, give up your anxiety for material gain and
safety.”
Arjuna could understand that his earlier arguments were aimed only at
material happiness. Although he had argued on the strength of Vedic morality,
it was becoming clear that he had not fully understood the Vedas and their
ultimate aim. There were higher principles and truths. Kåñëa continued to
explain them.
“The Vedas give directions for achieving material happiness, O Arjuna, but
there is a deeper purpose behind all Vedic instructions. One who knows this
purpose can satisfy all his desires without pursuing them all separately, just as
one who has access to a great river has no need for small wells and ponds. The
greatest aim of life is achieved by working without desire for the fruits of
action, simply because it is one’s duty to do so. In this way you can be situated
in yoga without attachment for success or failure in your work. Thus you will
remain untouched by sin. Even your previous karmic reactions will be
destroyed by such work. You will then be able to attain the highest destination,
the supreme abode of God, and be freed forever from the cycle of birth and
death. When you are no longer attracted by the promises of material happiness
given in the Vedas, and remain satisfied by the self alone, you will then be
fixed in the divine consciousness which leads to eternal liberation.”
Arjuna asked, “How can we recognize a man in divine consciousness, O Kåñëa?
What are his symptoms?”
“Such a person takes no delight in sensual pleasures, O Pärtha. He is ever
satisfied within himself. No miseries can disturb him, nor any kind of material
happiness. He is without attachment, fear and anger, and remains always aloof
to the dualities of this world. His senses are under complete control, even
though he may still experience sense desires. His mind is fixed upon the
Supreme and he is always peaceful. He does not dwell upon the objects of sense
534

pleasure, which can steal away even a practiced yogé’s mind, and thus he keeps
himself free from all material entanglement. Due to such sense control, his
intelligence is undisturbed and he is peaceful. O Arjuna, one whose senses are
uncontrolled is not peaceful. How, then, can he ever be happy?”
Arjuna was bewildered. Kåñëa was recommending yoga and sense control––
keeping oneself peaceful––and at the same time telling him to fight. How were
the two compatible? “O Keçava, why do You want me to engage in this ghastly
warfare if you think that yoga and detachment are better? Surely fighting
requires me to be motivated by a desire for victory. I am confused by Your
instructions. Please tell me clearly what will be most beneficial for me.”
“O sinless Arjuna, there are two paths to liberation: one involves renunciation
and the pursuit of knowledge, while the other involves working without
material desires. One cannot achieve perfection by renunciation alone, for by
simply stopping work one does not necessarily remain free from karmic
reaction. Impelled by his nature a man is forced to act at every moment, even if
the action is only in his mind. To withdraw the senses while allowing the mind
to think of sense pleasures is useless, O Arjuna. It is simply a pretense of yoga.
Far better is the man who uses his intelligence to control his senses and at the
same times works without attachment.”
Arjuna thought of his own case. Even if he tried to renounce the battle and
remain aloof, his mind would still work. It was likely he would continue to
think of Duryodhana and his evil deeds, and of how Yudhiñöhira had been
robbed of his kingdom. Those thoughts would sooner or later impel him to act–
–to take up arms and fight. But how can one fight without attachment?
“Work must be done as a sacrifice for Viñëu, O son of Kunté. This is detached
work. Any other work causes bondage in this world. Therefore, work only for
His satisfaction. By such sacrificial work a man can achieve all life’s necessities
and at the same time make spiritual progress. Only a man who is completely
self-satisfied need not perform such work.”
Arjuna wondered if he was able to remain self-satisfied. He already had some
experience of yoga and meditation. Did he really need to work?
Kåñëa smiled. “A genuinely detached man sees no need for work, but he also
sees no need to give up work. He works simply as a matter of duty and without
desire for the results. By this work he ultimately attains the Supreme. He also
sets the right example for others, for whatever a great man does will always be
followed by ordinary men.”
535

Kåñëa was thinking of Arjuna’s position in society. He was highly esteemed as a
leader and hero. If he gave up his duty, even assuming he was qualified to do so,
then his example would be imitated by unqualified men. Kåñëa reminded
Arjuna of the famous king, Janaka. Although renowned as an advanced
spiritualist and quite able to remain fixed in meditation on the Supreme,
Janaka had nevertheless continued to do his duty as a king.
“Think of My own example, O Pärtha. You know My identity as the Supreme
Lord of all the worlds. What duty is there for Me? Nevertheless, I execute all
the duties incumbent on a man in My position very carefully. If I did not do so,
then all the worlds would fall into ruination, for all men would follow My
example.”
Arjuna knew that Kåñëa, as a householder and a member of the royal order,
was scrupulous in performing the duties prescribed in the Vedas for such men.
It was a perfect example.
“One who knows the truth knows well the difference between material work,
motivated only by sensual desires, and work done for the pleasure of the
Supreme. O Arjuna, I am that Supreme. Therefore, fight for My pleasure,
without desire for personal gain, with no claims to proprietorship, and without
lethargy. Those who work only according to My instructions, with full faith in
Me, attain complete liberation. Those who disregard My injunctions, however,
are simply fools and will achieve neither perfection nor happiness.”
This made sense to Arjuna. He had always understood Kåñëa’s divinity, and
that knowledge had always stood him in good stead. He and his brothers had
enjoyed Kåñëa’s protection up to the present moment when He stood ready to
go with them into battle against their enemies. Why, then, did not all men
devote themselves to Kåñëa’s instructions? Arjuna voiced his doubt. “Why,
dear Lord, do men not do their religious duties?”
“They are overpowered by lust, the greatest enemy in this world. Due to
excessive desire for material objects, men commit sinful activities, not seeing
the suffering that will result. Lust is never satisfied. Rather, it burns like fire,
and when it is frustrated, it turns to anger. A man is thus completely
bewildered when he gives in to lust. O Arjuna, you should check lust by
controlling your senses. Otherwise it will destroy your knowledge and selfrealization. Listen now as I explain the science of sacrifice and self- control.”
Kåñëa told Arjuna that the knowledge He was speaking was ancient. He had
first told it to the sun-god millions of years ago. Hearing this, Arjuna asked,
536

“How can I accept this, Kåñëa? It appears that You were born in this world only
recently.”
“Both of us have had countless births, O Arjuna. I can remember all of them,
but you cannot. Actually, I am never born like ordinary men. My body is
transcendental and neither changes nor deteriorates. Still, I appear to take
birth in every age. I come only to establish religion and to curb irreligion,
Pärtha. In this way, I deliver the pious and annihilate the demons. One who
understands this truth about Me will not have to take another material body.
Those who take refuge in Me will become free from attachment, fear and anger
and will attain pure, transcendental love for Me. According to their faith in
Me, I reciprocate with all men, O Arjuna. Anyone can attain Me.”
Kåñëa explained that He had also arranged for the fulfillment of men’s
material desires. He was prepared to give everyone whatever they wanted,
whether it be sense enjoyment or love of God. He had no vested interests in
the material world and simply acted in reciprocation with men’s desires,
according to what they deserved. Kåñëa Himself was always transcendental to
the material world. Knowing this, all the liberated souls in the past had
attained perfection. They acted only for Kåñëa’s pleasure. Such work was
without reaction, as He was the supreme transcendence.
But those who renounced work, if the renunciation was not done for His
pleasure, were still subject to reaction. Anything done on one’s own account,
whether motivated by attachment or repulsion, carried a karmic reaction.
After describing various kinds of sacrifice, Kåñëa said, “All types of sacrifice
are meant to culminate in transcendental knowledge, or realizing one’s
identity as an eternal servitor of the Supreme. This is the mature fruit of all
mysticism and it burns to ashes all of one’s accumulated karmic reactions. By
working in this knowledge one is never again affected by the reactions of work.
All of your doubts have arisen out of ignorance, O Arjuna. Kill them with the
weapon of knowledge. Armed with yoga, O Bharata, stand and fight.”
As Kåñëa went on to explain how to work in devotion, Arjuna began to
understand that this was true renunciation. Only by dedicating all one’s work
to the pleasure of the Supreme could one be genuinely detached. Kåñëa
explained that working in such consciousness gradually brought one to the
point of always remembering the Supreme, or samädhi. This type of yoga was
no less effective than the practice of asceticism and meditation; indeed, it was
easier, for to give up everything and meditate in a solitary place would be
537

difficult for a worldly man like Arjuna. To Arjuna’s relief, Kåñëa made it clear
that this was not necessary. He also assured Arjuna that the path of yoga, once
begun, was never lost. Even if he did not achieve success in this life, in his next
life he would be able to continue from whatever point he had left off.
Having established that constantly thinking of the Supreme was the highest
goal of yoga, Kåñëa made His own position clearer. “It is I who should always be
remembered, O Pärtha. There is no truth superior to Me. Everything rests
upon Me, as pearls are strung upon a thread. I am the creation and dissolution
of all the worlds. People are bewildered by material desires. Thus they do not
know Me, who am always above the material world. It is hard to fully overcome
attraction to this material world and its allurements. Only by surrendering to
Me is it possible. It may take many births and deaths of striving in yoga until
one finally comes to understand Me. It is a rare soul who achieves such
perfection. Due to their lack of intelligence, most men are content to worship
lesser gods. Other foolish men think that beyond Me lies some impersonal
supreme existence. Because of deep-seated material desires, such fools can
never know Me, although I am the Lord and the knower of all living beings.”
Arjuna was feeling reassured by Kåñëa’s instructions. All his life he had
thought only of Kåñëa as his protector and greatest friend. Now Kåñëa was
telling him that this was life’s perfection. The highest achievement in life was
to remember Kåñëa at the moment of death, and thus attain His eternal,
spiritual abode.
But this required a lifetime of practice. Arjuna listened without question as
Kåñëa described the best process for always remembering Him.
“This is the king of knowledge, Arjuna, the most secret of secrets and the
perfection of religion. It is I alone who am to be worshipped and served with
love. Fools cannot understand how I am able to assume a human form and
appear in this world. They do not know My transcendental nature as the
Supreme Lord of everything. Intelligent men, however, are fully engaged in My
devotional service. They are always chanting My glories, endeavoring to please
Me with great determination, bowing down before Me, and worshipping Me
with all their hearts. I always personally protect such persons. I am indebted to
anyone who lovingly offers Me even a leaf, flower or fruit. Therefore, you
should do everything as an offering to Me, O son of Kunté. In this way, you will
achieve perfection. This is the highest instruction. Engage your mind always in
thinking of Me, become My devotee, offer obeisances to Me, and worship Me.
538

By such full absorption in Me surely you will come to Me, life’s supreme goal.”
Arjuna was now looking at his friend with amazement and love. The Supreme
Lord had become his charioteer. Surely this was a testament of His loving
reciprocation with His devotees. Who could ever understand it? Kåñëa seemed
so human. How would people be able to accept His supreme divinity?
Again understanding Arjuna’s doubts, Kåñëa went on. “Those who are devoted
to Me are able to know of My position and opulence. Because you are My dear
friend, I will explain further about Myself. Not even the demigods and great
sages can know Me in full, for in every respect I am their source. I am the
source of all things, material and spiritual. Everything emanates from Me. The
wise who know this perfectly fully engage in My loving devotional service.
Their thoughts always dwell in Me and they derive great pleasure from talking
about Me. To one who constantly serves Me with love, I give the
understanding by which he can come to Me. With the shining lamp of
knowledge I destroy all their ignorance.”
Arjuna had no doubts about Kåñëa’s position. He had already experienced
Kåñëa’s power and opulence, as well as having heard it described by so many
åñis. Now Kåñëa was making it plain. Arjuna was awe-struck. Folding his palms
he knelt before Kåñëa and said, “You are the original Supreme Person, the
ultimate abode, and the Absolute Truth. Unborn, eternal and transcendental,
You are the greatest of the great and the possessor of all opulences. This is
confirmed by those sages who can see the truth, such as Närada, Asita, Devala
and Vyäsadeva, and now You Yourself are declaring it to me. O Kåñëa, I totally
accept as truth all that You have told me. None can know You, not even the
gods and Asuras. You alone can know Yourself by Your own potency, O Lord
of all beings, God of gods, Lord of the universe!”
Feeling a surge of divine love, Arjuna asked Kåñëa to describe Himself further.
“Tell me how it is that You pervade all the worlds, O Lord. How should You be
remembered and how can You be known? Please tell me in detail of Your
mystic power and opulences. I never tire of hearing such descriptions and long
to taste the nectar of Your words more and more.”
“My opulence is limitless, O Arjuna. I shall therefore tell you only of that
which is most prominent.”
Kåñëa explained that although everything was a manifestation of His energy
and power, He would highlight for Arjuna some principal features by which He
could be remembered. He told him that He was Viñëu among gods, the sun
539

among planets, Çiva among Rudras, and Meru among mountains. He described
Himself in many ways, revealing to Arjuna how He was present in everything
Arjuna saw. Concluding His description, He said, “Know that all opulent,
beautiful and glorious creations spring from but a spark of My splendor. Is
there any need for so much detailed information about Me? With a tiny
fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe.”
Tears streamed from Arjuna’s eyes. Remembering how he would often sport
with Kåñëa as if he were an equal, he said in a choked voice, “Only out of
illusion did I ever believe You to be a man like me. That illusion is now
dispelled. I am convinced of Your supreme position. But, O greatest of all
personalities, there are many who will not believe this truth. Please, therefore,
show Yourself in all Your majesty. I too desire to see that great form which
pervades and supports the worlds. If I am able to see it, O Lord, then please
display it to me now.”
Kåñëa assented to Arjuna’s request. “See now My mystic opulence, O son of
Kunté. Here are My hundreds and thousands of varied divine and multicolored
forms. My dear Arjuna, I shall bestow upon you divine vision, for you cannot
see Me with your present eyes. Behold, O best of the Bharatas, all that you
desire to see and all that you will ever desire to see in the future. Everything
moving and unmoving is here in one place.”
As Arjuna looked on in astonishment, Kåñëa displayed His universal form. In
Hastinäpura He had shown a partial manifestation of this form, but this time
He exhibited it in full. Arjuna became aware of a vast form possessing
unlimited mouths and eyes. It was decorated with countless celestial ornaments
and held many divine weapons. Decked with celestial garments and garlands, it
was wondrous, brilliant, unlimited, and expanded everywhere. It seemed as if
hundreds of thousands of suns had risen simultaneously in the sky.
Arjuna felt his hair standing on end. He bowed his head to the floor of his
chariot and offered many prayers to Kåñëa. In Kåñëa’s divine form he could see
all the gods headed by Brahmä and Çiva with all the åñis, Siddhas and Nägas.
Every kind of created being appeared in that form, all the worlds were visible,
and nothing was missing.
Finding it difficult to look at the universal form, Arjuna said, “O inexhaustible
one, this unlimited body of Yours is wonderful and at the same time terrifying.
I see all the gods and åñis standing before You and offering prayers. As they are
disturbed, so am I, dear Lord. Seeing this tremendous manifestation I am losing
540

my peace of mind and my balance. I cannot look upon Your thousands of
blazing, death-like faces. All the soldiers of both sides appear to be rushing into
the fearful mouths of those faces. Indeed, You are destroying all men and
everything else. Everything is entering Your mouths as moths fall into a fire.
Covering all the universe, You are manifest with terrible, scorching rays.”
Arjuna was trembling. “O Lord of lords, so fierce of form, please tell me who
You are and what is Your mission.”
Kåñëa’s voice seemed to Arjuna to be resounding from all sides as He replied. “I
am Time, O Pärtha, the great destroyer of all the worlds. With the exception of
you, your brothers, and a few others, everyone will be slain. This will come to
pass whether you fight or not, Arjuna. Therefore, do your duty as a warrior and
you will become an instrument of My desire. Bhéñma, Droëa, and all the Kuru
heroes are already dead. Fight without disturbance, Arjuna, and you will gain a
glorious victory.”
***
Sitting before Dhåtaräñöra, Saïjaya saw everything that was taking place
between Arjuna and Kåñëa. He described it in detail to the blind king, telling
him the exact words spoken by them both. The king was amazed as he heard of
Kåñëa’s divine opulence. As Saïjaya tried to describe the universal form,
Dhåtaräñöra felt his heart tremble. How could his sons face such power and
survive? Now Kåñëa was saying that all the Kuru heroes had already been put
to death by a divine arrangement. Could it be true? Was Kåñëa really able to
make such a prediction? It seemed that not everything was in His power. After
all, He had come to Hastinäpura seeking peace and had failed in His mission.
Perhaps He would also fail to fulfill His desire to see the Päëòavas victorious in
the war.
Saïjaya told the king what Arjuna said to Kåñëa after he heard that all the
fighters would be killed. “Arjuna could understand Kåñëa’s desire. He then
replied, ‘All this is rightly done, O Lord. You are the protector of pious and
perfected beings and the destroyer of atheists and demons. This is for the good
of all, for even the demons will finally be brought to their senses by this
treatment. O almighty one, everyone should simply offer their obeisances unto
You. You are the ultimate sanctuary. Knowing everything, You are all that is
knowable. I fall before You again and again. My obeisances from every side, O
Lord! I have obviously disrespected You until now. Please forgive me. Not
541

knowing Your glories I have lain with You on the same bed, jested with You,
and surely dishonored You many times out of madness or love. O infallible one,
please excuse me, even as a father would excuse his son, or a lover his
beloved.’”
Saïjaya sat with his eyes closed, envisioning the scene. He saw Arjuna bowing
at Kåñëa’s feet. As Arjuna stood up he said, “O almighty one, having seen this
form which I have never seen before, my mind is filled with fear. Please be
gracious and allow me to see Your beautiful Viñëu form, with its four arms and
divine decorations.”
Kåñëa said, “Happily have I shown you, by My spiritual potency, this supreme
universal form. No one else has seen this form. Not by any means can it ever be
seen, O Arjuna. You have been disturbed and frightened by this horrible
feature of Mine. Let it be finished. See now My Näräyaëa form and be peaceful
again.”
Kåñëa withdrew his universal form and Arjuna saw before him the graceful
form of Näräyaëa, with His four arms holding a conch shell, disc, club, and
lotus flower. After some moments, that form again changed to Kåñëa’s original,
two-armed form, from which all other forms emanate.
Arjuna regained his composure and felt encouraged. Kåñëa said, “O Arjuna,
although My universal form is difficult to see, it is even harder to know My
original form. The gods are always seeking an opportunity to see Me as I now
appear. This form is the most dear and it can only be known by undivided
devotional service. Only in this way can one enter into the mysteries of My
understanding.”
As Saïjaya repeated Kåñëa’s words to Dhåtaräñöra, the king heard about the
science of bhakti-yoga, or devotional service. Kåñëa first explained that there
were two classes of transcendentalists: those who worshipped the unmanifested
Supreme Brahman––the eternal, spiritual energy which is the basis of all
existence––and those who worshipped Kåñëa’s personal form.
“Of the two, he who fixes his mind on My personal form, worshipping Me with
faith and love, is considered the most perfect. For the other class, advancement
in spiritual life is difficult, although they too will finally come to the point of
worshipping Me when their realization matures. Indeed, O Arjuna, I am the
basis and origin of the impersonal Brahman. Therefore, worship Me alone. I
swiftly deliver My devoted worshippers from the fearful ocean of birth and
death. They then live with Me in perfect happiness eternally.”
542

Kåñëa then explained how to approach the practice of bhakti-yoga by the
gradual method. After describing the qualities found in a consummate
practitioner of bhakti, He spoke about the material nature and consciousness.
Through descriptions of the knower, knowledge, and the objects of knowledge,
Kåñëa explained in detail how He pervaded the material energy and how He
was the Supersoul in every living being. He thus assured Arjuna of His
complete ability to protect and deliver His worshippers.
From Kåñëa’s instructions, Arjuna could understand that the living being is
the cause of his own happiness and distress. By initially desiring to turn away
from God, he is placed in the material energy. Then by associating with the
various aspects of matter, he becomes more and more entangled, being
attracted to various forms of material enjoyment. He is thus obliged to take
birth in various species of life. All the while the Supersoul accompanies him as
the witness of all his actions. The Lord is the overseer and sanctioner of the
living being’s activities. If the living being turns again toward the Lord, he can
at once become free of matter.
Kåñëa continued. “Those who can see the difference between the body and the
soul, and who can see the Supersoul, are eligible to approach the supreme
spiritual abode. Such persons will not become degraded in this world, even
though engaged in action.”
Arjuna was curious to know how the soul first came into the clutches of
matter. Kåñëa explained it in full. By this knowledge, one would be able to
extract himself from the material energy. Arjuna inquired as to what were the
qualities of a person who had achieved complete freedom from material
bondage, and Kåñëa gave a detailed description. He concluded by saying, “He
who engages in full devotional service to Me, unfailing in all circumstances, is
at once freed from the material energy and raised to the transcendental
platform.”
Arjuna understood that freedom from matter did not mean leaving the
material world altogether. It simply meant being freed from attraction and
attachment to material things and working only for the pleasure of the Lord.
In this mood Arjuna should fight. Kåñëa had clearly elaborated on his initial
instruction to Arjuna to fight without material attachment.
Having told Arjuna about the auspicious path of bhakti-yoga and the qualities
of a person on that path, Kåñëa went on to describe the atheistic persons who
went further and further away from God. “Such persons are absorbed in the
543

conceit of pride and false prestige. They are driven by lust and greed, and they
believe that satisfying their senses is the prime necessity of life. Perplexed by
various anxieties and bound by a network of illusions, they become strongly
attached to material pleasures and fall down into hell. They then attain birth
in all kinds of low and abominable species as a result of their own sinful desires.
“Those who disregard scriptural injunctions and act whimsically achieve, in
the end, only misery.” Kåñëa concluded His instructions to Arjuna by
describing how a person could work in the spirit of renunciation. “In that
mood, O Arjuna, fight. One who is not motivated by the false ego of thinking
himself to be the body, whose intelligence is not entangled in material
calculations of profit and loss, even though he kills men in this world, does not
actually kill. Nor is he bound by his actions. On the other hand, he who
chooses not to kill, based upon his material calculations is motivated only by
false ego, and he becomes bound by sinful reactions.”
Arjuna nodded. He understood. His hesitation to fight was born of ignorance.
All his considerations had been selfish. Seeing his beloved relatives before him,
he had forgotten his true spiritual nature and allowed himself to be influenced
by mundane sentiment. Now Kåñëa had awakened his higher intelligence. He
and all these kings on the battlefield were all eternal servants of God; their
highest duty was to render loving service to the Lord. That very Lord was now
standing before Arjuna and asking him to fight. By acting according to Kåñëa’s
instructions, he would achieve perfection, becoming free from material
bondage, and attain the eternal spiritual abode.
Seeing that Arjuna had understood His instructions, Kåñëa said, “Because you
are My very dear friend, I have fully explained to you all spiritual knowledge.
Deliberate on it fully and do what you wish to do. My final advice is that you
simply surrender to Me and act for My pleasure. This is the supreme morality.
There is no need to consider any other process of yoga or religion. If you act in
this way, I will always protect you from sinful reactions. Do not fear.”
Kåñëa looked at Arjuna, sitting at His feet. “Tell Me then, O son of Kunté,
have you heard everything attentively? Is your illusion dispelled?”
Arjuna stood up in the chariot and took hold of the Gäëòéva. “My dear Kåñëa,
my illusion is gone and by Your mercy I have regained my memory. I am now
firm and free from doubt. I shall act according to Your divine instructions.”
Sitting before Dhåtaräñöra, Saïjaya said, “Having heard this conversation
between two great souls, I feel my hair standing on end, so profound and
544

wonderful is its import. My heart is thrilled. Upon remembering Kåñëa’s
wondrous form, I rejoice again and again. Wherever there is Kåñëa, the master
of all mystics, and wherever there is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will
certainly be opulence, victory, extraordinary power and morality. That is my
opinion.”
Dhåtaräñöra said nothing. Saïjaya’s prediction was certain to be fulfilled. The
old king wondered how there could be any hope for his sons, but he still could
not help wishing that somehow they would win the war. It was strange. Even
though his intelligence accepted the obvious fact that Kåñëa, and anyone who
took His side, could not be defeated, his attachment to his sons rose up and
overpowered his intelligence. The internal conflict he suffered was itself a war.
He could neither rest nor sleep, although he felt emotionally and physically
drained. Somehow, hearing Kåñëa’s instructions to Arjuna had soothed him,
although his sons’ position seemed even more hopeless. He sat holding his head
as Saïjaya began to describe the beginning of the war.

Chapter 5
The War Begins
The warriors on the Päëòavas’ side had watched and waited as Arjuna spoke
with Kåñëa. Obviously he had been overcome by uncertainty. No doubt seeing
his beloved grandfather and teacher had filled him with apprehension. Now he
seemed to have regained his resolve. He was again standing in position on his
chariot, with the Gäëòéva held high. The Päëòava warriors sent up a great
shout. They blew their conches and beat their drums. Horns and bugles
sounded continuously and uproariously.
In the sky assembled the hosts of åñis, Siddhas, and other classes of celestials––
all wanting to witness the battle. They gazed in wonder at Arjuna’s chariot,
amazed to see Kåñëa acting as his charioteer.
Seeing that the battle was about to begin, Yudhiñöhira took off his armor and
climbed down from his chariot. His brothers and the other warriors watched as
he walked toward the Kauravas. What did he have in mind? Had he suddenly
decided to be humble and hand over a bloodless victory to the Kuru forces? All
545

his brothers called out to him, asking him about his intentions, but the king
made no reply. Unarmed and unprotected, he walked straight toward Bhéñma’s
chariot.
Kåñëa spurred on Arjuna’s white horses and the chariot moved closer to the
cars of Bhéma and the twins. “I know your brother’s intentions,” He said. “He
intends to pay his respects to his gurus before fighting with them. It is said in
the old histories that one who first offers his respects to his elders and teachers
before engaging with them in battle gains victory.”
As Yudhiñöhira approached Bhéñma, shouts of “Alas!” were heard among the
Päëòava forces, who thought that, in the face of such tremendous opposition,
he had decided not to fight. Dhåtaräñöra’s sons thought that Yudhiñöhira was
afraid. “Just see this infamous wretch,” they laughed. “Stricken with terror he
has gone to Bhéñma to beg for his mercy.” Disregarding their jeers, Yudhiñöhira
went before Bhéñma, who got down from his own chariot as Yudhiñöhira
approached. The Päëòava bowed down and took hold of Bhéñma’s feet. “O
invincible one, I bow to you,” he said. “We will fight with you. Please grant us
your permission and give us your blessings.”
Bhéñma smiled and raised his right hand. “O ruler of the earth, O great king, if
you had not come to me in this way, I would have cursed you with defeat. I am
pleased with you, dear son. May you fight and obtain victory. Ask for a boon, O
son of Kunté––anything you desire. Alas, men are the slaves of wealth, but
wealth is no one’s slave. I am bound by the wealth of the Kurus and like an
impotent man I stand against you in battle, although I know your cause is just.
Tell me, dear child, what you wish to have from me.”
Yudhiñöhira felt tears coming to his eyes. “O wise one, desiring my welfare,
please look after my interests. Do your duty and fight for the Kurus’ sake. This
is my wish.”
Bhéñma appeared despondent. “Although I must fight for your enemies, O
King, tell me what I can do for you.”
Yudhiñöhira folded his hands and bowed his head. “O sire, there is one thing I
will ask. Tell me how we will be able to vanquish you, who are invincible. If
you see any good in it, please give me this information for my benefit.”
Bhéñma stood with his large, silver-gilded bow in his hand. Although he was
now almost ninety years old, he was still a formidable figure in his polished
gold and silver armor. He placed a hand on Yudhiñöhira’s shoulder. “O
descendent of Bharata, I do not see that man who can defeat me in battle, even
546

if he be the lord of the celestials. The time for my death has not yet come.
Approach me again and ask this question at some other time.”
“Be it so.”
Yudhiñöhira again bowed to his grandfather and then walked away. Making his
way through the lines of curious soldiers, he went to Droëa. After
circumambulating his chariot he said, “O invincible hero, tell me how I may
fight with you, my worshipable teacher, without incurring sin. How, O great
Brahmin, will I be able to vanquish my enemies?”
Like Bhéñma, Droëa said, “O King, if you had failed to come to me, I would
have cursed you with defeat. I am pleased with you, sinless one. You have my
permission to fight. May victory be yours. Please tell me what I can do for you.
I desire to give you a boon. Alas, I cannot fight for you, for I am a slave of the
Kurus’ wealth, but I will pray for your victory.”
Tears again sprang to Yudhiñöhira’s eyes as he heard Droëa’s affectionate tone
of voice. How cruel a fate that he should now be forced to fight his esteemed
and elderly guru!
But Droëa would be difficult to overcome. Despite his advanced years, he knew
the secrets of all the celestial and earthly weapons. He could still fire an
unending stream of arrows from his great bow. Yudhiñöhira could not imagine
anyone even approaching him in battle. With reverence he said, “O Brahmin,
do pray for me and tell me also what is good for me. Fight for the Kurus with all
your might. This is my desire.”
Droëa looked lovingly at his disciple. Although not as physically powerful as
Arjuna or Bhéma, Yudhiñöhira was strong in his ability to remain fixed on the
path of virtue. Droëa knew that a pious man was always protected by his
virtue. He glanced at Arjuna’s chariot across the field. “O king, your victory is
certain. You have Kåñëa as your counselor, and righteousness is always with
Him. Where there is Kåñëa, there must be victory. O son of Kunté, go and fight
with full confidence. What else will I say to you?”
“O mighty-armed one, please tell me how you may be defeated?” Yudhiñöhira
asked.
“As long as I fight, you will not obtain victory, O King. Therefore, seek my
death at the earliest opportunity. But there are none who can face me when I
am fighting. Neither man nor celestial can stand before me when I am angry
and scattering an incessant shower of arrows in all directions. O Bharata, only
when I lay down my weapons and am prepared for death, with my senses
547

withdrawn, will you be able to kill me. This is the truth. Having heard
something disagreeable from some credible source, I shall abandon my arms
and cease fighting.”
Yudhiñöhira bowed to his preceptor. Thinking about what he had said, he
walked toward Kåpa’s chariot. After offering respects to the old Brahmin
warrior, he said, “O teacher, only with your permission can I fight without
incurring sin. Please permit me to engage in battle to defeat my enemies.”
Like Bhéñma and Droëa, Kåpa replied that he would surely have cursed
Yudhiñöhira to be defeated if he had not come to him for his permission. He
also lamented his obligation to the Kauravas. Having stated his inability to
fight for him, he asked Yudhiñöhira what else he could do for him.
As he stood before Kåpa, Yudhiñöhira felt as if his heart might break. First
Bhéñma, then Droëa, and now Kåpa––all three were like fathers to him and his
brothers. From their childhood when they had first come to Hastinäpura, these
elders had cherished and taught them with the greatest care. He could not
recall a single cruel word or deed from any of them. Now he must go before
them and ask how they could be killed. Yudhiñöhira stood with his head bowed.
His throat was choked and he could not say anything.
Understanding his plight, Kåpa said, “O King, no one can kill me. Knowing
this, go and obtain victory.”
Kåpa’s father, Gautama Åñi, had told him that he would be invincible in battle.
Therefore, he advised Yudhiñöhira not to waste time trying to bring about his
fall. Lifting his right hand in blessing, Kåpa continued, “I will rise from sleep
every day and pray for your victory. I say this truly. Go now and obtain your
desires.”
Yudhiñöhira went at last to Çalya. After asking his permission to fight with
him, he stood with folded palms, looking up at his maternal uncle. Çalya
sorrowfully replied, “The Kurus’ wealth has made me their slave. What can I do
for you under these circumstances? I wish to bestow a boon upon you for your
having come to me in humility. What do you desire?”
Yudhiñöhira reminded him of his promise to discourage Karëa when it came
time for him to fight with Arjuna.
“It shall be so,” Çalya answered. “Go and fight. I will pray for your victory.”
Yudhiñöhira bowed to Çalya and then returned to his army. Witnessing the
respect and honor he paid to his elders, even the Kauravas praised him. Cries
of “Excellent! Bravo!” were heard among the soldiers on both sides. As they
548

thought on the noble qualities of Yudhiñöhira and his brothers, the soldiers
wept aloud.
After he was again stationed on his chariot, clad in armor and ready for battle,
Yudhiñöhira called out to the Kauravas, “If any among you wishes to choose us,
we will consider you our ally. Come then to our side.”
There was silence and no one moved. Then from out of the Kaurava ranks
emerged Yuyutsu’s chariot. “I will fight for you,” he shouted. “O sinless one,
will you accept me?”
“Come, come,” replied Yudhiñöhira. “Fight with us against your foolish
brothers. O Yuyutsu, we accept you into our ranks. It seems the thread of
Dhåtaräñöra’s line, as well as their last funeral offerings, will rest upon you. O
prince, accept us who accept you. The wrathful and foolish Duryodhana will
not survive.”
As drums and cymbals were sounded, Yuyutsu went over to the Päëòavas’ side.
Duryodhana glared in silent fury at his half-brother. Yuyutsu had never shared
his feelings toward the Päëòavas. That had been obvious enough from their
frequent disagreements. But how did he dare abandon his family in their hour
of need? He would regret this foolish decision.
Seeing that the moment of battle had arrived, the warriors on both sides began
to shout in exultation. Now they would die and be elevated to the heavenly
realm, or they would emerge victorious. To the sounds of thousands of conches,
trumpets and drums, the warriors rushed at each other with uplifted weapons.
The earth shook and clouds of dust rose into the air as they advanced. They
sounded and appeared like two great oceans coming together. Bhéma’s cries
rose above the tumult as he raced ahead of the Päëòava forces roaring like a
bull. Hearing his shouts, which drowned out other sounds, the Kaurava soldiers
became afraid. Horses and elephants passed urine and excrement, faltering as
they ran. Dhåtaräñöra’s sons were struck with terror as Bhéma came toward
them, his mace whirling above his head. Bhéma laughed at his frightened foes.
At last the moment had arrived. Now he could finally release the full fury of
his anger.
Taking heart, the Kauravas shouted out their own battle cries and waved their
bows in the air. They surrounded Bhéma and began firing snake-like arrows at
him. Laughing as the arrows glanced off his armor, he struck other shafts down
with his mace. Bhéma shook off their attack. He replied with thousands of his
own arrows, dispersing the Kaurava princes in all directions.
549

Abhimanyu and Draupadé’s sons, along with Nakula, Sahadeva and
Dåñöadyumna, advanced in a body and tore into the Kaurava forces, scattering
arrows everywhere.
Neither side flinched nor turned back from the violence as they hurled their
weapons at one another. The twang of bowstrings and the slap of strings
hitting leather arm-protectors and gloves was heard everywhere. The air was
full of swift-flying arrows. Spears, darts, and iron balls fell upon both armies in
the thousands. The blare of conches, the lion-like roar of warriors, the heavy
tread of infantry, the neighing of horses, the clash of weapons, the clatter of
chariot wheels, the jingle of bells around the elephants’ necks, the elephants’
trumpeting, and the beating of drums mingled to produce a hair-raising uproar.
Recklessly the warriors rushed forward.
Arjuna immediately engaged with Bhéñma. With lightness of hand he fired
countless arrows at him, but Bhéñma countered them all. He returned
numerous shafts at Arjuna. Even though Bhéñma’s arrows pierced him, Arjuna
did not waver. Nor could he shake Bhéñma, as he sent at him his own deadly
shafts. The two heroes exchanged arrows while the fight raged around them.
As the battle got under way, the sky began to flash red and blue, while black
clouds showered flesh and blood onto the field. A terrible wind blew, carrying
innumerable stones and afflicting all the troops. The loud rumble of thunder
resounded and bolts of lightning struck the earth.
Powerful chariot-warriors engaged with other chariot fighters, while infantry
battled infantry and horsemen engaged with other mounted troops. The
warriors sought out their marked enemies. Bhéma assailed Duryodhana;
Sahadeva––Çakuni; and Dhåñöadyumna––Droëa. As other kings and kñatriyas
came to their aid, the battle became general and weapons flew in all directions.
On both sides of the armies divisions of Räkñasas marched. Ghaöotkaca led a
division of Räkñasas on the Päëòavas’ behalf and the powerful Alambusha led
the Räkñasas for the Kauravas. These awful beings created a huge carnage
among the soldiers as they wielded their axes and bludgeons.
The warriors fought as if possessed by demons. No quarter was shown. Amid
the terrible confusion, fathers could not recognize their sons, brothers their
brothers, nor friends their friends. Uncles slew their nephews and cousins
killed cousins. Men hacked and struck at one another with swords, spiked
maces, and heavy clubs. Streams of blood flowed freely across the ground,
carrying mutilated and severed limbs. Chariots smashed against chariots,
550

breaking them to pieces, while elephants tore into other elephants, gouging
them with their steel-tipped tusks.
The battlefield assumed the appearance of Yamaloka, the abode of Death. Men
screamed in pain, sounding like souls condemned to hell. The bodies of slain
warriors and animals lay everywhere in heaps. Axes and swords dripping with
blood whizzed through the air. There was a continuous loud thudding sound as
heavy maces and swift arrows struck the bodies of soldiers.
Bhéñma fought with fury. His tall standard, bearing a palm tree and five stars,
glided through the Päëòava army, leaving a trail of bodies and shattered
chariots in its wake. With his straight arrows he severed the heads and limbs of
all who came before him. The old Kuru hero seemed to dance in his chariot as
he whirled about wielding his bow. His deadly shafts were fired with such
power that they would pierce even great elephants to their vitals, sending them
tumbling to the earth.
Seeing the destruction Bhéñma was causing, Abhimanyu rushed toward him
shouting out a challenge. Bhéñma was protected by five maharatha heroes, but
Abhimanyu attacked them all. Firing arrows that flew with blinding speed, he
held off Bhéñma’s protectors while simultaneously attacking him. With one
well-aimed arrow, he cut Bhéñma’s bow in two. Another three arrows cut down
his standard, which fluttered to the floor of his chariot.
Witnessing Abhimanyu’s lightness of hand, even the celestials were pleased.
The warriors who saw him considered that he was in no way inferior to his
father. His bow, which sounded just like the Gäëòéva, seemed like a circle of
fire as he continuously released arrows. As the god-like prince spun in his
chariot, his shafts appeared to be leaving his bow in all directions at once.
Under attack, Bhéñma gathered himself and fought back. He wounded Arjuna’s
son with nine arrows, then cut down his standard with three more. Kåtavarmä,
Çalya and Kåpa, who were among Bhéñma’s protectors, all assailed Abhimanyu,
but they could not make him waver. He repelled their attack while
maintaining his assault on Bhéñma. The warriors witnessing the fight all
praised Abhimanyu’s prowess, calling out “Bravo! Well done!”
Bhéñma covered Arjuna’s son with thousands of arrows. As he increased the
ferocity of his attack, a number of other Päëòava heroes, headed by Bhéma,
came to Abhimanyu’s aid. All of them aimed their weapons at Bhéñma. Not the
least perturbed, Bhéñma sent his long golden shafts at all of them.
The prince of Virata, Bhuminjaya, also came to support Abhimanyu. Çalya
551

attacked him and a fierce battle ensued between the two fighters. Bhuminjaya
was mounted on a huge elephant and he rushed at Çalya, wielding a lance. The
elephant placed its foot onto the yoke of Çalya’s chariot, crushing and killing
the four horses. Remaining on his chariot, Çalya took out a large iron dart and
hurled it at Bhuminjaya with all his strength. That dart pierced his armor and
went into his chest. The prince fell lifeless from his elephant, his hook and
lance falling from his hands. Çalya jumped down from his chariot. Raising his
sword he brought it down and severed the elephant’s trunk. As the great beast
fell dead, Çalya quickly climbed onto Kåtavarmä’s chariot, being praised for his
heroism by all the fighters present.
Bhuminjaya’s brother, Sweta, saw Çalya kill his brother. Blazing with anger, he
rushed at the king of Madra like an infuriated elephant. Seven Kaurava
warriors came forward to check him, showering him with arrows. Sweta
countered the shafts and, with seven broad-headed arrows of his own, cut all
his assailants’ bows in two. The Kaurava fighters angrily hurled darts at Sweta
which flew toward him like fiery meteors, but with razor-headed shafts the
prince cut down the missiles before they could reach him. With still more
arrows he wounded his attackers and sent them reeling in all directions, their
standards cut and their bodies mutilated.
Sweta continued toward Çalya, and it appeared as if Death personified had
come for the Madra king. Seeing him advance, Bhéñma quickly placed himself
between Sweta and Çalya. Thousands of horsemen and charioteers had come to
Sweta’s aid and Bhéñma began to pick them off with his unerring shafts. As he
fired his uncountable golden arrows, the son of Gaìgä seemed like the blazing
sun with its rays in summer. As the sun dispels darkness, Bhéñma dispelled the
foes who surrounded him. Soon, the many chariots he had deprived of warriors
flew aimlessly about the field. Impetuous horses carried youthful riders killed
and hanging from their saddles. Hundreds of slain warriors lay on the ground,
their armor shattered and their heads and arms cut off.
As Bhéñma slew the Päëòava troops, Sweta killed large numbers of the Kaurava
army. In his fury, none could stand before him. After some time only he and
Bhéñma remained facing one another. They attacked each other like two
enraged lions. Showers of arrows sped through the sky like golden-winged
birds. Each fighter wounded the other. Sweta, with blood flowing from his
wounds, fired twenty-five arrows into Bhéñma’s body. He then cut Bhéñma’s
bow with another ten arrows. With still more arrows he killed Bhéñma’s horses
552

and charioteer.
Without hesitating, Bhéñma took up another bow and jumped down from his
chariot. He continued fighting the prince on foot. Sweta then took out a
golden dart and called out, “Wait only a moment, O Bhéñma. I will slay you at
once.” He hurled the dart, which fell toward Bhéñma like a comet. The many
warriors watching the fight cried out, “Alas! Bhéñma is slain.”
Bhéñma, however, was not slain. He sent eight arrows at the dart and cut it into
fragments. He fought on with the prince, who became senseless with fury as he
saw his dart checked. Sweta took up a huge spiked mace and rushed toward
Bhéñma. Gaìgä’s son, mounted on a fresh chariot brought by his aides,
considered the attack unstoppable. He leapt clear of his chariot just as the
prince brought the mace down upon it. The force of the blow smashed the
chariot, standard, horses and charioteer.
Bhéñma got up on another chariot and resumed his attack on Sweta. The prince
had now mounted his own chariot and Bhéñma advanced toward him. As the
two warriors closed on one another, continuously releasing weapons, Bhéñma
heard a voice from the sky: “O Bhéñma, O mighty-armed hero, the time fixed
for Sweta’s destruction has arrived. Fight on with all your power and gain
victory.”
Bhéñma looked at Sweta. He was flanked by numerous Päëòava warriors,
among them Bhéma, Abhimanyu and Sätyaki. Encouraged by the divine voice,
however, he attacked Sweta alone while parrying the other attacks. Coming
close to the Virata prince, he took up an arrow which resembled the rod of
death. He placed the golden shaft, decked with gems, onto his bow and drew
back the string to his ear. Imbuing the arrow with the force of the Brahmä
weapon, he released it to kill Sweta.
With a flash like a thunderbolt, the arrow struck the prince on the chest and
passed clean through his body. It entered the earth like a snake going into its
hole, carrying with it the hero’s life. Sweta fell from his chariot like a peak
loosened from the summit of a mountain. The Päëòavas sent up cries of
lamentation, while the Kauravas shouted joyously. Duryodhana and
Dushashana danced in delight. They repeatedly praised Bhéñma as the loud
music of trumpets and drums sounded.
The sun was slowly disappearing over the western horizon and Arjuna and
Dåñöadyumna withdrew their troops. The two armies entered their respective
camps for the night, the Päëòavas cheerlessly and the Kauravas laughing and
553

shouting. As darkness fell, thousands of vultures and jackals came onto the
battlefield, their cries mixing with the sounds of the warriors withdrawing.

Chapter 6
Yudhiñöhira’s Fear
Saïjaya finished his description of the first day’s battle. Dhåtaräñöra smiled as
he heard of Bhéñma’s incomparable prowess and the slaying of the two Päëòava
heroes. Perhaps destiny would favor his forces after all. It was hard to imagine
anyone overcoming Bhéñma in battle. Feeling a surge of hope, the king said,
“Your words are pleasing for they describe our victory. The old Kuru chief
Bhéñma is ever devoted to my interests and will never abandon his prowess. My
heart feels no shame on remembering our transgressions against the Päëòavas.
But that itself is shameful.”
Dhåtaräñöra fell silent again for some moments. Sighing, he continued. “Even
hearing of our success I cannot condone the battle brought about by my foolish
son, O Saïjaya. What good can war do for anyone? Apart from my wicked sons
and their equally evil advisors, I do not think there were any who approved of
this fight.”
The king’s mind swung between hope for his sons and sorrow at the thought of
the Kurus’ inevitable death. Sometimes he was overcome by despair as he
pondered on the Päëòavas’ power and virtue. And then there was Kåñëa.
Today’s report was encouraging, but Arjuna had still to exhibit his prowess, as
had Bhéma and the other Päëòava generals. Many would die before the
outcome was settled. He did not doubt that. How could his sons survive?
Waving away the servants who were fanning him, Dhåtaräñöra shook his head
and said, “Victory will doubtlessly attend the righteous, Saïjaya, but is our case
so clearly wrong? Should not the throne have been mine? Does not
Duryodhana have the foremost claim to sovereignty, even over Yudhiñöhira?”
Saïjaya did not respond. It had long ago been established that Päëòu was the
rightful monarch. Dhåtaräñöra was born blind and that disqualified him from
ruling the kingdom. Päëòu’s sons were thus the rightful inheritors of at least
half the kingdom, if not all. Saïjaya knew that Dhåtaräñöra cursed his
554

blindness and considered it an unfortunate quirk of destiny that had denied
him his rights. In Saïjaya’s mind, it was clearly the Lord’s arrangement. There
were none who could match the virtue and kindness of the Päëòavas. The
earth could have no better rulers––especially if the alternative was
Duryodhana and his brothers.
Struggling with his inner conflict, Dhåtaräñöra went on dolefully, “But there
can be no excuse for the cruelty my sons meted out to the Päëòavas and their
chaste wife. Soon we will see the fire of their anger blazing on the battlefield.
O Saïjaya, thinking of their anger, incited by Duryodhana, I am restless both
by day and by night.”
Seated at the feet of his master, Saïjaya spoke frankly, but with affection.
“You are the cause of the Kurus’ present plight. Why do you blame only your
son? Your present remorse is like the building of a dam after the water has
escaped. Listen as I describe how events are unfolding at Kurukñetra. You will
soon be consumed by a lonesome regret as this war takes its inevitable course.”
Dhåtaräñöra fell silent as Saïjaya again began to describe the events at
Kurukñetra.
***
After arriving back at camp at the end of the first day’s fight, Yudhiñöhira
called a council of war. He consulted with Kåñëa, who sat by his side, wearing
golden armor and a jeweled helmet. “O Govinda, behold how the powerful
Bhéñma is consuming my troops as fire consumes dry grass. How can we even
look at him as he releases his celestial weapons? Seeing him stationed on the
battlefield, my troops are flying away in all directions. Perhaps we may defeat
Varuëa or Väyu or even the mighty Yamaräja in battle, but I do not think we
can overpower Bhéñma.”
Yudhiñöhira’s voice was heavy with sorrow as he went on. “O Keçava, when
Bhéñma is my foe, I think it preferable to retire to the forest. It is wrong for me
to sacrifice these kñatriyas into the fire of his weapons simply for the sake of
sovereignty. Look at my brothers! They have all been wounded for my sake.
Not only that, but they have been deprived of both happiness and wealth
because of the love they bear for me. How can I allow them to suffer further? I
will therefore spend the rest of my days practicing asceticism.”
Kåñëa said nothing as Yudhiñöhira poured out his feelings. He knew the
Päëòava king had no intention of abandoning the fight. The first day had not
555

gone his way, and naturally he was frustrated––especially in the face of a
warrior like Bhéñma. It was not going to be easy to win this war. That much was
already clear.
Yudhiñöhira continued. “It seems that Arjuna is content to be only a spectator
in this battle. Bhéñma alone remembers his kñatriya duties and fights with
determination. Why, O Kåñëa, does Your friend Arjuna look on with
indifference as Bhéñma annihilates our troops? Tell me who can stop Bhéñma?
We must devise a plan to check him before he destroys the entire army. O
Govinda, only by Your grace will we regain our kingdom after killing our
enemies.”
Yudhiñöhira sat with his head down. Kåñëa replied, “O best of the Bharata race,
do not give way to grief. You are surrounded by great chariot warriors who are
all dedicated heart and soul to your welfare. I am also engaged in doing you
good. You have your brothers, as well as Drupada, Virata, Dåñöadyumna,
Sätyaki, Çikhaëòé, and many others. All of them are illustrious fighters who
will not waver in battle. Çikhaëòé will surely slay Bhéñma in due course. Do not
despair.”
Yudhiñöhira was heartened by Kåñëa’s assurance. Certainly He could never
utter an untruth, and it was obvious that He wanted the battle to continue.
Nor could it be checked regardless. It must go on.
Yudhiñöhira was concerned that his outpouring of sorrow may have
discouraged his troops. Looking at Dåñöadyumna, he said, “O hero, you have
been appointed leader of my troops. Even as Kärttikeya leads the celestials,
lead our army to victory. Use your prowess to kill the Kurus. I will follow
behind you, along with my brothers and all the other kñatriyas.”
Dåñöadyumna replied, “O son of Påthä, it is ordained that I will kill Droëa. I
will now fight with any Kuru who stands before me. Let all those proud kings
try their best; I am not afraid of any of them.”
Everyone present cheered. Yudhiñöhira then discussed the arrangements for
the next day’s battle. His army would arrange itself in the Krauncha-vyuha, the
formation shaped like a crow, which Båhaspati had devised. After arranging
the warriors’ positions, the Päëòava army rested for the night, with the moon
casting its glow over their thousands of tents.
***
As the sun rose on the second day of battle, the Päëòava forces arranged
556

themselves in the Krauncha formation. Seeing this formidable array, with its
atirathas and maharathas stationed at key points, Duryodhana asked Bhéñma to
form a counter-array of his own troops. Bhéñma formed his forces into another
mighty vyuha. As countless conches and trumpets were sounded, the two
armies attacked. Bhéñma headed the Kaurava attack personally. He
immediately assailed the foremost Päëòava fighters, led by Dåñöadyumna,
Abhimanyu, Bhéma and Arjuna.
Under Bhéñma’s attack, the Päëòava vyuha wavered. Charioteers and
horsemen fell in quick succession. Bhéñma’s gold-winged arrows whistled
through the air with deadly accuracy. The Päëòava troops were terrified as the
old Kuru hero continuously showered them with his shafts.
Seeing the carnage, Arjuna was infuriated. “Go, O Janärdana, to the place
where the grandfather stands. It seems he will annihilate our entire army for
Duryodhana’s sake. Therefore, I will kill him.”
“Be on your guard,” Kåñëa cautioned. “I will now take you to Bhéñma.”
As Kåñëa crossed the field, Arjuna sent arrows in all directions, killing the
Kaurava forces in large numbers. The twang of his bow, the slap of the string
on his leather fences, and the whistling of arrows leaving his bow made one
continuous sound. An endless line of shafts emanated from his chariot in many
directions as he whirled about.
Bhéñma saw him approach. The great chariot with its white horses, huge ape
banner, and numerous other celestial flags was easy to recognize. Without
delay, Bhéñma sent eighty long shafts at Arjuna. At the same time, Duryodhana
sent another sixty, while Kåpa fired fifty, and Droëa twenty-five. Many other
powerful warriors supporting Bhéñma also trained their arrows on Arjuna.
Although struck on all sides, Arjuna was unmoved. He sent his own arrows at
his assailants, piercing each of them. Sätyaki, Virata, Dåñöadyumna and
Draupadé’s sons came to support him as he targeted Bhéñma. Each engaged with
one or more Kuru heroes, leaving Bhéñma unprotected.
Unperturbed, Bhéñma quickly sent another eighty arrows which wounded
Arjuna and sent him reeling in his chariot. The Kauravas shouted with joy.
This infuriated Arjuna. He quickly regained his stance and had Kåñëa drive his
chariot toward the Kaurava heroes, attacking all of them with arrows fitted
with heads shaped like calves’ teeth. Suffering Arjuna’s attack, the Kauravas
resembled an ocean lashed by a tempest. Their armor was torn off and their
bows repeatedly shattered. Arjuna routed them by the thousands and they fled
557

in terror.
Duryodhana quickly rode up to Bhéñma, who had not followed through on his
attack on Arjuna. He called out, “O sire, see how this mighty Päëòava is
cutting down our troops like a farmer cutting wheat. How can you allow this?
Only for your sake has Karëa laid aside his weapons. As a result, it seems
Arjuna will destroy us all. Act quickly to protect us, O son of Gaìgä.”
Bhéñma looked at the agitated prince. “Fie upon the kñatriya’s duty!” he replied,
turning his chariot toward Arjuna. He did not want to face the Päëòavas in
battle, but he knew it could not be avoided. As he went toward Arjuna, the
Kauravas cheered and blew their conches. Duryodhana, Açvatthämä and
Dushashana went with him on his two sides and at his rear.
The two atirathas, Bhéñma and Arjuna, exchanged arrow for arrow. Each
fighter released first ten, then a hundred, then a thousand shafts. Arjuna sent
so many arrows at Bhéñma that he seemed to be covered by a net, but the Kuru
hero soon dispelled the arrows with his own and quickly counterattacked
Arjuna. As they fought both were pleased by the other’s prowess. Neither
could gain the advantage.
Kåñëa was struck on the breast by three arrows and blood flowed from His
wounds. As He dexterously drove the horses, He appeared like a blossoming
kinsuka tree with bright red flowers. Standing on the chariot, He made it
advance and retreat with beautiful circling motions. So swift was its movement
that Bhéñma found it difficult to aim at Arjuna. He too wheeled rapidly about
the field, confusing Arjuna’s aim.
The earth trembled under the chariot wheels and appeared ready to split open.
Those who witnessed the fight were wonderstruck. They could not mark any
difference between the two combatants, nor see any flaw in their fighting
techniques. Most of the time both remained invisible beneath a network of
arrows. In the sky the celestials said, “These two cannot be defeated by any foe,
earthly or divine. Surely this battle will be without end.”
While Arjuna and Bhéñma fought, the two armies continued cutting each other
down. Droëa and Dåñöadyumna contended like two enraged lions. As guru and
disciple battled, the contest was no less spectacular than that between Arjuna
and Bhéñma. Both pierced the other’s armor, and both stood as immovable as
the Himälayan mountains. Dåñöadyumna, conscious of his destiny to kill
Droëa, constantly sought an opportunity to slay his opponent, but Droëa
repeatedly and fearlessly confounded his attacks. The martial preceptor
558

displayed his unmatched ability as he fought Drupada’s son.
At one point, seeing his chance, Dåñöadyumna hurled a long dart adorned with
gold and vaidurya gems. It flew like a streak of lightning toward Droëa. The
moment it was released, however, Droëa shot three razor-headed arrows that
cut it to pieces in mid-air. It fell to the earth like a shower of meteors.
Infuriated, Dåñöadyumna rained down arrows on Droëa, but the Kuru warrior
checked them all and at once cut apart Dåñöadyumna’s bow with a crescentheaded shaft. He then killed his four horses and smashed his chariot.
Clutching a massive mace, Dåñöadyumna leapt from the smashed chariot.
Droëa immediately struck the mace with a volley of arrows and shattered it
into small pieces. Dåñöadyumna took out his long sword and, raising his shield
adorned with a hundred gold moons, ran at Droëa. Seeing him charging like a
hungry lion running at an elephant, Droëa checked him with a cluster of
barbed shafts. Dåñöadyumna could not take another step but was forced to ward
off the arrows with his sword and shield. Bhéma saw him struggling, and he
pulled him up onto his own chariot, riding swiftly away from Droëa.
After Dåñöadyumna had mounted a fresh chariot and turned again to face his
opponent, Bhéma encountered the king of Kalinga, Ketumat, and his vast
army. Ketumat was supported by another monarch named Srutayush, who was
followed by thousands of Niñadha fighters. The two armies surrounded Bhéma.
Finding himself hemmed in on all sides by elephants, chariots and horsemen,
Bhéma laughed and began unleashing his arrows in all directions. The arrows,
fired by Bhéma’s mighty arms from his huge bow, passed clean through the
bodies of men and horses.
But the Kalinga and Niñadha forces were fearless. Other Päëòava troops moved
in to assist Bhéma. The Matsyas, Cediç and Karushas together attacked the
armies surrounding him. A terrible fight then took place. The clash of weapons
and the screams of men and animals was deafening. Hacking and chopping, the
soldiers made the field resemble a ghastly crematorium strewn with flesh and
blood. They could hardly distinguish between friend and foe, and warriors slew
others from their own side. Gradually, the Niñadha troops, fighting with
demonic fury, forced back the Cediç and Matsyas. Bhéma was left alone on his
chariot, still surrounded by thousands of fighters.
Undaunted, the Päëòava stood his ground. He covered the Kalingas with
showers of arrows and sent up a great cry. Ketumat and his son Sakradeva
rushed upon Bhéma, letting loose numerous shafts. Roaring, Bhéma shook his
559

bow and warded them off with ease. Sakradeva fired a volley of shafts that
killed Bhéma’s horses. Remaining on his chariot, Bhéma fended off Sakradeva’s
attack. He quickly took up an iron mace and hurled it at the prince. That mace
sped through the air as straight as an arrow. It caught Sakradeva on the chest,
killing him instantly and throwing him out of his chariot onto the earth some
distance away.
Seeing his son killed, Ketumat rushed forward backed by his troops. Bhéma
took up a long sword forged from the finest blue steel. Holding the sword as
well as a massive shield made of bullhide decorated with golden stars and
crescents, he leapt from his chariot. Hoping to kill Ketumat, he ran at him with
his sword held high.
Ketumat at once released a poisoned dart that sped toward Bhéma. The
Päëòava whirled his sword and cut it down as it flew. He shouted in the
exultation of battle, and his shout filled his enemies with fear. Ketumat became
completely enraged and hurled fourteen more darts at Bhéma, each with heads
of sharpened stone. Bhéma cut all of them into fragments with his sword. As he
performed this wonderful feat, Ketumat’s brother Bhanumat, who was
mounted upon a great elephant, rushed upon him with a lion-like roar. Unable
to tolerate that cry, Bhéma shouted even louder. Both yells terrified the troops,
and their animals froze in fear where they stood.
Bhéma ran toward Bhanumat and leapt onto his elephant. With a powerful
sword stroke he cut Bhanumat into two halves, which fell on either side of his
elephant. Bhéma then swept his sword down and severed the elephant’s trunk.
As the beast fell like a mountain hit by a thunderbolt, Bhéma jumped clear. He
stood on the ground roaring furiously. The Kauravas looked in horror upon
Väyu’s enraged son, no longer considering him human.
Bhéma began to whirl around like a firebrand, cleaving a path through the
enemy with his bright, blood-soaked sword. Heads and limbs flew about as he
slaughtered innumerable warriors and their animals. He moved around the
field with the speed of a hawk. Anyone who came before him was instantly
slain. He seemed to be Yamaräja himself at the time of universal dissolution.
The Kaurava troops were terrified. They ran about in all directions, screaming
in fear.
Bhéma exhibited various motions. He wheeled and whirled. Making side
thrusts, leaping high, jumping forward and then back, he moved about like a
frenzied dancer. All the while his sword flashed, seeming to cover all sides at
560

once. As he butchered them, the enemy soldiers shrieked. Hundreds of
elephants fell with fearful cries. Bhéma hacked indiscriminately into the forces
of the Kalingas and Niñadhas. The ground around him was strewn with broken
armor and weapons. Lances, bows, mallets, maces, darts and axes––all cut
asunder––lay everywhere. Beautiful golden housings from the backs of
elephants adorned the field, along with shining bells and other colorful
decorations. The heads and arms of warriors lay about in large numbers, their
jeweled ornaments glinting from the ground.
Bhéma could not be checked. The earth around him became a thick mire of
flesh and blood. Wanting to save his soldiers, Srutayush came before him on
his chariot and shouted out a challenge. He immediately shot a hundred fierce
arrows at the rampaging Päëòava. Pierced by the arrows like an elephant
pierced by a hook, Bhéma’s anger knew no bounds. His charioteer, Vishoka,
came to him with a fresh chariot and Bhéma leapt aboard. Crying, “Wait!
Wait!” he rushed at Srutayush, who continuously fired sharp arrows at him.
Bhéma took up his bow and sent nine iron arrows at the Kalinga king. Three
shafts hit Srutayush with the force of a thunderbolt and threw him lifeless to
the ground.
Turning at once to Ketumat, Bhéma similarly slew him with a number of long
shafts that left his bow with the sound of thunderclaps. The remaining
Kalingas surrounded Bhéma in the hundreds of thousands. All of them rained
their weapons on him at once. Bhéma repelled their weapons and then took up
his mace. He jumped down from the chariot and resumed fighting on foot.
Wielding his huge mace he sent the Kalingas to the region of Death. So rapid
were his movements that no one could touch him. He crushed his enemies and
they broke and ran.
Seeing his foes fleeing, Bhéma took out his conch and blew repeated blasts on
it. The incredible sound reverberated around the field and struck the Kauravas
with panic. They trembled and seemed to lose consciousness. As Bhéma
continued to move among the remaining Kalingas, they appeared to be in a
trance. The whole army shook like a lake agitated by an alligator. Bhéma wiped
out their entire army. With great difficulty their commander rallied the few
that were left and brought them back to the fight.
Bhéma remounted his chariot and stood ready as more troops came to assist the
Kalingas. Dåñöadyumna then came up to Bhéma, followed by large numbers of
Päëòava warriors. As the sun approached the western horizon, the fight raged
561

on. When twilight fell, the two armies disengaged and withdrew from the field.
As jackals and vultures again gathered around the grisly scenes of carnage, the
soldiers made their way back to their encampments.

Chapter 7
Bhéñma Wreaks Havoc
On the third day, the Kurus formed their troops into the Garuòa vyuha,
shaped like the divine eagle with outspread wings. On the neck of the eagle
stood Bhéñma, and its two eyes were Droëa and Kåtavarmä. At its head stood
Açvatthämä and Kåpa, backed by the Matsya, Kekaya and Vatadhana armies.
Other armies made up its two wings and back. Duryodhana, with all his
followers, were its center and tail.
In opposition to the Kurus, the Päëòavas countered with a formation in the
shape of a crescent, its points toward the enemy. Bhéma stood at the right
point, surrounded by many kings. Dåñöadyumna and the immense Païchäla
army formed its middle. Behind was Yudhiñöhira, protected by Sätyaki and
numerous other chariot fighters. Arjuna stood at the left point with
Ghaöotkaca and his awful Räkñasa troops.
Once again the two armies closed to the sound of countless drums and
conchshells. They resembled two clouds merging in the heavens. As soon as
they met, the great slaughter began again.
Urged on by Kåñëa, Arjuna displayed his full prowess. He seemed like the
Destroyer himself at the end of creation. Many heroes, hoping to win glory and
with death as their goal, came before Arjuna as he let loose his shafts. They fell
by the thousands. Arjuna carved a path through the Kauravas.
Fearing that Arjuna might destroy his entire force in one day, Duryodhana
commanded his generals to surround the Päëòava. Coming upon him from all
sides, they hurled their bright lances, darts, clubs, maces, pikes, battleaxes,
mallets and arrows. Smiling in the midst of the downpour of weapons, Arjuna
quickly checked them with his arrows. At the same time, he maintained his
attack on his assailants. In the sky the celestials were astonished by his
extraordinary lightness of hand and they praised him loudly.
562

As Arjuna engaged with the Kuru chiefs, other Päëòava heroes also attacked
the Kauravas. Yudhiñöhira and the twins fought furiously, driving back the
Kuru forces with their incessant showers of arrows. Bhéma and Ghaöotkaca,
father and son, performed terrible feats of valor.
Clenching his teeth in fury, Duryodhana challenged Bhéma. The Päëòava at
once fired an iron arrow at him. Struck on the chest, Duryodhana collapsed on
the floor of his chariot. His charioteer quickly carried him away and all the
troops supporting him broke and fled.
As Bhéma, Ghaöotkaca, Yudhiñöhira, and the twins fought together,
Abhimanyu joined them. At the same time, Arjuna continued his attack on
the kings surrounding him. Thus the Päëòava warriors assailed the Kauravas
like a tempest tearing into a forest. Although both Bhéñma and Droëa tried to
rally their fleeing forces, they were unsuccessful.
Duryodhana returned to his senses and again stood in his chariot. Seeing the
commotion, he called out to his panic-stricken soldiers, “Where will you go,
foolish men, leaving behind your fame? Do not act like eunuchs. The fight has
hardly begun. While I am still standing, and while Bhéñma and Droëa are our
leaders, how will we not gain victory? Turn back and fight!”
The warriors stopped, shamed. Desiring to exhibit their prowess, they turned
back toward the Päëòavas. Rallied, the huge Kaurava army resembled the sea
surging at the full moon’s tide. As they again rushed toward the foe,
Duryodhana rode over to Bhéñma. “O Grandfather, O descendent of Bharata,
please hear my words.”
Bhéñma lowered his bow and looked across at the agitated prince. It was obvious
that Duryodhana was angry and trying to control the harshness in his voice.
“O scion of the Kuru race, I do not consider the Päëòavas to be a match for
you. When you are fighting, backed by Droëa, Kåpa, Açvatthämä, and so many
other maharathas, how is it possible that my troops are flying from the battle?
Surely you are favoring the Päëòavas. Therefore, you forgive them for this
slaughter of our men. O King, you should have told me before the battle began
that you would not fight the Päëòavas. I could then have consulted with Karëa
and decided what needed to be done. O best of men, if I do not deserve to have
you abandon me, then fight to the utmost of your power.”
Bhéñma laughed angrily in return. “O King, have I not told you on so many
occasions that the Päëòavas are invincible? I will nevertheless do whatever I
am capable of doing. See now my power in battle. In the sight of all I will
563

chastise the Päëòavas with their troops and kinsmen.”
Duryodhana clenched his fist and smiled. He ordered drums and conches to be
sounded. As the sun began its descent toward the west, Bhéñma advanced
toward the Päëòavas, flanked by the best of the Kauravas.
Seeing the Kauravas returning back to the battle, roaring and beating their
drums, the Päëòavas cheered and blew their conches in reply. The fight
continued. Warriors on both sides again fell like ripe ears of corn in a field.
The brave shouts of thousands of fighters merged together and sounded like a
roaring sea. Cries of “Stand your ground!” “Strike!” “Turn back!” “On your
guard!” and “Here I am!” were heard everywhere, and the stench of blood filled
the air.
The warriors could hardly traverse the battlefield, it was so thick with corpses.
Strewn with colored armor, turbans and ornaments, the field appeared as
beautiful as the autumn sky at night. Though mortally wounded, warriors were
seen to rush upon their enemies with pride. Others who lay dying called out to
their loved ones, “O Father, O Brother, O Uncle, do not abandon me.” In some
places, headless trunks ran about wildly, blood spurting from their severed
necks.
In accord with his promise to Duryodhana, Bhéñma wrought a terrible havoc on
the battlefield. His bow was constantly drawn to a circle. Virulent arrows sped
in all directions and cut down warriors by the thousands. The blazing shafts
never missed their aim. The old Kuru chief trained his weapons on all the
principal Päëòava heroes, calling them by name as he fired. His chariot made
wondrous motions as it careened about. It seemed as if he was everywhere at
once, and he left a trail of destruction in his wake. Everyone who saw him
considered that he had somehow multiplied himself a thousandfold by the
power of illusion. None could look at him. All that they could see was an
endless stream of arrows leaving his bow.
The Päëòavas and their allies gave way to lamentation. Any kñatriya brave
enough to encounter Bhéñma was immediately dispatched to Death’s abode.
Whoever came near him was seen at that moment to fall to the ground. With a
single long arrow he pierced three or four men seated on the back of an
elephant. With another shaft he slew the elephant itself. Horsemen and
infantry were swept away like leaves blown by a gale.
The Päëòava army trembled and gave way, fleeing in all directions. They were
so completely routed that no two persons were seen together. With cries of
564

“Oh” and “Alas,” they scattered in fear. Many men with dishevelled hair and
clothes were seen running away in terror, throwing aside their weapons and
armor. Even the Päëòava chiefs were confounded by Bhéñma’s prowess.
Seeing their confusion, Kåñëa halted Arjuna’s chariot and said, “O foremost of
men, strike Bhéñma alone. He alone is dispersing your army. Take action or
everything will be lost. O hero, formerly in the assembly of kings you said, ‘I
will kill all the Kaurava warriors, headed by Bhéñma and Droëa.’ O Bhibatsu, O
son of Kunté, chastiser of foes, make good your words. Stand before Bhéñma. He
appears today like the Destroyer himself with his mouth opened wide to
consume all beings.”
Arjuna looked around at the annihilation. Even though it was his own army
being destroyed, he was nevertheless filled with an admiration and joy.
Bhéñma’s power in battle was incomparable.
But he had a duty to perform. Bhéñma had sided with Duryodhana. Thinking of
the Kaurava prince again incited Arjuna’s anger. “Plunge through this sea of
hostile troops, O Keçava, and take my chariot to Bhéñma. Today I will throw
down that invincible warrior.”
Kåñëa at once urged on the silver-white horses, and the brilliant chariot sped
unobstructed toward Bhéñma. Seeing Arjuna coming to face Bhéñma, the rest of
the Päëòava army was heartened and rallied back to the fight.
Bhéñma saw Arjuna approach and he roared like a lion. He immediately
covered him with countless shafts. In a moment Arjuna’s chariot with its
standard and charioteer became invisible beneath a curtain of arrows. Kåñëa
fearlessly and patiently maneuvered the chariot out from under the arrows. As
he emerged, Arjuna fired four straight-flying shafts from the Gäëòéva and cut
apart Bhéñma’s bow. Bhéñma, angry, took up another bow and strung it in an
instant. Without delay, Arjuna cut the new bow to pieces with razor-headed
arrows. Bhéñma praised him, calling out, “O Pärtha, O son of Päëòu, well done,
well done! I am pleased with you for this wonderful feat. Now fight your
hardest with me.”
Bhéñma whirled around in his chariot and appeared with yet another bow. He
shot large numbers of shafts at Arjuna, but Kåñëa, by His expert driving,
baffled them all. The chariot went around in swift circles with Arjuna moving
about to keep his arrows aimed at Bhéñma. Both Arjuna and Kåñëa were
wounded, and they both resembled angry bulls scratched by one another’s
horns. Laughing loudly, Bhéñma again covered his foe with arrows on all sides.
565

Even Kåñëa was astonished by his skill and power.
Seeing Arjuna’s chariot swamped, Dåñöadyumna rushed to his aid,
accompanied by a large number of troops. He released volleys of powerful
shafts, which distracted him from his attack on Arjuna. At the same time, the
twins hurled their weapons at him. Arjuna, freed from Bhéñma’s assault, sent
countless arrows back at him and at the kings supporting him. Other Kuru
fighters rode up to assist Bhéñma and gradually the fight between all the
warriors became a general conflagration.
As the two armies clashed, the sun pursued its course to the western hills.
Once again the conches blew and the soldiers lowered their weapons. Slowly
they withdrew from the field. Both sides had suffered heavy losses, but the
Päëòavas had been particularly afflicted by Bhéñma’s prowess. As Räkñasas and
carnivorous beasts and birds descended on the battlefield, the troops rested for
the third night, exhausted from the day’s fighting.
Dhåtaräñöra was cheered by the report of the third day of battle. It seemed that
even Arjuna and Kåñëa together could not check Bhéñma when he fought with
fury. And there was also the mighty Droëa, who was perhaps even more
powerful than Bhéñma. What to speak of Kåpa, Açvatthämä, and the other
maharathas. Even if the Päëòavas somehow managed to overpower Bhéñma,
there was still Karëa waiting on the sidelines to come into the battle. And he
would not have been fighting, so his strength would be fresh. Things looked
promising for the Kauravas. The old king looked forward with hope to the
fourth day.
***
On the fourth morning, Arjuna arranged the Päëòava forces in a vyuha
shaped like an alligator. From a distance it looked like a mass of clouds. On the
other side the Kauravas arranged a counter-array and moved toward their foe.
As the two armies came together, the earth shook.
The chief chariot fighters of the two sides clashed, while the infantry fought
hand-to-hand on the ground. Once again a great din arose. The Päëòavas had
been cheered by Kåñëa after their battering at Bhéñma’s hands, and they fought
with renewed vigor. Arjuna fought with Bhéñma and kept him at bay, while
Dåñöadyumna and other great fighters slaughtered many enemy kings and their
forces.
Thinking of his vow to slay Dhåtaräñöra’s sons, Bhéma began to search them
566

out. As he ranged across the earth, causing destruction, he came across
Duryodhana’s chariot. Drawing up his own chariot at a distance, he smiled as
he saw Duryodhana’s many brothers surround their king. Here was his chance
to finish them all.
Duryodhana saw Bhéma facing him. The two enemies glared at one another for
a moment. Then Bhéma took up his mace, roared and raced toward
Duryodhana.
With a wave of his gloved hand, Duryodhana ordered a large division of
elephants to charge the advancing Bhéma. Licking his lips and whirling his
iron mace, Shaikya, Bhéma leapt from his chariot. He ran straight at the
company of elephants with his mace held high. Careering about, he smashed
the elephants and brought them down one after another. The elephant
warriors could not approach this circling firebrand. Even his terrible shouts
made the huge beasts stop in their tracks and tremble.
Behind Bhéma came Abhimanyu and Draupadé’s sons, as well as Dåñöadyumna
and the twins. They all fired razor-headed arrows, which beheaded the fighters
on the elephants. The riders appeared like trees on a mountain with their tops
cut off.
The leader of the elephant division, Maghadaraja, goaded his mount toward
Abhimanyu. The immense beast resembled Airävata, Indra’s elephant carrier.
Unperturbed, Abhimanyu shot a long iron arrow which hit the elephant
between the eyes, penetrating up to its feathers. As the beast fell like a
mountain toppling, Abhimanyu fired another arrow which took off the head of
its royal rider.
Bhéma continued annihilating the elephants with mace blows. He felled them
with a single stroke and they dropped down with their heads broken open.
Others had their tusks, backs and legs broken. They fell vomiting blood and
screaming. Bhéma moved among them like Çiva wielding his Pinaka weapon.
The Päëòava looked exactly like that mighty god dancing his wild dance of
destruction at the end of the cosmic age. His mace, stained with blood and fat,
whizzed through the air with a roar like the ocean.
Like clouds driven in a tempest, the elephant forces broke and fled.
Surrounded by the carcasses of the hundreds that were slain, Bhéma looked like
Rudra standing in the middle of a cremation ground. He roared repeatedly, his
red eyes looking about for more enemies.
Duryodhana foamed at the mouth. He screamed out to his troops, “Kill
567

Bhéma!”
All the forces supporting Duryodhana turned and rushed toward Bhéma, who
smiled grimly as they charged. The advancing army came like a tidal wave
toward him, but Bhéma stood firm to meet them. The other Päëòava warriors
flanking Bhéma blew their conches and roared along with him. All of them
joyfully met the charging Kauravas with volleys of weapons. They were like the
seashore resisting the surging sea. Bhéma alone checked the leading Kauravas
by ranging about with his mace. He again created confusion among his foes.
They looked on him as if he were the immovable Mount Meru. None of their
weapons affected him at all. Most were knocked to the ground by his mace.
Those that struck him he shrugged off.
Headed by Bhéma, the Päëòava forces crushed the Kaurava army like an
elephant crushing a cluster of reeds. With one blow from his mace Bhéma
would destroy a chariot along with its charioteer and the warrior fighting on its
terrace. As he roved about like a tornado, the Kaurava soldiers turned their
eyes away from him in utter horror.
Surrounded by many of his brothers, Duryodhana roared out a challenge. With
a grim smile the Päëòava glared at him. Seeing the prince and his brothers
mounted on chariots, Bhéma quickly signalled to his charioteer to bring over
his own chariot. Jumping aboard he rushed at his foes. As Bhéma approached
them, Duryodhana and his brother Nandaka fired arrows at him, wounding
both Bhéma and Vishoka, his charioteer. They cut Bhéma’s bow apart and it fell
in pieces to the floor of his chariot.
Unable to tolerate their attack, Bhéma took up another bow, as tall as a man.
Releasing an arrow fitted with a horseshoe head, he cut apart Duryodhana’s
buffalo-horn bow. Excited to the highest pitch of his anger, Duryodhana took
hold of another bow from the many lying in his chariot. He instantly fired at
Bhéma a long hammer-headed arrow that resembled a bludgeon. It blazed
through the air and struck Bhéma full on the chest. Rendered senseless by the
blow, Bhéma fell to his knees for some moments.
The Päëòava forces supporting Bhéma poured upon Duryodhana a relentless
shower of arrows. As the Kaurava warded off the attack, Bhéma regained his
senses and sent up a shout. He quickly pierced Duryodhana with eight swift
shafts. As Duryodhana’s brothers converged on him, he licked the corners of
his mouth like a hungry wolf. Fourteen of Dhåtaräñöra’s sons surrounded him at
once and hurled countless arrows and other weapons at his chariot.
568

Laughing amid their furious assault, Bhéma swiftly fixed razor-headed shafts
onto his bow. Sending the arrows to all sides with deadly accuracy, he cut off
his opponents’ heads one after another. Duryodhana looked on helplessly as his
brothers were slain like a herd of deer killed by a lion. Their beautiful helmeted
heads, adorned with golden earrings, rolled in the mud. In a short time, all
fourteen were killed and the rest of the brothers had turned and fled.
Bhéñma came up to Duryodhana to support him and he shouted commands to
the army. “Bhéma is wantonly slaying the king’s sons, although they are
accomplished in arms and courageous. Quickly fight with the son of Päëòu
before he annihilates all our princes.”
The battle soon became general as the warriors of both sides came together,
matching their prowess and their weapons. As evening approached another
great carnage was wrought among the Kauravas by Ghaöotkaca and his Räkñasa
followers, whose strength increased with the onset of night.
Seeing his troops receiving the worst of the fight, Bhéñma blew his conch and
ordered the army to withdraw. As the afflicted Kaurava forces left the
battlefield, the victorious Päëòavas cheered. Ashamed and dispirited, the
Kauravas went back to their encampment. On their side, the Päëòavas,
cheerful despite their wounds, returned to their camp with Bhéma and
Ghaöotkaca at their head. They praised and worshipped their two heroes, who
had caused such destruction among the Kauravas.

Chapter 8
The Räkñasas Show Their Power
Dhåtaräñöra wept when he heard of his sons’ deaths. “O Saïjaya, I am afraid. I
am amazed to hear of Bhéma’s god-like prowess. Hearing, too, of my sons’
humiliation, I am burning with anxiety. What will the outcome of this war be?
I remember only Vidura’s prophecies. By the influence of destiny, it seems his
words will prove true. The Päëòava heroes are emerging successful, even
though our forces, headed by Bhéñma and Droëa, appeared so invincible. What
austerities have they performed? What knowledge did they cultivate? What
boons have been bestowed upon them? Alas, my sons are doomed.”
569

Dhåtaräñöra began to wail. Saïjaya consoled him, but the king continued to
weep for some time. Struggling to regain his composure, he clutched the arms
of his golden throne and continued to speak.
“I am being chastised by destiny. Tell me, Saïjaya, why my sons are being
killed while the Päëòavas survive? I cannot see any end to this ocean of distress
into which I am being plunged. I am like a man who desires to swim across the
sea. No doubt Bhéma will slay all my sons. O Saïjaya, tell me what Duryodhana
and his generals are doing as a result of the Päëòavas’ victory.”
Saïjaya sat at the king’s feet with his eyes closed. He could see everything
occurring on the battlefield in both camps. Visualizing the scene in
Duryodhana’s tent, he said, “Listen carefully, O King, and I shall describe
everything. What is the use of hoping to be victorious? You have already been
told so many times about the Päëòavas’ position. Those heroic men live only
for Kåñëa’s pleasure, and the universe itself depends on His will. Your sons are
wicked and have perpetrated numerous ills upon their cousins. Now they are
reaping the bitter fruits.”
Saïjaya then continued his description of the battle.
***
Duryodhana entered his tent with a heavy heart. Tens of thousands of his
troops lay dead on the battlefield, and Bhéma had killed fourteen of his
brothers. Tears of grief and frustration ran down his face as he took his seat
among his counselors. Turning to Bhéñma, he spoke in a voice laden with
sorrow.
“O Grandsire, on my side I have you, Droëa, Çalya, Kåpa, Kåtavarmä,
Açvatthämä, and many other warriors incapable of being defeated. All of you
are ready to lay down your lives for my sake. Our numbers are far superior to
those of the Päëòavas. In such circumstances, I cannot understand how we can
be suffering at their hands. How is it, O hero, that we are being overcome?
What is the secret of their success?”
Bhéñma, laying his silver helmet by his side, turned and looked at Duryodhana.
“O King, I will explain once again why we cannot defeat the Päëòavas. For
your own good you have repeatedly been counseled to seek peace with them.
You have chosen to ignore these instructions. Therefore, you will have to
suffer, as all your counselors predicted. I have cried myself hoarse trying to
make you see sense. What more do you want me to say? However, because I
570

desire your welfare and the welfare of your brothers, I will try one more time.”
Bhéñma felt his compassion stir for the grieving Duryodhana, who sat weeping
as he remembered his brothers, relatives and friends who had died for him.
Although the prince had always scorned his well-wishers’ advice, Bhéñma
hoped that his misery would make him more receptive. The Kuru commander
waited until he had the attention of all the kings present, then he spoke in a
loud voice.
“O King, O lord of the earth, there was not, is not, and will never be any
person who can slay the Päëòavas while Kåñëa protects them. I will describe to
you an ancient history which I heard while I resided in heaven with my
mother. Once, Brahmä was sitting in his assembly with the gods. At that time,
the earth goddess Bhümi came to him crying. She said she was afflicted by the
sinful acts of the demons and Dänavas, all of whom had taken birth on earth.
Thus she sought the shelter of the unborn creator. ‘O my lord,’ she prayed, ‘all
the mighty and wicked Daityas and Dänavas whom the gods slew in battle have
now appeared on earth as kings and warriors. I can no longer bear the burden
of such cruel men, who rape and plunder my resources for their own selfish
pleasure.’
“Feeling compassion for Bhümi, Brahmä, accompanied by the gods, went at
once to the limitless milk ocean, where the inconceivable Viñëu lies. After
offering prayers to the Supreme Personality, he told Him of the earth’s plight.
Brahmä then heard Viñëu speak to him from within his heart, where the Lord
ever resides as the Supersoul of all beings. The Lord told him that He would
soon appear on earth to destroy the demons. His personal servants would
incarnate along with Him. All the gods should expand themselves by their
mystic power and take birth on earth. Assisted by all of them, the Lord would
execute His divine plan for the salvation of the earth.”
Bhéñma paused and looked at Duryodhana. He knew the Kaurava cared little
for histories. Although he was prepared to accept that Viñëu was a powerful
being who acted for the gods’ good, Duryodhana could not accept Viñëu’s
identity as the Supreme Lord. Duryodhana was not a religious man in that
sense. Despite performing his religious duty as a kñatriya, he had no concept of
serving and pleasing a God who controlled everything. He believed in his own
power. Now, in a moment of distress, where it was obvious that his own power
was limited, Bhéñma hoped to find his mind more open. He went on addressing
the grieving prince.
571

“That eternal and indescribable Lord Viñëu has now appeared as Kåñëa.
Indeed, it is Kåñëa who is the source of Viñëu. There is no difference between
the two personalities. O Duryodhana, you have already heard that Kåñëa and
Arjuna are the two ancient åñis, Näräyaëa and Nara. Know too that the many
kings and kñatriyas fighting with them are expansions of the gods. The
Päëòavas themselves are all former Indras from different ages. Through them
Kåñëa will execute His divine plan to kill the demons, who have amassed as
your army, O King. Kåñëa’s will is infallible. He is the supreme mystery, the
supreme shelter, and the supreme glory. Do not disregard Him, thinking Him
an ordinary man. You should worship that undeteriorating being of endless
energies. The wise say that one who thinks Kåñëa to be an ordinary man is a
fool and a sinner.”
Bhéñma stopped and Duryodhana sat in thought. It was hard to accept that
Kåñëa was the all-powerful Supreme Being. Certainly He was an
extraordinarily powerful person, but God? Could any being lay claim to
possessing such power? Some great force or power lay beyond everything, that
was sure, but how could it be a person? And how could that person be Kåñëa,
who had sided with his foes? After all, was he, Duryodhana, the king of the
Kurus, really such an irreligious person? Everyone condemned him as such, but
he had always done his duty and tried to rule the people with justice. If there
was a God, why should He be antagonistic toward him? But if Kåñëa was God,
it would certainly explain why the Päëòavas proved so difficult to overpower.
Why, though, was He favoring Päëòu’s sons?
Duryodhana took a deep breath. “Tell me more about Kåñëa,” he asked, his
voice unusually subdued. “I always hear Him spoken of as the highest being. O
Grandsire, I desire to know all about His position and His glory.”
Bhéñma then described Kåñëa’s opulence as he had heard of it from Närada,
Vyäsadeva, Märkaëòeya and Paraçuräma. “All these wise sages accept Kåñëa’s
divinity. They consider Him the master and sustainer of all beings. He is
everyone’s well-wisher and friend, but you do not see Him as such, O King. For
this reason I consider you to be a Räkñasa of wicked heart and mind. You are
immersed in ignorance, absorbed only in thoughts of selfish happiness. Thus
you cannot know Kåñëa. He can only be known by those free from lust, greed
and anger, and those who realize themselves to be His eternal servants. O King,
try to see things in this way, for that alone will lead to everlasting happiness.
Make peace and live happily with your cousins. You cannot win this war. Your
572

enmity toward Kåñëa and the Päëòavas will result only in suffering and
defeat.”
Hearing Bhéñma speak at length about Kåñëa, many of the kings surrounding
Duryodhana began to regard the Yädava as the Supreme Person. Even
Duryodhana began to wonder. Perhaps Kåñëa was something more than just a
man; maybe He was even higher than a celestial.
But it was too late to turn back from the fight now. Whoever Kåñëa was, the
Päëòavas were Duryodhana’s enemies. He would give them nothing. If they
wanted the kingdom, they would have to fight for it. Even if their army was
comprised of expansions of the gods, his forces would be empowered by the
Dänavas, whose power was equal to that of the gods.
Duryodhana dismissed the assembly and went to bed. Before laying down to
sleep he bowed down to Kåñëa. If the Yadu hero was actually the Supreme,
then it would do no harm to offer Him some respect. Perhaps, the prince
thought, his own fortunes might change. Lying on his milk-white silk sheets,
Duryodhana then slept fitfully.
***
As the sun rose on the fifth day, the two armies again rushed at one another.
The warriors slain the previous day had been allowed to lay on a hero’s bed for
one night, then had been cremated at dawn, leaving the field clear for the day’s
action.
Worked up with the fury of battle, the opposing troops again slaughtered one
another. The killing did not end at any time throughout the day. Arjuna
showed his incomparable prowess as he moved about the field. The Gäëòéva
bow resembled flashes of lightning as he released innumerable arrows on all
sides. Other great fighters, such as Abhimanyu, Bhéma, the twins, Sätyaki, and
Yudhiñöhira, also created havoc among the Kauravas.
On the Kauravas’ side, Bhéñma and the other powerful warriors continued their
destruction of the Päëòava army. Çikhaëòé faced Bhéñma on a number of
occasions, intent upon his destruction, but each time Bhéñma turned away from
the fight. Dåñöadyumna also constantly sought an opportunity to slay Droëa,
but the Kuru preceptor held off his attack and drove Dåñöadyumna back with
his own irresistible assault. Drupada’s son wondered how he would ever fulfill
his destiny, but he fearlessly challenged Droëa again and again.
Bhéma also constantly watched for any opportunities to catch Dhåtaräñöra’s
573

sons. He was determined to kill them as quickly as possible. As he roved across
the battlefield, he appeared like the god of death. He favored fighting with his
mace, although he was equally accomplished with the bow and would
frequently shower volleys of arrows on the Kurus.
The fifth, sixth and seventh days passed with many men being slaughtered, but
none of the principal warriors fell on either side. In an attempt to limit the
destruction Arjuna was causing among his troops, Duryodhana assigned
Susharma and his army, the Samshaptakas, to engage him. Those warriors
challenged Arjuna at the start of each day and the Päëòava duly fought with
them, killing thousands.
Despite their inferior numbers, the Päëòava army slowly wore down the
enemy. Duryodhana repeatedly harangued Bhéñma and Droëa, accusing them
of partiality toward the Päëòavas. Both of them tried again and again to
convince Duryodhana to stop the war and to make peace, but Duryodhana was
resolute. The fight would continue.
On the eighth day, Bhéma encountered and killed another seventeen of
Duryodhana’s brothers. Although a large contingent of them had surrounded
Bhéma and hurled their weapons at him, he cut them down relentlessly with
his arrows. Standing on his chariot, it was clear that he intended to kill all of
Duryodhana’s brothers there and then. Only when Droëa came forward,
showering him with arrows, were they able to stop him. By shooting so many
arrows that Bhéma could no longer be seen, Droëa allowed Dhåtaräñöra’s sons
to escape. Breaking free from Droëa’s attack, Bhéma again ranged about the
battlefield like a wolf amid a flock of sheep.
As Bhéma ravaged the Kaurava troops and the other Päëòava heroes slew
warriors in other parts of the battlefield, Arjuna’s son Iravan came to the
battle. Born from the Näga princess Ulüpé, Iravan was a powerful celestial
fighter. He headed a division of warriors who rode upon many-hued horses
which had been raised on the high tracts of the Himälayas. The horses were
clad in steel mail and caparisoned in gold. The Näga fighters riding them
charged at the Kauravas with fearful cries, appearing amid the battle like a
flock of swans on the bosom of the ocean.
The Näga cavalry were met on Duryodhana’s side by the large division of
horseback warriors from the hilly region of Gandhara led by Çakuni’s six
younger brothers. Covered in armor and screaming battle cries, they rushed at
Iravan and his troops and penetrated their forces, their minds fixed on victory
574

or the attainment of heaven. Iravan laughed loudly, calling out to his followers,
“Kill all these warriors by any means.”
The Nägas displayed dazzling skills at riding and fighting. Their horses seemed
to float in the air, and their weapons fell from all sides onto their enemies. The
Gandhara fighters were crushed, leaving only Çakuni’s brothers to face the
Nägas. They threw lances at Iravan and pierced his armor. The lances stuck
out from his chest, back and huge legs.
Undaunted, Iravan pulled out the lances and hurled them back at his roaring
foes. He came down from his horse with blood streaming from his wounds.
Taking out a fearsome saber, he ran at Suvala’s sons. The powerful Näga
appeared like a moving mountain covered with red oxides. As he whirled his
saber and buckler, he covered himself on all sides. Although the Gandhara
princes shot hundreds of arrows at him, they could find no gap in his defense.
They surrounded Iravan and hurled their long lances. Beating down their
spears, Iravan leapt up with his saber and cut off their arms and legs. Their
mutilated limbs fell to the earth, along with their weapons, armor and shields.
Iravan then swung his saber with deadly accuracy, severing his opponents’
heads.
Only one prince, Vrishaba, escaped. He ran to Duryodhana to report that the
Gandhara forces had been annihilated. Duryodhana’s wrath flared. He called
for Alambusha, a massive Räkñasa of frightful appearance. Alambusha had
joined with Duryodhana because he hated Bhéma, who had slain his brother
Baka. As he came before Duryodhana, the Kaurava said, “Behold the
destruction caused by Arjuna’s son. The master of illusions, Iravan, can only be
checked by one of equal power. O hero, you are capable of going anywhere on
the earth and in the sky. You can assume forms at will. Go and slay Iravan in
battle, the son of your sworn enemy’s brother.”
Replying, “So be it,” the Räkñasa uttered his terrible war cry and rushed at
Iravan. By his mystic power he created a large division of demons, mounted
upon chargers. The demon warriors held lances fitted with spiked ends and
brandished bludgeons stained with blood.
Seeing Alambusha racing toward him, Iravan rallied his horsemen. Then the
Nägas and Räkñasas clashed. Soon, both divisions were slain and Iravan and
Alambusha faced one another alone just as Indra met Våtrasura in ancient
times. As the Räkñasa approached Iravan, the Näga swung his saber and cut
apart his enemy’s sword.
575

Alambusha rose up into the sky and confounded Iravan’s attack. Iravan, by his
own powers, followed the Räkñasa into the heavens. In their shining armor the
fighters appeared like two planets colliding. Assailing the Räkñasa with great
force, Iravan cut off his limbs and mutilated his body, but Alambusha somehow
evaded death. Rather, he immediately appeared in a new, youthful body.
Iravan slashed at him again and again with his saber and battle-axe, but the
Räkñasa appeared in a new body each time. Alambusha roared discordantly, the
sound filling the sky. He suddenly assumed a dreadful and prodigious form and
tried to capture Iravan.
As thousands of warriors looked on from below, Iravan created his own
illusions. He appeared in an enormous form resembling Ananta-sesha. He was
surrounded by numerous other Nägas in the forms of terrible-looking serpents.
They closed on Alambusha, baring their fangs and spitting poison. The
Räkñasa, after reflecting for a moment, assumed the form of Garuòa. Swooping
about rapidly, he devoured his antagonists.
Iravan was confounded by Alambusha’s illusory powers. As the Näga again
assumed his own form, Alambusha rushed at him, swinging his great sword.
With a powerful stroke he cut off Iravan’s head, graced with earrings and a
diadem, and it fell down to the earth like the moon falling from the heavens.
Duryodhana and his followers cheered loudly and fought on with renewed
vigor. The Päëòava forces cried out in dismay. Elsewhere on the field, Arjuna
battled the Samshaptakas, unaware of his son’s death.
But Ghaöotkaca had seen Iravan’s death. Enraged, he sent up a huge roar. The
earth with her mountains and lakes quaked as the terrifying cry echoed off the
distant hills. The Kauravas trembled and perspired. Their limbs froze in fear
and they gazed about to see what had caused that horrific sound. Depressed by
the cry, they fled in all directions like a herd of deer frightened by a lion.
Ghaöotkaca raised his blazing trident and advanced toward the Kauravas. He
was backed by hordes of Räkñasas who had all assumed fearful forms. As they
rushed into battle, they dispersed the enemy troops like the wind blowing away
dust and debris.
Duryodhana saw his forces fleeing in fear at the sight of the Räkñasas.
Shouting out a battle cry he stood firm to face them. He shook his bow and
took out a number of long, razor-headed shafts. Behind him stood a large
division of elephant fighters. They rushed at the Räkñasas, yelling out their war
cries again and again.
576

Ghaöotkaca was furious. Screaming, he and his loyal followers met
Duryodhana’s forces. Appearing as fiends, goblins and hideous demons, the
mighty Räkñasas attacked the elephants. With arrows, darts, sabers, lances,
mallets and battle-axes, they slew the warriors who rode them, then lifted
boulders and trees and killed the elephants. Crushing and butchering the
entire division, the Räkñasas roared in triumph.
Duryodhana was beside himself with anger. Heedless of his own life he rushed
at Ghaöotkaca and his troops. The powerful Kuru sped countless arrows at his
foes. He killed dozens of them, and they fell screaming to the earth.
Duryodhana exhibited astonishing prowess as he ranged about the field. His
shafts flew like lightning and severely afflicted the Räkñasas.
Ghaöotkaca then personally attacked Duryodhana. Although Ghaöotkaca
rushed forward like Death incarnate, Duryodhana did not waver. The Räkñasa
approached him and began to rebuke him.
“O evil-minded one, today I will liquidate the debt I owe my fathers whom you
exiled. You robbed such virtuous men and insulted their chaste wife. O man of
perverse intelligence, wretch of your race, for these and many other insults I
will now punish you. Stand and fight, if you have any courage.”
Biting his lips, Ghaöotkaca released a shower of arrows at Duryodhana. The
Kaurava seemed like a mountain under a storm in the rainy season, but he bore
the arrows without flinching as if he were an elephant receiving a shower of
flowers. He shot twenty-five shafts at the Räkñasa in reply. His arrows fell like
serpents falling upon the Gandhamädana mountain. Pierced and bleeding,
Ghaöotkaca resolved to kill Duryodhana. Forgetful of his father’s vow, he took
up a mighty lance which was capable of penetrating rock. It blazed with a
brilliant effulgence as Ghaöotkaca raised it to destroy Duryodhana.
Seeing the Kaurava in danger, the leader of an elephant division, a king named
Banga, urged his elephant forward. He came between Duryodhana and the
Räkñasa just as the lance was hurled. Struck by the blazing lance, the elephant
was slain and the king leapt from its back.
Duryodhana seethed. His forces were being slain on all sides. Now Bhéma’s
Räkñasa son stood before him like an immovable mountain. How could he
possibly overpower him? But keeping in mind his kñatriya duty, the Kaurava
prince stood firm. He let go a number of searing shafts that flew toward
Ghaöotkaca like a cluster of comets.
The Räkñasa moved about swiftly and expertly evaded the arrows. He roared
577

repeatedly, petrifying his enemies.
Hearing his roars, Bhéñma became fearful for Duryodhana’s life. He went
quickly to Droëa and said, “It seems from his cries that Ghaöotkaca is
overpowering the king. No creature can conquer Bhéma’s son. Only you can
help the king. Go at once and rescue him. May good betide you.”
Droëa immediately turned toward the sound of Ghaöotkaca’s roars. He was
followed by Açvatthämä, Kåpa, Bählika, Somadatta, Çalya, Bhurisrava, and
other Kuru warriors. Reaching Duryodhana, Droëa saw that he was hardpressed. He quickly shot a volley of arrows at Ghaöotkaca, while the other
Kurus attacked the Räkñasa army with arrows, darts and lances. The crack of
bowstrings striking leather fences sounded like the crackling of burning
bamboos in a forest fire. The Kurus hurled their lances at the Räkñasas and
they soared through the air like thousands of virulent serpents.
Seeing the Kuru force arriving, Ghaöotkaca laughed and stood his ground.
With another terrible yell he stretched his huge bow and released a crescentheaded shaft that destroyed Droëa’s bow. With other arrows he pierced all the
leading Kurus and broke their standards. So swift was his movement that the
Kurus had hardly any opportunity to train their weapons upon him before they
were struck by his arrows. The power of his shafts sent them reeling. Many of
them sat down on the terraces of their chariots, stunned and wounded.
As the Kurus fell back under the fierce assault, Ghaöotkaca focused his
attention on Duryodhana. He rushed at him with his sword held high. Seeing
this, the Kurus rallied and rained arrows on the roaring Räkñasa. Sorely
afflicted, Ghaöotkaca rose into the sky like an eagle. His roars carried to
Yudhiñöhira, who said to Bhéma, “Those are surely the roars of your son. I
suspect he is under attack from many powerful foes. O foremost of men, go at
once to his assistance.”
Bhéma obeyed his brother’s instruction and raced off toward Ghaöotkaca,
supported by other Päëòava chariot-warriors and a large contingent of soldiers.
As he approached his son, he shouted out his battle cry.
Hearing Bhéma’s cries, the Kurus turned pale with fear. As he rushed toward
them, many fled. But the leading Kurus stood their ground. A violent battle
ensued between them and the combined forces of Ghaöotkaca and Bhéma.
Duryodhana rallied his troops and they returned to the fight only to be
slaughtered by the charging Päëòava warriors. The earth became thick with
the mutilated bodies of fighters from both sides. The clash of weapons striking
578

armor was deafening. A thick cloud of red dust filled the air and no one could
see anything clearly. In that awful and confused encounter, friend struck
friend, unable to distinguish him from foe. Gradually, the earth became
covered with so much blood that the dust cloud subsided. Everything again
became visible, revealing scenes of destruction everywhere.
Bhéma and Ghaöotkaca swept about the field like whirlwinds, killing thousands
of men. Duryodhana saw his forces overpowered. He ordered Bhagadatta, the
king of Pragyotisha, to attack Bhéma and his son. The mighty warrior rode
upon a great elephant no less powerful than Airävata. Backed by a vast
division of other elephant warriors, he advanced toward Bhéma, shouting out
his challenge. Seeing him approach like a moving mountain, the Päëòava
fighters surrounded him and assailed his elephant with numerous shafts that
thudded into its side.
Wounded by hundreds of arrows, the huge beast resembled a hill decorated
with seams of red chalk. It screamed in fury and rushed at its foes, trampling
entire chariots with their horses, charioteers and warriors. Despite its wounds,
the elephant could not be checked.
The ruler of the Dasarhas, Kshatradeva, mounted upon another elephant, ran
in fury at Bhagadatta. The two elephants collided, but Bhagadatta’s mount did
not waver. Kshatradeva’s mount, however, stumbled backwards. In swift
succession, Bhagadatta hurled at him fourteen lances decked with gems and
fitted with long, barbed points. They pierced through the elephant’s armor and
sent it reeling. Screaming in pain, the Dasarha monarch’s elephant turned and
ran, crushing the army to which it belonged. Bhagadatta roared in joy and
goaded on his own beast, which began to careen wildly about the field. The
unstoppable elephant crushed divisions of soldiers as it ran here and there. The
Päëòavas were dispersed and they raced away in all directions, shouting in
terror.
Ghaöotkaca then challenged Bhagadatta with a roar of anger. Assuming an
immense form, he hurled a blazing trident at the elephant. As it flew it emitted
fire. Bhagadatta instantly shot a crescent-headed shaft that cut the trident
down before it reached him. It fell in pieces to the earth like a couple of
meteors fallen from heaven. Bhagadatta then threw a lance at the Räkñasa that
blazed as it flew.
Ghaöotkaca leapt up and caught that lance. Yelling, he broke it across his
thighs as the Päëòavas cheered. Infuriated, Bhagadatta rushed at the Päëòava
579

warriors, backed by his elephant division, and a fierce fight ensued.
Ghaöotkaca kept Bhagadatta at bay while Bhéma and other warriors
slaughtered the enemy troops.

Chapter 9
Bhéñma’s Vow
On the far southern side of the battlefield, Arjuna fought the Samshaptakas,
headed by Susharma. These warriors were dauntless and had vowed never to
retreat. They kept the Päëòava fully engaged and away from Bhéñma and the
other leading Kurus.
Arjuna fought fairly. He would not use the weapons he had received from the
gods, even though the celestial missiles were capable of annihilating his human
foes. But even with conventional weapons Arjuna was formidable. The
Samshaptakas rushed at him in waves, hurling darts, lances, clubs, axes and
countless arrows, all of which Arjuna effortlessly countered with his own
arrows from the Gäëòéva. He repeatedly struck his antagonists with clusters of
shafts that tore through their armor. With every attack thousands fell, but they
kept coming at him.
Late in the day a messenger reached Arjuna and informed him of Iravan’s
death. He immediately cried out and sat down on his chariot. Seeing him
overpowered by grief, Kåñëa maneuvered the chariot away from the enemy.
Arjuna buried his head in his hands and wept. After a few minutes he said,
“Alas, O Lord, I am realizing how pious was Yudhiñöhira in seeking to avert this
war by any means. Surely that great-minded soul saw clearly how this war
would mean such a terrible destruction of men. Therefore he begged for only
five small villages. But the mean-spirited Duryodhana refused. Now
innumerable kñatriyas are being slain for the sake of wealth. Seeing all these
heroes lying prostrate on the earth, I can only reproach myself. Fie upon the
duty of a kñatriya! Fie upon the desire for kingdom and wealth! I cannot take
any pleasure in this battle.”
Arjuna gazed with tearful eyes at the waiting Samshaptakas. There was now no
question of abandoning the fight. It was clear that the war would end only
580

when Duryodhana’s forces were annihilated, and him along with them.
Arjuna’s grief turned to anger as he thought of Duryodhana’s obstinacy. Now
Arjuna’s own dear son had perished thanks to Duryodhana.
Frowning and breathing heavily, Arjuna reached for his bow. “This is no time
for a display of feminine sentiments. Drive the chariot toward Duryodhana, O
Keçava. Let us cross over this impassable ocean of soldiers. By your grace, dear
Lord, I will soon end this war.”
Kåñëa urged the horses forward and the chariot raced across the field. From a
distance Arjuna saw the banners of Duryodhana, Droëa and Bhéñma, who were
fighting together supported by Kåpa, Açvatthämä and Bhagadatta. As they saw
Arjuna approach, they met him with volleys of arrows. Not tolerating their
attack, Arjuna replied with arrows of his own. He began to range about the
field firing his shafts on all sides. Each of them flew with unerring accuracy
toward its target. Warriors fell from their chariots like ripe fruits falling from
trees caught in a gale.
As the sun fell to the west, the battle raged on. The combatants fell upon each
other like angry lions fighting for their prey. They dragged one another by the
hair and hacked off each other’s limbs and heads. Striking with weapons, fists,
feet and teeth, they fought in a frenzy, slaying both armies in droves.
Beautiful bows, their staves decked with gold and jewels, lay discarded on the
field. Precious ornaments and arrows soaked in oil shone from the ground.
Steel swords with ivory hilts and fine shields embossed with gold engravings
fell from their owners’ lifeless hands. Lances, darts, battle-axes and maces, all
ornately worked with gold and jewels, were scattered about. Men lay in
unnatural positions, still clutching weapons. With wide, staring eyes, they
appeared as if still living. Others lay butchered and twisted, their arms and legs
akimbo and their mouths hanging open. The smell of blood and burning flesh
filled the air.
Toward the end of the day, a fearful fight took place between Bhéma and
Duryodhana. Having just single-handedly slain an entire division of ten
thousand men, Bhéma heard Duryodhana challenging him. “Stand and fight
with me, Bhéma, if you have any courage! So far you have killed only ordinary
soldiers. Let us see now how you fare against a truly powerful warrior!”
Clasping his iron mace as if he might crush it, Bhéma laughed. “The hour I
have so long anxiously awaited has arrived. Today I will kill you, if you do not
abandon the fight out of fear. Today I will soothe the sorrows of Kunté and
581

Draupadé. Killing you in battle, I will avenge the woes we suffered in the forest.
Inflated with pride you have disregarded us. Reap now the fruit of that folly. O
man of wicked mind, you have despised even the sinless Kåñëa, although He
personally came to Hastinäpura to seek peace. Filled with a sick joy you sent
Uluka to us with your depraved messages. For all these acts I will dispatch you
and your relations to Death’s abode.”
Bhéma lifted his bow and instantly fired thirty-six arrows resembling
thunderbolts at Duryodhana. They killed Duryodhana’s horses, knocked his
charioteer to the ground, and broke his bow. Bhéma swiftly followed the arrows
with two more razor-headed shafts, which cut down Duryodhana’s standard
and the white umbrella above his chariot. The Kaurava’s fine standard,
emblazoned with a golden serpent and decked with gems, suddenly dropped to
the ground and Bhéma roared in exultation.
Duryodhana reached for another bow, but Bhéma struck him with ten more
arrows. The Kaurava reeled about on his chariot. Without his horses, he could
not maneuver away from Bhéma’s attack. Seeing his plight, Jayadratha
advanced and attacked Bhéma with a shower of arrows. At the same time, Kåpa
came up to Duryodhana and took him onto his own chariot.
As Kåpa carried away the almost unconscious Duryodhana, many other
Kaurava fighters attacked Bhéma, who was then joined by Abhimanyu. A
ferocious battle ensued among all those heroes. Once again the sun set on
scenes of widespread destruction all over the battlefield. The two armies
withdrew for the night, praising each other for their respective feats of
prowess.
***
Back in his tent, Duryodhana slowly came back to his senses. Smarting from
the wounds inflicted by Bhéma and from the shame of losing the fight, he
began to think of Karëa. If Bhéñma was not willing to slay the Päëòavas, then
he should stand down and allow Karëa to fight. The Kaurava prince decided to
speak with his friend, who was waiting in the camp for his opportunity to join
the battle.
Seeing him entering his tent bloodied and covered with dust, Karëa jumped up
and embraced him. “How fares the Kurus? Are you gaining victory over your
enemies and increasing your fame?”
Duryodhana shook his head. “No, my friend, things are not going our way. We
582

are being routed by the warlike Päëòavas, who cannot be slain even by the
celestials. Day by day they are grinding down my forces. O Karëa, I am
weakening and our store of weapons has been reduced. I am now wondering if
we will ever defeat the Päëòavas.”
Karëa’s face flushed and he clenched his fists. “Grieve not, O best of the
Bharatas. I will do what is pleasing to you without delay. Let Bhéñma be
withdrawn from the battle. When that old hero lays down his weapons, I will
come personally to slay the Päëòavas. Bhéñma will always treat Päëòu’s sons
leniently and is incapable of killing them. Order him to stand down, O King. I
swear that I will then, before everyone’s eyes, bring down the mighty Päëòavas
in battle.”
Karëa only wanted to say what pleased Duryodhana. He knew that he too
could not kill all the Päëòavas; he had promised Kunté to spare all but Arjuna.
At least he would fight with his full power, perhaps killing Arjuna and sending
the other brothers fleeing. That would lead to the Kauravas’ victory without a
doubt.
Duryodhana was heartened. “Your words fire me with new enthusiasm, O great
hero. I will go to Bhéñma. If the powerful warrior will not agree to slay the
Päëòavas tomorrow, then I will return. You will then be able to fight, for I will
persuade Bhéñma to retire.”
Duryodhana left Karëa’s tent. Mounting his dark-colored horse, he made his
way to Bhéñma’s quarters. Seeing him so badly hurt, Bhéñma had royal
physicians cleanse his wounds. He then personally applied herbs, which quickly
healed the prince. By the application of vishalyakarini, a herb taken from the
Himälayan mountains, Bhéñma removed Duryodhana’s pain. As he was treated,
the Kaurava leader spoke anxiously with his commander.
“It seems we can do nothing to stop the Päëòavas’ onslaught. O sire, they surge
forward and break our lines. Penetrating, crushing, and slaughtering, the
mighty warriors gain fame at our expense. Today they smashed apart our
formation and routed our troops. I myself have been wounded by Bhéma and
almost slain. O best of men, I do not accept that you are incapable of checking
the Päëòavas. Tomorrow you should exert your full power. By your grace, I
desire to obtain victory and kill Päëòu’s sons.”
Bhéñma looked with pity upon Duryodhana. He still could not realize that his
hope to destroy the Päëòavas was futile. Equally futile was trying to explain
that to him. He would have to learn the hard way. Bhéñma thought of Kåñëa.
583

Whatever plans or maneuvers the Kurus attempted, no matter how skillful,
Kåñëa would doubtlessly thwart. Yet as the commander of the Kuru army,
Bhéñma knew it was his duty to do everything in his power to try to defeat the
Päëòavas. Duty was painful. At least it brought him into contact with Kåñëa,
and that could never be inauspicious under any circumstances.
Having finished his medical administrations, Bhéñma took his seat by
Duryodhana’s side. “I have fought to the utmost of my power each day.” The
old Kuru held up his arms, which were scarred from countless strikes of the
bowstring. “I have slain tens of thousands of warriors. Still, I cannot harm the
Päëòavas and their foremost fighters. They are protected by virtue and by the
Lord of virtue himself. What can exertion achieve?”
Duryodhana folded his palms as he addressed Bhéñma. “Relying on you, O
slayer of foes, we are capable of vanquishing in battle even the celestials and
Asuras combined. What then of the Päëòavas? How can I believe that you
cannot kill five men, even if they are supported by their relatives and allies?”
Tears flowed from Duryodhana’s eyes. “O son of Gaìgä, O lord, you should be
merciful to me. Slay the sons of Päëòu like Indra slays the Dänavas. Make good
your promise to me that you would slaughter the enemy armies. Exhibit your
full power and kill the five brothers along with all their followers.”
Duryodhana paused and breathed deeply. He looked into Bhéñma’s eyes. “Or, if
out of compassion for them, O lord, or hatred for me, you do not wish to kill
the Päëòavas, then please step down and allow Karëa to fight. That great hero,
the very ornament of battle, has promised to kill Kunté’s sons and all their
allies.”
Bhéñma felt the dagger of Duryodhana’s words pierce his heart. The prince’s
suggestion that he was not trying his best only compounded the pain he
already felt at having to fight in the first place. It seemed Duryodhana had no
intelligence. Had he not seen how hard his warriors had been fighting? What
more did he think Karëa could achieve? Bhéñma remained silent for a moment
to control his anger. Breathing heavily and clutching the hilt of his sword, he
finally said in a cool voice, “Why, O Duryodhana, are you stinging me with this
insult? I am always endeavoring to the best of my ability to accomplish your
good, even at the cost of my life. I say the Päëòavas are invincible. Is it not
sufficient evidence that Arjuna gratified Agni by withholding the celestial
hosts at Khäëòava? Or that he and his brother rescued you from the enraged
Gandharvas? Where was the suta’s son that time?”
584

Bhéñma felt an increasing sense of frustration as he addressed Duryodhana.
The prince thought only of himself. He cared nothing for others. Why could
he not understand what was in his own best interests in this case? Surely he
was blinded by envy and hatred for his cousins. Thus he embraced his own
destruction, even as it unfolded before his eyes.
Mixed with his frustration, Bhéñma felt compassion. “Surely a man on the brink
of death loses his senses, O son of Gändhäré. You cannot see the inevitable
consequences of the enmity you have created with the Päëòavas. Standing as
they are with the immortal and infallible Keçava on the field, there can only be
one outcome. This is your doing. Why do you rant? The time you have long
anticipated has arrived. Now match your malice with acts of valor. Display
your long-vaunted prowess in battle and end this conflict.”
Servants entered the tent to inform Bhéñma and the prince that their meal was
ready. Duryodhana dismissed them with a wave of his hand. He had no
appetite. Since the battle had begun, he had hardly eaten, refusing even the
wine which he normally enjoyed so much. His mind thought only of the
Päëòavas and how they might be slain. Sitting at Bhéñma’s feet, he looked up at
him imploringly. If the son of Gaìgä became determined, then the Päëòavas
were as good as dead.
Bhéñma drew a deep breath. “You should know, O monarch, that I will not at
any time abandon you or the Kurus. Such is the duty of kñatriyas and indeed
my own determination. For your sake, O King, I will make a mighty effort to
bring about the Päëòavas’ death tomorrow. Breaking through the hostile ranks
I will personally confront them in the thick of battle. Any who come to protect
them will be at once killed. With the exception of Çikhaëòé, I will spare none.”
Bhéñma reached down by his side and lifted up his large silver quiver, which
was studded with precious stones. He extracted five shining arrows, gilded with
gold and decked with gems. These arrows were fitted with long spiked heads
and fletched with buzzard feathers. Bhéñma spread out a silk cloth on the
ground and carefully placed the five arrows upon it. As Duryodhana watched,
he sat in meditation for a few moments, muttering Vedic mantras.
Finally he said, “I have imbued these five arrows with the full force of my
ascetic powers. Even Indra would not escape them. With them, I will kill the
five Päëòavas tomorrow.”
Bhéñma’s voice was flat and cheerless. Tears came to his eyes as he continued.
“Sleep peacefully tonight, O King. In the morning I will come out and fight a
585

terrible battle, the like of which has never been seen. The Päëòavas will not
escape. Only Kåñëa can save them, but He has vowed not to take up weapons.”
A smile touched the corner of Bhéñma’s mouth. Would Kåñëa find some way to
save His beloved servants? That would be wonderful indeed. But failing that,
the Päëòavas would be finished. His empowered arrows would not fail.
Duryodhana jumped to his feet beaming and slapping his arms. Then he
became thoughtful. Like Bhéñma, he also wondered if Kåñëa might devise some
means to thwart the plan. Looking down at the arrows lying before Bhéñma, he
said, “Let me keep these shafts tonight. I will guard them carefully and hand
them over to you at the start of the battle.”
Bhéñma nodded and Duryodhana took the arrows. He bowed before Bhéñma and
went to his own quarters, carefully placing the arrows by his bed. Now surely
the Päëòavas were doomed. Bhéñma was famous everywhere as Devavrataù, one
of unbreakable vows. Nothing would stop him from fulfilling his promise.
Duryodhana lay down happily to rest. He could not wait for the next day’s
battle.
***
Yudhiñöhira sat in his tent surrounded by his brothers. After eight days of
fighting, it seemed his forces were gaining the upper hand. Although pleased,
Yudhiñöhira was simultaneously saddened that so many men were being
slaughtered. By the time the war ended, the earth would be full of widows. Yet
what could be done? He had made every attempt to bring about peace. The
stubborn Duryodhana and his blind father were to blame. Now they were
suffering the results of their folly. They were so foolish that not even Kåñëa
could change their minds. Yudhiñöhira looked at Kåñëa. The Yädava hero had
assumed a pensive expression. As everyone settled into their seats around him,
he began to speak.
“We are becoming successful in this fight. Bhéma and Arjuna are crushing the
Kauravas, supported by all you men. In my view, our enemies will resort to
every desperate means to reverse the situation. Even now I sense that they are
devising some dangerous scheme.”
Kåñëa looked at Arjuna, who sat apart from the others, his head bowed. He
thought only of Iravan. The Näga prince had fought only out of love for his
father. Arjuna remembered the day long gone when he had conceived Iravan
with Ulüpé. She had raised the boy among the Nägas, but he had sometimes
586

come to see Arjuna at Indraprastha. Tears fell from Arjuna’s eyes as he recalled
the days he had spent with his son. Now that boy lay on a hero’s bed, another
victim of Duryodhana’s greed. Arjuna sighed and looked through the tent
opening into the dark night.
Kåñëa moved toward His friend and placed an arm round his shoulder. “O
Pärtha, holding fast to the duty of a kñatriya, dismiss this grief. Your son has
surely reached everlasting regions of bliss. Shake off your sorrow and fix your
mind on the fight.”
Arjuna wiped his eyes and turned toward Kåñëa. How fortunate he was that
the Lord of all beings was personally present to keep him fixed in virtue. The
duty of a warrior was certainly not easy.
Kåñëa smiled comfortingly as He went on. “There is something you must do
tonight, Arjuna. Do you recall the time when you saved Duryodhana from the
Gandharvas––how he then promised to return the favor? I believe that time
has now come. The Kaurava has in his possession five arrows meant for the
death of you and your brothers. O Arjuna, go to him in friendship and ask for
the arrows.”
Arjuna remembered that day in the forest when he had released Duryodhana
and his brothers. The Kaurava had been consumed by shame, yet his kñatriya
honor had compelled him to admit he owed Arjuna a boon. Arjuna recalled
how he had laughed and said he would claim it in the future. He had thought
that day would never come, but it seemed that Kåñëa thought differently.
Arjuna began to remove his armor. “O Janärdana, I will always follow Your
determination. I will go at once to Duryodhana.”
Unarmed and alone, Arjuna mounted a white horse and rode across to the
Kaurava camp. By the kñatriya’s code of honor he knew he faced no danger.
Many times after the day’s fighting, the soldiers of the two armies would meet
together as friends. The Kaurava guards stood aside as they saw Arjuna arrive.
He was quickly shown to Duryodhana’s quarters, where he found the prince
about to sleep.
Duryodhana stood up in surprise as Arjuna was shown in. “Hail, O Pärtha,” he
said, pointing to a seat near his bed. “You are welcome. Tell me, why you are
here? Have you come to ask for the kingdom without a fight? If so, then I will
give it to you at once.”
Arjuna knew that Duryodhana was being facetious. Arjuna would never beg
for anything. If he were to take the kingdom now, it would only be at the end
587

of the war, after his enemies were slain. But he obviously wanted something.
Duryodhana looked at him curiously.
Arjuna continued to stand. “O hero, I have come here remembering that you
offered me a boon. Do you recall that promise?”
Duryodhana shrank with shame as he thought back to that day. “Yes, of course
I remember it well. What would you ask of me?”
“I believe you have here five arrows, O Bharata. I wish to have them.”
Duryodhana looked at him with shock, but without hesitation he reached
down and picked up the arrows. Placing them across his outstretched hands, he
offered them to Arjuna. “Take them at once, Pärtha, but pray tell me how you
knew about them.”
Taking the arrows and thanking Duryodhana, Arjuna told him that Kåñëa had
informed him of their existence. He then took his leave and returned to
Yudhiñöhira’s tent, leaving Duryodhana seated on his bed, wringing his hands.
Kåñëa again! Maybe the eulogies of Bhéñma and Vidura were true. There was
surely something extraordinary about that Yädava. It seemed He knew
everything. Duryodhana lay down and gazed up at the empty expanse of the
tent’s large roof. Was there any hope of victory? Perhaps. The arrows may be
gone, but Bhéñma had still decided to kill the Päëòavas.

Chapter 10
Kåñëa Protects His Devotee
At sunrise the following morning, Bhéñma went to Duryodhana and asked for
the arrows. Hearing that Arjuna had taken them at Kåñëa’s behest, Bhéñma
smiled. He was not surprised. Even if he had kept the arrows, Kåñëa would no
doubt have found some way to thwart him. While Kåñëa rode on Arjuna’s
chariot, the Kurus were doomed. How much longer could this fight go on?
Would everyone have to die before it was over?
Donning his armor Bhéñma said, “It seems the Yädava has made my promise
false. I cannot invest another five arrows with the same power. Therefore, it
will not be possible for me to slay the five brothers today. However, I will still
exert myself on your behalf. Everything that lies within my power will be done.
588

I will focus my attention on Arjuna. Even if I slay him alone, your purpose will
be accomplished.”
As he prepared for the day’s fighting Bhéñma thought of Kåñëa’s promise not to
take up arms in the battle. Well, today he would test that promise. If the Yadu
hero made him forsake his vow, then he would force Kåñëa to break His own.
Either He would have to fight or He would see His beloved Arjuna slain.
Bhéñma mounted his chariot and moved off to the head of the army. Shouting
commands he arranged the Kauravas in the formation named Sarvabhadra. It
resembled an eagle with outspread wings. With Kåpa, Kåtavarmä, Jayadratha
and other kings, he stationed himself at the front and center of the troops.
Other mighty heroes stood at the right and left wings, guarding the infantry in
their separate divisions. Duryodhana stood in the middle, surrounded by his
brothers and protected by Droëa and his son. Alambusha and his Räkñasas
stood in the rear, along with tens of thousands of other soldiers.
Duryodhana looked at Bhéñma at the front of his army. Amid the Kauravas, the
old hero shone like the moon. The prince felt his hopes rise. With Bhéñma
exhibiting his full power, the Päëòavas would doubtlessly be thrown into
complete disarray. Still, they would try by any means to stop him. But there
was only one person capable of that, at least according to the prophesy.
Duryodhana turned to Dushashana and called out, “Today the grandfather will
slay our enemies in battle like a fire burning grass. Surely that which we have
longed for all these years will now be achieved. Thus I consider it our highest
duty to protect Bhéñma. But for Çikhaëòé, he said, he will slay anyone who
crosses his path in the battle. We should therefore ensure that he does not
have to face Drupada’s son. We should not let Çikhaëòé kill him, like a wolf in
a pack slaying a lone lion.”
On Duryodhana’s order, many powerful chariot warriors rode up to surround
Bhéñma. The army then moved off, shaking the earth.
On the other side of the field, the Päëòava forces stood ready for battle. Cased
in shining mail and arrayed in a counter-formation, they advanced toward
their foe. Arjuna, riding alongside Dåñöadyumna, said, “Today Bhéñma, feeling
that we deceived him, will be angry. Therefore let Çikhaëòé face him. I will
protect your brother.”
Then the two armies clashed. Amid war cries and the blare of countless
instruments, they met furiously. Above the soldiers hovered shrieking birds of
prey. Jackals howled. All the points of the compass appeared as if ablaze, and
589

showers of stones fell from the sky. The horses and other animals shed tears
and stumbled as they ran. Despite these inauspicious omens, which portended a
massacre, the warriors rushed into battle with full force. They drove
remorselessly into one another, hacking, slicing and piercing. The chariotwarriors showered volleys of shafts that fell like grey clouds from the sky, while
countless lances sped through the air like silver- and gold-winged serpents.
Breaking forward from the Päëòava ranks, Abhimanyu displayed astonishing
skill and power. Driven by tawny-colored horses he charged against
Duryodhana and his division. He shot arrows at the prince and all his followers
with such force and speed that they were stunned and unable to respond.
Many heroic chariot fighters were slain by his unerring shafts. Chariots were
smashed and elephants were brought down. Abhimanyu’s arrows flew like
virulent serpents spitting fire. He scattered the Kaurava divisions like a wind
scatters clouds. They could hardly look at him as he careered about the field,
his bow drawn constantly to a circle. As Abhimanyu crushed them, the
Kaurava warriors considered him another Arjuna. No one could detect any
weakness in him. He even confounded Droëa, Kåpa and Açvatthämä, who all
tried to check him. The Kauravas broke and fled in terror.
Seeing his troops’ distress, Duryodhana called for Alambusha and instructed
him, “Singlehandedly, Subhadrä’s son is destroying my troops. I do not see any
way to stop him other than through yourself, O prince of Räkñasas. Go at once
and slay him. In the meantime, Bhéñma, Droëa and I will slay Arjuna.”
Alambusha bowed to the command and uttered a deafening roar that shook
the earth. Upon hearing the roar, warriors fell stunned to the ground.
Abhimanyu, however, was delighted to see the Räkñasa charge him. Grasping
his tall bow, he urged his charioteer to approach him. He appeared to be
dancing in his chariot as he released arrows at Alambusha and his followers.
The Räkñasas began crushing the divisions supporting Abhimanyu. Alambusha
moved with such speed and power that he quickly killed thousands of warriors.
His arrows fell like poisonous showers and consumed the Päëòava forces.
Seeing the Räkñasa’s prowess, Draupadé’s five sons rushed at him like five
planets rushing at the sun. Yudhiñöhira’s son, Prativindya, pierced his armor
with a number of keen arrows that screamed through the air. Shining, blood
flowing from his wounds, the Räkñasa was as beautiful as a dark cloud fringed
with the sun’s red rays. The Päëòavas’ sons continued to rain fierce shafts on
Alambusha from all sides. Sorely afflicted and wounded, he became infuriated
590

like a snake who had been carelessly kicked. Unable to gather his senses under
the attack, he crouched down in his chariot and swooned for a few moments.
As the Räkñasa regained consciousness, he rose to his feet and swelled with
anger. He shot long arrows decked with buzzard feathers that broke apart his
adversaries’ bows and standards. Every one of the five brothers standing
against him was severely wounded. The frenzied Alambusha sent his deadly
arrows with frightening force. The shafts slew the four horses drawing each of
his opponents’ chariots, and killed the charioteers. He pierced the brothers
again and again with arrows that resembled fiery meteors.
With his bow working non-stop, Alambusha rushed against his foes, intent on
slaying them, but as he approached them he was checked by a volley of arrows
from Abhimanyu. The Räkñasa turned his attention to Subhadrä’s son, and a
ferocious battle ensued between the two heroes. Their eyes red with rage, they
gazed at each other for some moments. Both of them roared and clutched their
bows as they circled each other on their cars. Suddenly, they both released
arrows, their bows twanging like thunderclaps. The Räkñasa employed his
illusory powers and Abhimanyu countered with celestial weapons.
The sky between the two fighters was filled with clouds of arrows. Fire and
smoke issued from them as they struck each other in mid-air and fell to the
earth. Each seeking the weak point in the other, the two warriors pierced one
another on the chest, arms and legs. Although hit with powerful shafts that
stuck from their bodies like trees on a mountain, neither fighter flinched.
Abhimanyu then fired arrows that passed clean through the Räkñasa’s body
and entered the earth like red serpents going into a hole. Alambusha gasped in
pain and turned his face away. By his mystic power he spread a cloak of
darkness over the battlefield. No one could see anything in the gloom. Then
Abhimanyu invoked the Sürya-astra. As the effulgent weapon appeared, the
battlefield was once again illuminated. Abhimanyu then covered his adversary
with a network of golden arrows. Finding himself hard-pressed, the Räkñasa
employed many kinds of illusion. He made strange beings appear on the field.
Blazing weapons of all sorts fell on Abhimanyu from all sides.
Unperturbed, Abhimanyu countered the illusions with his celestial missiles.
Alambusha, his mystic powers neutralized by Kåñëa’s nephew, was
overwhelmed. He leapt down from his chariot and fled.
After defeating the Räkñasa, Abhimanyu began crushing the Kaurava troops
like an infuriated elephant crushes lotuses in a lake. Only Bhéñma could check
591

him. The Kuru grandfather was backed by many other powerful chariot
fighters. Similarly, many Päëòava warriors supported Abhimanyu and a
general fight ensued.
Elsewhere on the battlefield, Duryodhana, Droëa, Kåpa, Susharma, and the
Trigarta army encountered Arjuna. Both sides invoked their celestial weapons
as they assailed one another to their full power. As they contended together
Droëa and Arjuna appeared like Çiva and Yamaräja. Forgetful of their
relationship, they fought remorselessly.
Challenging Arjuna repeatedly, the Trigartas poured their arrows upon him
from all sides. Although assailed by a thick shower of shafts, Arjuna exhibited
his lightness of hand by countering them. Even the celestials cheered Arjuna’s
skill.
Infuriated at being attacked by so many warriors at once, Arjuna invoked the
Väyu-astra. That irresistible weapon created a tempest that hurled warriors,
chariots and elephants all around the field. Seeing the destruction that weapon
wrought, Droëa countered it with the Saila missile. The wind subsided and
men and horses fell from the sky.
Arjuna, moving with blinding speed, fired innumerable arrows that sent the
Trigarta division reeling. The chariot fighters ranging against Arjuna fell
screaming from their shattered cars. Quickly, he was surrounded by
Duryodhana, Kåpa, Açvatthämä, Çalya, Bählika, and a number of other
Kaurava maharathas. Bhagadatta and Srutayush, heading an elephant division,
surrounded Bhéma, who was supporting his younger brother.
While numerous fighters held the two Päëòavas at bay, Bhéñma approached
Yudhiñöhira. The Kuru chief knew that if he could capture Yudhiñöhira, the
war would be over. He surrounded him with thousands of chariots and
horsemen. The eldest Päëòava, supported by Dåñöadyumna, Sätyaki, Çikhaëòé
and other heroes, fought off his attack.
Seeing himself surrounded by many elephants, Bhéma licked the corners of his
mouth and smiled. He grasped his mace and leapt from his chariot with a roar.
The elephant warriors closed in on him, goading their rocking beasts with their
hooks. In the midst of the elephant division Bhéma resembled the sun amid
dark clouds. Then like a tempest scattering clouds, he moved swiftly among his
opponents. Struck by Bhéma’s flailing mace, the elephants shrieked.
The elephants gored Bhéma as he fought. The blood running from his wounds
made him appear like a blossoming ashoka tree. Catching hold of the
592

elephants’ tusks he wrenched them out and felled the screaming beasts with
blows from his mace. Although the elephants were highly trained in crushing
and killing, Bhéma was able to slaughter their entire division. The survivors ran
frantically back through their own ranks, trampling soldiers and chariots as
they fled.
In the meantime, Arjuna had repelled the warriors who surrounded him. The
Kauravas had fled. Both Bhéma and Arjuna then came to support Yudhiñöhira,
who was still under Bhéñma’s attack. In his fury, Bhéñma had alone crushed a
huge detachment of Somakas. Although the Somakas were fierce fighters, they
could not face Bhéñma.
Virata, Drupada and Drupada’s two sons came before Bhéñma and challenged
him. They pierced him with arrows decked with gems. Çikhaëòé came forward
and shouted out his challenge, firing a hundred shafts, but Bhéñma did not
respond. Turning from Çikhaëòé he attacked Drupada and Virata.
Dåñöadyumna brought his chariot to the fore and shot three arrows that
penetrated Bhéñma’s armor and pierced his chest. Bathed in blood he shone all
the more on the battlefield. Without flinching, he struck Dåñöadyumna with
twenty-five arrows, then fired an arrow which cut Drupada’s bow.
At that time, Bhéma and Arjuna arrived and the battle raged on between the
two sides. Both armies were fearless. Embracing a hero’s death, their minds
fixed on heaven, they rushed at their foes with uplifted weapons. Many
warriors fell to the ground and lay there laughing as they died. Horses dashed
about wildly with their warriors hanging lifeless from the saddle. Chariot
fighters fell from their cars with their armor smashed and their limbs severed.
So many men were slain that it appeared as if a river
of blood flowed across the earth, carrying heads, arms, legs and torsos. Heroes
were cheered by the sight and cowards became afraid.
As the carnage increased, the kings and kñatriyas censured Duryodhana. “All
this destruction has arisen through the folly of that prince and his blind father.
Why did Dhåtaräñöra, of crooked mind and intentions, infatuated by greed,
harbor feelings of envy toward the sinless Päëòavas?”
Hearing their cries, Duryodhana scowled. He looked at Bhéñma and Droëa,
calling out, “Do not heed these shouts. Fight with determination and slay our
enemies before they annihilate us. O Grandsire, why do you tarry?”
Bhéñma turned to Duryodhana and raised his hand in silent assent. He gazed
around the field. Some way off he could see Arjuna’s standard rising above the
593

battle. He could hear Hanumän crying on the flag. Bhéñma again thought of
Kåñëa. Soon the Yädava would see His dearest friend in danger. By His
cunning He may have saved the Päëòavas last night, but now He would need
more than that to save Arjuna. Bhéñma was filled with joy at the thought.
Whatever Kåñëa decided would doubtlessly be for his good, and the good of the
world.
Bhéñma ordered his charioteer to move toward Arjuna. Remembering his
promise he slew every soldier he saw. Arjuna was fighting with Susharma and
his army when Bhéñma arrived. Like the Destroyer himself, he was slaughtering
their warriors mercilessly. No one could stand before him for even a moment
before being struck by his shafts. Faced with the impossible task of fighting
Arjuna, many warriors fled in terror. Some left their horses, others their
chariots, and some their elephants, to escape on foot in their panic. Others
galloped away at full speed, not looking back. Although Susharma tried to rally
his troops, they paid him no heed. Soon the king stood in the battle with only
his own brother supporting him. Duryodhana saw his plight and came to assist
him. With Bhéñma, they assailed Arjuna with volleys of shafts.
The other Päëòavas then rushed to Arjuna’s assistance. At the same time,
other great fighters among the Kauravas came to Bhéñma’s side. Soon a mighty
battle between the best warriors on both sides ensued. Sätyaki and Kåtavarmä,
disregarding their long friendship, battled together. Droëa fought Drupada,
while Bhéma engaged with Bählika. Duryodhana and Çakuni, along with some
of Dhåtaräñöra’s other sons, fought Yudhiñöhira and the twins.
Bhéñma slew the Päëòava troops with a vengeance. It appeared that even
Death personified could not approach him. Ten thousand chariot warriors
from the races of the Cediç, Kashis and Karushas, all fearless and unretreating
in battle, rushed at Bhéñma, but he killed them all.
Now the Päëòava army began to flee. Seeing this, Kåñëa said, “O Pärtha, the
hour which you have so ardently longed for has now arrived. Make good the
words you spoke at Virata’s palace. Before the assembled kings you said, ‘I will
slay any and all of Duryodhana’s fighters, headed by Bhéñma and Droëa.’ O
grinder of foes, make true your words. Remembering the duties of your order,
do not hesitate. Fight and slay Bhéñma before he destroys our army.”
Arjuna stood in his chariot, his head hung down. He knew it was indeed time
to try to kill his grandfather. Heavy with sadness, he looked at Kåñëa and
replied, “Burdensome is the duty of a kñatriya in this world. Killing those who
594

ought not to be slain, he strives for wealth and power. Yet, O Janärdana, I must
do Your bidding. That is my highest duty. Then drive my horses toward that
virtuous man of irresistible splendor. Today I will kill Bhéñma.”
Kåñëa took up the reins and the horses moved according to His will. The
Päëòava troops, seeing Arjuna rushing for an encounter with Bhéñma, rallied.
Bhéñma roared out his war cry and covered Arjuna’s chariot with a blanket of
arrows. Kåñëa dexterously drove the chariot out from under the attack and
Arjuna fired a broad-headed shaft that split Bhéñma’s bow in two. Bhéñma
immediately strung another, but before he could fit an arrow to it, Arjuna
again destroyed it. Bhéñma smiled and cheered Arjuna. “Well done, well done,
O mighty-armed one.”
Evading Arjuna’s arrows, the Kuru chief took up another bow, then spun
around to fire dozens of shafts at his foe. Again Kåñëa baffled the attack by His
expert chariot driving. None of Bhéñma’s arrows found their mark, and they
whistled past harmlessly. Bhéñma increased the intensity of his assault,
anticipating Kåñëa’s moves and striking both Him and Arjuna with numerous
shafts. Kåñëa and Arjuna, mangled by Bhéñma’s arrows, appeared beautiful, like
a pair of heifers scratched by each other’s horns. Arjuna countered Bhéñma’s
attack, but found himself unable to strike his beloved grandfather with all his
might.
Bhéñma maintained a relentless assault on Arjuna. At the same time he
attacked the surrounding Päëòava troops. The twang of his bow made one
continuous roaring sound. His shafts streaked in all directions. Passing through
the bodies of warriors, horses and elephants and killing them, the fearful shafts
then entered the earth.
Bhéñma concentrated his attack on Arjuna’s chariot. He struck Kåñëa with a
number of shafts and the Yädava trembled in His seat as He guided the horses.
Laughing loudly, Bhéñma rained thousands of arrows on Arjuna. Still the
Päëòava resisted him only half-heartedly.
Kåñëa looked astonished to see Bhéñma’s prowess. It seemed like the Kuru
warrior would consume the three worlds. Bhéñma stood in battle like the
Destroyer on the day of universal dissolution. Seeing him killing the foremost
Päëòava warriors, and that Arjuna was not fighting to his full power, Kåñëa
became thoughtful. Bhéñma could kill the combined armies of the gods and
Asuras if left unchecked. Unless Arjuna did something, then even he would
succumb to Bhéñma’s deadly shafts. Already he was sorely afflicted.
595

Kåñëa reflected, “I will personally slay Bhéñma. I cannot tolerate the slaughter
of the Päëòavas. Arjuna is not doing what he should do out of his respect for
Bhéñma. Therefore I will lighten the Päëòavas’ load by killing that best of men
in battle.”
Even as Kåñëa thought in this way, Bhéñma stepped up his attack. By employing
celestial weapons, he fired so many arrows that all points of the compass
around Arjuna were covered. Neither the sky, the earth, nor the sun could be
seen. Yudhiñöhira’s troops were crushed and forced back by the irresistible wall
of arrows. Jumping down from their cars, they fled in terror. Arjuna’s chariot
was entirely shrouded. Neither he nor Kåñëa were visible. Only his tall
standard could be seen. Seeing him hard-pressed, Dåñöadyumna blew his conch
and came to his aid.
Kåñëa whirled Arjuna’s chariot around and managed to evade Bhéñma’s attack.
Seeing Dåñöadyumna coming up, He called out, “O hero of the Sinis, our men
are retreating. The grandfather is slaying them like a lion killing deer. Behold!
I will Myself kill that hero of fixed vows along with all his followers and the
sons of Dhåtaräñöra. O Satvata chief, no one can escape Me when I am angry.
With great joy I will secure the kingdom for Ajätaçatru.”
Kåñëa threw down the reins and leapt from the chariot. Taking up a nearby
chariot wheel, He raised it above His head as if it were His own favorite
weapon, the Sudarçana chakra. He ran toward Bhéñma as a lion might run at an
elephant. The end of His yellow silk garment fluttered in the dusty air,
resembling lightning dancing in a dark cloud. The wheel in His hand seemed
to glow with His own effulgence, and it looked as beautiful as the primeval
lotus from which Brahmä was born. Kåñëa’s dark arm appeared like the stalk of
the lotus, and His charming face, covered with beads of perspiration, was its
filament.
Seeing Kåñëa intent on Bhéñma’s destruction, the Kurus felt their end was
near. Kåñëa looked like the all-destroying Samvartaka cloud, which appears at
the end of the millenium.
Bhéñma’s limbs trembled and his eyes flooded with tears. Here was the Lord of
the universe, breaking His own promise to protect His devotee. The Kuru hero
threw down his weapons and stretched out his arms. As Kåñëa approached him
he called out, “Come, come, my Lord. O Supreme Deity, Lord of all the gods, I
bow to You. Seeing You forsake Your vow to save Your friend, and thus
fulfilling my own desire, I am satisfied. Fell me from this chariot, O Keçava.
596

Killed by You, O Janärdana, I will obtain great good fortune. My fame and
dignity will be celebrated throughout the worlds.”
Arjuna was mortified to see Kåñëa breaking His promise not to fight. It was his
fault. If he had exerted himself against Bhéñma, this would not have been
necessary. Of course, Kåñëa’s promise had been that He would not wield
weapons in the war, and a wheel was hardly a weapon, but still, He would be
condemned by foolish men for His apparent dishonesty.
Arjuna put down his bow and jumped from the chariot. His armor flashing in
the late afternoon sun, he ran after Kåñëa. Kåñëa had covered almost half the
distance to Bhéñma. As He ran with the upraised wheel, His upper garment fell
from His body into the mud. Gazing at Bhéñma with eyes red with anger, He
shouted, “You are the root of this great slaughter. A wise minister who treads
the path of virtue should restrain a wicked king by any means. If that is not
possible, then such a wretched monarch should be abandoned.”
Arjuna succeeding in reaching Kåñëa. Hurling himself forward, he caught hold
of Kåñëa’s legs. But even with Arjuna hanging onto His thighs, Kåñëa
continued to run at Bhéñma.
Bhéñma bowed his head and replied to Kåñëa as He came near. “You forever
speak the truth, my Lord. I told Dhåtaräñöra to abandon Duryodhana, even as
the Bhojas abandoned Kaàsa, but he did not listen. Surely destiny is allpowerful.”
Dragged by Kåñëa, Arjuna dug his feet into the ground. After taking ten steps
with the Päëòava gripping Him tightly, Kåñëa was at last brought to a stop.
Arjuna released His legs and fell at His feet. “Quell Your anger, O Keçava. You
are the Päëòavas’ refuge, without doubt, but please do not violate Your
promise. These were Your words, O Lord: ‘I will not take up arms.’ Do not
falsify Your vow. I swear by my sons and brothers that I will make good my
promise. You will see me fight as never before. O Kåñëa, at Your command, I
shall surely annihilate the Kurus, headed by Bhéñma.”
Hearing Arjuna’s promise, Kåñëa was pacified. He lowered the chariot wheel.
As Bhéñma looked on in wonder, both Kåñëa and Arjuna turned and walked
back to their chariot. Even as they were returning, the sun set and the day’s
hostilities ended. Conches were blown on both sides and the two armies
withdrew. The battle-weary warriors made their way to their camps, speaking
of the wonderful incident between Kåñëa and Bhéñma. The Kuru chief himself
thought only of Kåñëa as he led his forces away for the night. The image of the
597

Yädava hero running toward him with the upraised wheel would stay forever
in his heart.

Chapter 11
Yudhiñöhira Approaches Bhéñma
In the Päëòava camp everyone was talking about Bhéñma. The next day would
be the tenth day of battle, and still the Kuru commander was scorching their
army. It seemed there was no way to stop him. If Kåñëa had not taken matters
into His own hands today, then even Arjuna might have been killed. Surely no
fighter could equal him anywhere in the three worlds.
As the Päëòavas consulted with their allies, Yudhiñöhira said, “O Keçava,
Bhéñma ranges across the battlefield like an all-consuming fire. We dare not
even look at him as he stands with his weapons raised, his face blazing with
anger. Even the god of death wielding his mace, or Varuëa his noose, or Indra
his thunderbolt might be overcome, but not Bhéñma. O Kåñëa, I am again
thinking of retiring from this battle. So many heroes have died. It is clear that
none will survive this fight. Bhéñma will destroy our forces. We are like insects
rushing into a blazing fire. Thus it is preferable to stop now and spend the rest
of my days practicing asceticism. What do you advise, O Janärdana? My mind is
afflicted by duality and doubt.”
Even though He had spent the day exerting Himself fully as Arjuna’s
charioteer, Kåñëa appeared fresh and spotless. A garland of unfading lotuses
and necklaces of pearls and gems rested on His chest. Lifting a graceful hand
He replied, “O son of Dharma, do not indulge in grief. On your side you have
warriors equal to the gods. All of your brothers still stand ready to do your
bidding in the battle, and all of them are invincible. I too am here to do you
good, O mighty monarch. Simply order Me and I will personally slay Bhéñma.
For your sake, O son of Päëòu, what would I not do? I can challenge Bhéñma
and kill him before Duryodhana’s eyes. Even if Arjuna is reluctant, you will
not find Me so. If you feel that by killing Bhéñma victory will be attained, then
riding out alone, I shall end his life.”
Kåñëa glanced affectionately at all the Päëòavas. “He who is inimical toward
598

your brothers is My enemy. Your friends are as dear to Me as My own relatives.
Arjuna is My friend, relative and disciple. For him I would cut off and give
away My own flesh. He too would lay down his own life for My sake. “Although
I am ready to do whatever is necessary, I think Arjuna should keep his vow. He
should slay the grandfather, not Me. There is also the prophesy regarding
Çikhaëòé. Somehow Çikhaëòé will be involved in Bhéñma’s destruction. The
grandfather’s death is imminent. He has lost his good sense and no longer
knows right from wrong. Let us therefore act now to bring about his end.”
Yudhiñöhira replied, “It is exactly as You say, Madhusüdana. You are capable of
destroying the entire universe with all its moving and nonmoving creatures.
With Your support alone I am sure to obtain everything I desire, but I cannot
let Your words be falsified for my sake. It is already enough that You came close
to breaking Your promise today. You must not kill Bhéñma. I think we will be
able to find some other means, my Lord.”
Yudhiñöhira’s brothers nodded their approval. Kåñëa was like their second self.
They would never be able to tolerate hearing Him criticized. Kåñëa’s words
were meant to guide all men. If He broke His word, then others would follow
His example and the whole world would be ruined. People would disregard His
instructions and end up in hell.
Remembering what Bhéñma had said to him at the beginning of the battle,
Yudhiñöhira said, “It is Bhéñma himself who will tell us how to kill him. Alas,
how vile is a kñatriya’s duty that I must now seek to kill he who became our
father when we were fatherless. That one who has always sought our good and
loved us as his own, that aged grandsire, I now wish to kill.”
Consoling the weeping Yudhiñöhira, Kåñëa said, “Take heart, O hero. The son
of Gaìgä has chosen to follow Duryodhana and thus cannot avoid death in
this battle. You have spoken rightly. We must hear from Bhéñma himself how
he may be slain. This was his promise to you. Let us go to him now and once
more beseech him. If you question him, he will surely speak the truth. O
Yudhiñöhira, take off your armor and we will go and see the son of Gaìgä.”
Servants removed the Päëòavas’ armor and they then accompanied Kåñëa to
the Kaurava camp. They were ushered into Bhéñma’s tent and they bowed at
his feet. Bhéñma’s face lit up when he saw them. “Welcome, O best of the
Vrishnis. Welcome too, all you sons of Päëòu.”
Bhéñma stood resplendent in his white silks. He waved his long arm toward the
many fine golden seats arranged around him on the silk rugs in his tent. After
599

his visitors were seated, he took his own seat and said, “What can I do for your
delight? I will do it with all my soul, even if it is extremely difficult to
accomplish.”
Yudhiñöhira folded his palms. Looking at Bhéñma he remembered their years
together in Hastinäpura. His heart melted and he could hardly speak. Glancing
across at Kåñëa to gain strength, he took a deep breath and addressed the old
Kuru leader. “O Bhéñma, O highly learned man, please tell us how we may gain
victory in this fight. How can we put an end to this slaughter? O lord, please
tell us how we may vanquish you. You do not display even the slightest
weakness in battle. Your bow is always drawn fully. No one can see when you
take up your shafts, place them on your bow, and fire them. Who could dare
face you when you blaze forth with such awful prowess? Each day you slaughter
more of my army, and I fear that soon we shall be ruined. Thus I have come to
you again, as you instructed me, O Grandsire.”
Bhéñma was moved as he looked at Yudhiñöhira and his brothers. All of them
carried scars from the wounds they had received in the battle. All of them were
gazing reverentially at his face. How different they were from Duryodhana and
his brothers! Bhéñma knew that if he told Yudhiñöhira now to give up the fight
and leave the kingdom to the Kauravas, he would obey. There was nothing the
Päëòavas would not do to satisfy their elders. If only Dhåtaräñöra’s sons were
like these virtuous brothers this horrible carnage would never have happened.
Yet here was Kåñëa. It was surely His desire and arrangement that all the
earth’s kings and warriors be destroyed. So many of them were, after all,
atheistic, even demonic. Obviously, He wanted to relieve the earth’s burden.
After a few moments, Bhéñma said, “O son of Kunté, as long as I am alive you
will not gain victory. I tell you this truly. Strike me down and victory will be
yours. I will permit you, O sons of Kunté, to strike me as you please. When I am
slaughtered, then all the others on our side will be overcome.”
Yudhiñöhira spoke with difficulty. “Please tell us in detail how we may achieve
this apparently impossible feat, O wise man. We could perhaps vanquish Indra,
thunderbolt in hand, or Yamaräja wielding his mace, but you appear to be
invincible.”
Bhéñma held up his hands. “It is as you say, O King. When with these hands I
clutch weapons and stand to fight, none can withstand me. Only when I lower
my weapons will I be approachable. Here is my vow, which I will not break: ‘I
will not raise weapons against one who is weaponless, one whose armor and
600

standard are shattered, one who flies away in fear, one who surrenders, one
who has only one son, one who is disabled, a woman, or one who bears the
name of a woman.’ O son of Päëòu, I will fight with none of these at any time.”
Bhéñma placed a hand on Yudhiñöhira’s shoulder as he spelled out his meaning.
“Drupada’s valiant and wrathful son, who is known in your army as Çikhaëòé–
–it is he who will cause my fall. Formerly he was a woman, as everyone knows.
Therefore, I will not strike him, even if he attacks me. Place him at the
forefront of the fight and let Arjuna stand behind him. Only Dhanaïjaya or
the illustrious Kåñëa can bring me down in battle. If Çikhaëòé faces me, I will
not fight. Then it will be possible for Arjuna to slay me. Do this, O
Yudhiñöhira, and gain victory.”
When Bhéñma stopped speaking the Päëòavas rose from their seats. Bowing
before him one by one, they touched his feet and asked his permission to leave.
Kåñëa also placed His hands on Bhéñma’s feet and bowed to the floor before
him. Then they all left the tent, leaving Bhéñma alone. As they made their way
back to their own camp, Arjuna spoke with Kåñëa. His face was flushed and his
voice choked as he addressed his friend. “O Väsudeva, while playing in my
childhood I would soil the high-souled Bhéñma’s garments by climbing onto his
lap. Clambering on his body I would say, ‘Father.’ That hero would then gently
reply, ‘I am not your father, but your father’s father, O Bharata.’ How can I slay
him, O Mädhava? Let him kill our troops. I cannot kill him under any
circumstances. What do You think, O Kåñëa?”
Kåñëa’s voice was firm. “O Jiñëu, having promised to kill Bhéñma in battle, how
can you now avoid that without transgressing your kñatriya duties? Overthrow
him, O son of Kunté. Without slaying Gaìgä’s son in battle, you can never
hope to win this war. It has been ordained by the gods that Bhéñma will soon go
to Death’s abode. Only you can bring him down. Do not hesitate.
“Hear from Me an ancient instruction given by Båhaspati: ‘One should slay
even an aged man or an elder, or one endowed with all virtues, if he comes as
an enemy, or indeed anyone else who comes for one’s destruction.’ This is the
eternal duty of kñatriyas, O Dhanaïjaya. Fighting, protecting the subjects, and
performing sacrifices––all without maliciousness––are their sacred duties.”
Arjuna looked ahead into the darkness as they rode across the field. He knew
he could not avoid this fight, especially as Kåñëa repeatedly urged him on.
Clearly it was his duty. Only sentiment held him back. Somehow he had to get
past that. Clutching the reins of his white horse, Arjuna replied dourly,
601

“Surely, O Kåñëa, Çikhaëòé has been born for Bhéñma’s death. As soon as
Bhéñma sees him he will drop his weapons. Therefore, as Bhéñma has suggested,
let us place Çikhaëòé at the front as we attack the grandfather. I will then do
the needful.”
The Päëòavas returned to their camp with mixed feelings. They now knew
that victory would be theirs before long, but only at the cost of Bhéñma’s life.
Censuring Duryodhana and his old father, they entered their tents to rest for
the night.
***
After describing to Dhåtaräñöra the fights which resulted in the death of his
sons, Saïjaya fell silent. The blind king was weeping again, beating his chest
and tossing about on his great throne. “Alas, everything is my fault. Why did I
not listen to Vidura? Where is my learned brother now? Where will all this
end, O Saïjaya? What refuge is there for an old and weary man, bereft of his
sons and other relations?”
Saïjaya tried to console the monarch as he vented his grief. He had little to
say. The battle was taking its inevitable course. Dhåtaräñöra had been told
many times about the outcome. Now Bhéma was systematically destroying his
sons, just as he had vowed. But would even that make Dhåtaräñöra realize his
fault? His self-condemnation was certainly nothing new. Every time the
Kauravas suffered a reverse he expressed his remorse, but those feelings
dissolved whenever he heard that they had won a battle.
As the king’s sobbing subsided, Saïjaya continued describing the battle in full.
Sure enough, as he described how Bhéñma was coursing through the battle like
Death personified, the king was enlivened. He sat forward and listened
carefully as Saïjaya told him how the grandfather had routed the Päëòava
troops.
Then Saïjaya told him of the episode in Bhéñma’s tent. Dhåtaräñöra was aghast.
“Why has our grandsire revealed how he may die? How can that be his duty? I
think he has become weary of the fight. Surely he is favoring Päëòu’s sons over
mine. Alas, I do not think I will be able to hear of the next day’s fighting,
bringing as it will the fall of such a hero.”
Dhåtaräñöra’s wails again filled the empty chamber where he and Saïjaya sat.
They echoed mournfully around the hall as Saïjaya looked across at the ornate
seat where Bhéñma used to sit.
602

Chapter 12
The Fall of Bhéñma
As sunrise approached on the tenth day, the sounds of thousands of drums,
cymbals, conches, and trumpets filled the air. Donning their armor and taking
up their blood-stained weapons, the warriors came forward for battle. The
Päëòavas arranged for Çikhaëòé to ride in his chariot at the forefront of their
formation. Bhéma and Arjuna protected his two flanks and behind him came
Abhimanyu and Draupadé’s sons. Then, spreading out in a fan behind them, all
the Païchälas, headed by Dåñöadyumna, Sätyaki and Chekitana, stood ready to
fight. Other powerful rathas and maharathas protected the formation’s key
points. With a joyful roar they rushed at the Kauravas.
Bhéñma stood at the center of the Kaurava formation. Duryodhana ordered his
best fighters to surround and protect him. He knew the Päëòavas would target
him. Until they checked Bhéñma, their success would be uncertain.
Duryodhana himself stayed close to his grandfather, carefully watching the
Päëòavas’ moves.
As the two armies clashed, the slaughter began. Knowing that it would likely
be his last day, Bhéñma made one final and supreme effort. If he were to fall,
then he should go down fighting to the best of his ability. He let loose his
arrows on the Päëòava troops in incessant showers, and countless men, horses
and elephants fell under his assault. It began to seem as if Bhéñma was present
everywhere as he wheeled about in the battle.
All five Päëòavas went toward him, awed by his power. They honored him in
their minds. With depressed hearts they gazed at him even as the gods had
gazed at Våtrasura. He was consuming their forces like a fire swallowing a
forest.
Standing between Bhéma and Arjuna, Çikhaëòé roared out his challenge and
sent three arrows at Bhéñma. They struck him on the chest, penetrating his
armor. Bhéñma felt his anger rise, but with a slight smile he called out, “O
Çikhaëòé, I will never strike you in this fight. You are even now the same
person the Creator made you before and are no match for me.”
Çikhaëòé was infuriated by Bhéñma’s words. “You are the destroyer of kñatriyas,
603

O mighty-armed hero. I have heard of your fight with Paraçuräma and have
seen for myself your prowess. Still, I will fight with you. Whether you fight
back or not, I will slay you in battle. Know this for certain, O afflicter of foes.
Take a good view of this world while you can, for you will not escape from me
with your life.”
Çikhaëòé at once fired five more arrows that pierced Bhéñma in the shoulder
joint. Wincing, Bhéñma turned away from Çikhaëòé and attacked the warriors
surrounding him.
Arjuna came up next to Çikhaëòé and said, “Maintain your assault on the
grandfather, mighty-armed hero. He will not be able to harm you. I will protect
you from any other fighters who come to his aid. Today we must lay Bhéñma
low or face the derision of our own men.”
Çikhaëòé longed for Bhéñma to fight with him. He sent clusters of swift arrows
at the Kuru commander, striking him all over, but Bhéñma did not respond.
Moving back and around in a circle, Bhéñma avoided Çikhaëòé and at the same
time rained down his shafts on the Päëòavas. He was supported by a huge
division of elephant warriors and thousands of charioteers. Duryodhana
personally marshaled his forces around Bhéñma, ensuring that he was carefully
guarded on all sides.
With a roar Arjuna charged into the fray. Shooting countless arrows he carved
a path through the Kauravas. As he ranged about, leaving in his wake a trail of
destruction, Duryodhana was alarmed and approached Bhéñma. “O sire, behold
how my troops are being routed by the enraged Arjuna. As a herdsman
belabors his herd with a cudgel, so Arjuna belabors my troops with his
Gäëòéva. O mighty hero, I see no other shelter than your illustrious self.”
Bhéñma lowered his bow and looked at Duryodhana. “O best of men, hear my
words. Before the battle began I vowed I would slaughter ten thousand men a
day. I have kept my vow. Now I will make one final promise. Today, either I
will kill the Päëòavas or they will kill me. Thus I will liquidate the debt I owe
you, arising from the food you gave me, by throwing off my mortal coil in the
thick of battle.”
Without another word Bhéñma moved off and began scattering arrows among
the Päëòava forces. Like the sun drawing moisture with its rays, he robbed the
strength of all heroes who approached him. Having slain ten thousand swiftmoving elephants and ten thousand chargers with their riders, as well as a full
one hundred thousand infantry, he stood on the field like a smokeless fire. The
604

Päëòavas could not look at him.
Arjuna again enthused Çikhaëòé. “Go toward Bhéñma, O hero. Do not fear. I
will dislodge him from his chariot with my sharp arrows.”
Çikhaëòé again challenged Bhéñma, followed by Dåñöadyumna, Abhimanyu,
Drupada, and Virata. Arjuna, Yudhiñöhira, and the twins flanked them and
joined the charge. The Kuru warriors, however, checked their advance. There
was a terrible encounter between the enraged warriors. Arrows, lances, darts,
and maces flew threw the air, and the screams of the soldiers mixing with the
clash of the weapons was intolerable.
With Çikhaëòé before him, Arjuna steadily approached Bhéñma. Seeing him
moving determinedly toward the grandfather, Dushashana came before him.
He checked Arjuna with a volley of shafts. Dismissing fear from his mind, he
withstood the Päëòava like the shore resisting the ocean. The two fighters
contended like Indra and Mayäsura meeting in the celestial realm in the days
of yore. Dushashana stopped Arjuna with twenty-five shafts, then struck Kåñëa
with three more. Incensed at seeing Kåñëa attacked, Arjuna sped a hundred
long shafts at Dushashana. Penetrating his armor they drank his blood and
made him gasp with pain. Without delay he sent back three arrows that struck
Arjuna on the forehead. As blood streamed down his face, Arjuna was as
beautiful as Mount Meru with its towering crests stained with red oxides.
Laughing loudly, Arjuna cut Dushashana’s bow with three crescent-headed
shafts fired simultaneously. He followed that at once with fifty more hammerheaded arrows that smashed the Kaurava’s chariot. Arjuna shot a hundred
more spiked arrows toward Dushashana as his chariot fell apart around him.
Without losing his composure, Dushashana resisted Arjuna’s attack by firing
his own razor-headed shafts, which cut down Arjuna’s arrows in mid-air. All
the warriors who saw this marvelous feat cheered Dushashana. The Kaurava
prince felt encouraged and launched another twenty arrows at Arjuna. Struck
by his shafts, Arjuna blazed up in fury. He sent so many arrows at Dushashana
that the prince was forced to flee. With his body pierced all over, he ran three
hundred paces and mounted Bhéñma’s chariot.
With all their principal warriors at their head, both armies faced each other for
a violent exchange of weapons. Bhéñma was backed by Duryodhana, Droëa,
Kåpa, Açvatthämä, and all the other Kuru heroes, while the five Päëòavas,
backed by Dåñöadyumna, Çikhaëòé, Sätyaki, Abhimanyu, and the other
Päëòava fighters, all stood against them. They fought like the gods and Asuras.
605

Watching the fight, Droëa spoke to his son, who was stationed by his side, “It
seems, my dear Açvatthämä, that Arjuna will exert himself fully to destroy
Bhéñma. See how he targets the grandfather again and again, keeping Çikhaëòé
by his side. I am seeing many evil omens. My arrows seem to fall from my
quiver and will not fit themselves to my bow. I feel my enthusiasm wane. All
around us I hear the cries of carnivorous birds and beasts. Even the earth seems
to cry out in pain and the sun is dimmed. Though clad in bright armor, the
kings on our side do not shine. All these signs indicate that our illustrious sire
will soon fall.”
Droëa urged his son to challenge Arjuna. “This is not the time when
dependents should think of their own lives. Fixing your mind on heaven, dear
son, confront the roaring Dhanaïjaya. That diadem-decked hero is agitating
our army like a storm tossing the ocean. Listen to the cries of men and the
constant crack of his bowstring. Go quickly and exert yourself fully to check
your godbrother before he destroys us all.”
Açvatthämä moved off at once, supported by Çalya, Kåpa, and Bhagadatta,
along with another six Kaurava maharathas. All ten warriors advanced in a
body toward Arjuna. Bhéma challenged them when he saw their intention. All
ten of them trained their weapons on the powerful Päëòava, but he remained
unmoved by their attack. He cheerfully assailed every one of them with his
own arrows, each of which resembled one of Indra’s blazing lances. The
Kaurava warriors found themselves completely engaged by Bhéma alone. With
roars of delight he held them all at bay.
As other battles raged around him, Arjuna focused on Bhéñma’s chariot. After
beating back an attack from Susharma and his brother Citrasena, he rushed at
Bhéñma like an elephant rushing at another for the sake of a mate. Quickly,
Bhagadatta placed his elephant in Arjuna’s way, but the Päëòava sent it
reeling with a volley of swift arrows. Then Çikhaëòé was again before Bhéñma.
He rained countless arrows on his chariot. Still Bhéñma refused to fight with
him. Instead, he bore his attack patiently while maintaining his assault on the
soldiers supporting him. Bhéñma resembled Rudra at the end of the creation.
No one who came within range of his arrows escaped. Only Arjuna was able to
withstand his attack and approach him, along with Çikhaëòé, who was still
unharmed.
When only Arjuna and Çikhaëòé were left standing against Bhéñma, Çikhaëòé
pierced him in the chest with ten broad-headed arrows. Bhéñma gazed at him as
606

if to burn him by that look, but he did not attack. Urged on by Arjuna,
Çikhaëòé attacked Bhéñma more and more fiercely. Arjuna also shot his goldenwinged arrows at the grandsire. Bhéñma fought only Arjuna, disregarding
Çikhaëòé’s arrows, which wounded him in every part of his body.
As Arjuna and Çikhaëòé bore down on Bhéñma, Dushashana came again to
protect him. Cheered by the Kauravas, he singledhandedly resisted the arrows
of Bhéñma’s two assailants. Other charioteers came up to support Arjuna, but
Dushashana struck them down. Dhåtaräñöra’s second son exhibited his prowess,
allowing Duryodhana to marshal more troops for Bhéñma’s protection.
Arjuna was infuriated. Losing all patience, he sent arrows that struck
Dushashana like thunderbolts and tore off his armor, sending it crashing to the
ground. The Kaurava fell from his chariot, then got up and ran. By then, a
large force of Kaurava warriors had come to surround Bhéñma. Numerous tribes
of barbarians, clad in animal skins and clutching bludgeons and spears, rushed
at Arjuna. Thousands of other soldiers galloped forward screaming their battle
cries and hurling spiked lances. Not caring for their attack, Arjuna sent
flaming arrows charged with mystic power. Sheets of fire-tipped shafts swept
through the barbarian ranks. They fell by the thousands, making the ground
impassable. Those that were not slain turned back and fled.
Arjuna again turned his attention to Bhéñma, who was now supported by
Duryodhana, Kåpa, Çalya, and a number of Dhåtaräñöra’s other sons. All those
Kuru heroes trained their arrows on Arjuna.
The other four Päëòavas attacked Bhéñma’s protectors. Numerous Kaurava
fighters were struck down by Päëòu’s sons as they fired their searing shafts.
Bhéñma and Arjuna contended like two lions. Neither could find any gap in
their opponent’s defenses. Both invoked celestial weapons which the other
neutralized. Each praised the other’s prowess as they fought.
Arjuna covered Bhéñma’s chariot with arrows. Taking the opportunity, other
Päëòava fighters came forward to support Arjuna. Backed by innumerable
chariots, Bhéma, the twins, Dåñöadyumna, Sätyaki, Abhimanyu, Ghaöotkaca,
and other principal Päëòava warriors pressed forward in the battle.
Duryodhana and the best of the Kauravas’ warriors met them.
Coming out from underneath Arjuna’s attack, Bhéñma assailed every one of the
heroes who came toward him. With one razor-headed shaft he slew Satanika,
Virata’s beloved brother. Bhéñma rained down death- dealing shafts that
destroyed Satanika’s entire division of chariot-warriors. At the same time he
607

held off Arjuna’s attack as well as the attacks of other fighters. The Kuru
commander seemed to be sporting as he battled against the hundreds of
warriors. He danced on the terrace of his chariot as if he had regained his
youth. Like the rising sun dispersing clouds, he dispersed the Päëòava forces
with his sun-like arrows.
Untouched by Bhéñma’s attack, Çikhaëòé moved closer to his chariot. From
time to time Bhéñma threw a deriding glance at him, but he focused his energy
on slaughtering the Päëòava forces. He knew the Päëòavas had decided to
bring him down today, and they pressed in on him on all sides. Like clouds
covering the sun, they surrounded the old Kuru fighter and threw their
weapons at him. Spiked and razor-headed arrows, battle-axes, maces, mallets,
lances, bludgeons, darts and javelins fell toward Bhéñma, but Bhéñma only
smiled. His armor was shattered and he had been pierced many times.
Oblivious to pain, he fought on, embracing a hero’s end. His chariot wheeling
in the midst of his attackers, he spun around and fired arrows in all directions.
Sensing that it was now time to defeat Bhéñma, Arjuna again placed Çikhaëòé
in front of him and rushed forward. With a perfectly aimed arrow he cut apart
Bhéñma’s bow. As the maharathas of both armies engaged, Arjuna and
Çikhaëòé came before Bhéñma, both of them firing barbed arrows that pierced
him deeply. Arjuna killed his horses and charioteer and brought his chariot to
a halt. With a crescent-headed arrow he brought down his standard.
Bhéñma took up another bow worked with gold and ivory, but Arjuna
immediately shattered it. Without a second’s delay, Bhéñma hurled a lance at
Arjuna, but Arjuna fired five broad-headed arrows that broke the lance into
six pieces. They fell to earth like forks of lightning.
Arjuna thwarted all of Bhéñma’s weapons. Bhéñma looked at Kåñëa, who was
expertly guiding Arjuna’s swift-footed horses. Bhéñma knew it was the end, as
fate had ordained. He could not win a battle when Kåñëa was on the opposite
side. Even though Kåñëa was not fighting, His mere presence was sufficient to
ensure the Päëòavas’ invincibility. Bhéñma lowered his weapons. All his skill
and power would prove to no avail now. Bhéñma began to think of death. In the
heavens the assembled åñis, along with the eight Vasus, addressed Bhéñma. “We
also desire that you stop fighting. Withdraw your heart from the battle. It is
time.” Bhéñma alone heard the heavenly voices.
Suddenly a cool, fragrant breeze began to blow. Celestial drums resounded and
flowers fell from the sky. As Bhéñma stood in thought, Çikhaëòé raised his bow
608

and shot nine shafts that struck him full on the chest. At the same time,
Arjuna fired twenty-five short, thick arrows that struck Bhéñma with
tremendous power. Arjuna quickly followed them with a hundred steel shafts.
Stunned, Bhéñma resolved to make one final assault on Arjuna. He would go
down fighting. There could be no other way. Firing a volley of shafts, Bhéñma
thwarted the attacks of both Arjuna and Çikhaëòé. Arjuna quickly cut
Bhéñma’s bow. With hot tears pricking his eyes he fired thousands of straight
shafts and pierced Bhéñma’s mighty frame, like snakes enter the holes in
mountains.
Although both Arjuna and Çikhaëòé shot their arrows at Bhéñma
simultaneously, the Kuru hero considered that only Arjuna’s shafts were
capable of bringing him down. He called out to Dushashana, who had rushed to
his side, “These arrows, O Bharata, resembling thunderbolts and coming at me
in a straight line end-to-end, are Arjuna’s and not Çikhaëòé’s. I can distinguish
between them because they have the touch like a Brahmin’s rod, or of Indra’s
Vajra weapon. Even the gods could not resist them. Like furious snakes with
protruding eyes, they are penetrating my vital organs. Only Arjuna is capable
of bringing me down. Even the world’s monarchs united could not afflict me.”
With one last supreme effort, Bhéñma raised a massive lance and hurled it at
Arjuna with all his strength. Arjuna cut it into a hundred pieces. Bending the
Gäëòéva to a full circle, he fired arrows twenty at a time in a continuous line.
Seeing Çikhaëòé directly before him, Bhéñma lowered his weapons and did not
resist Arjuna’s attack. Arrows struck him in waves. There was no space thicker
than two finger’s width on his body that was not pierced. Before the Kauravas’
shocked eyes, he fell headlong from his chariot. With his head pointed toward
the east he lay fully supported by Arjuna’s arrows. No part of his body touched
the earth.
The Kuru army was overwhelmed by sorrow. Cries of grief rippled across the
field. From the sky a celestial voice resounded: “How can this hero, this
illustrious son of Gaìgä, leave his body when the sun is in its inauspicious
southern course?”
Hearing that voice, Bhéñma replied, “I am still living.” He had noted the course
of the sun and, by his father’s boon, had decided to wait until it moved toward
the north before dying. He knew the Vedic instructions that a yogé should
leave his body only when the sun was in its northern track. Until then he
would lie on the battlefield, as befitted a warrior, awaiting his final moment.
609

Death would not take him until he desired it.
Duryodhana and his followers were utterly confused. They did not know what
to do or where to go. They dropped their weapons and wailed. As the sun
reached the western horizon, the Kauravas stood about the battlefield
dispirited and afflicted by grief. No one could find the strength to move for
some time.
On the side of the Päëòavas conches were blown and soldiers cheered.
Thousands of drums were beaten and trumpets and horns sounded. Word of
Bhéñma’s fall spread around the battlefield in moments. The warriors of both
armies stopped fighting and stood wherever they were, their minds stunned by
the impossible news. Some men wept aloud, others ran wildly around, and some
swooned.
Assuming the forms of swans, celestial åñis descended from the heavens and
walked around the fallen Bhéñma, who lay with his mind absorbed in yogic
meditation. Seers, Siddhas and Cäraëas praised Bhéñma from the skies. As
darkness fell, the earth seemed to cry out: “This one is the best of all Vedaknowing sages.”
Duryodhana breathed long and heavy sighs. He rode swiftly to Droëa, who had
been taken to a distance from Bhéñma, and told him of his fall. Hearing the
news, Droëa fell from his chariot in a faint. When he returned to his senses he
ordered the Kauravas to withdraw. Duryodhana, Droëa, Kåpa, and all the other
Kuru leaders made their way sorrowfully toward where Bhéñma lay.
Seeing Bhéñma at last felled, Bhéma leapt from his chariot and danced on the
battlefield. Arjuna, however, was sober. He asked Kåñëa to drive his chariot
over to the Kuru chief. Dismounting with bow in hand he went over to the
fallen warrior and knelt by his side. “Please instruct me what I can do for you,
O sire,” he asked, struggling to control his voice as his grief rose. “Command
me at once and consider it done.”
Bhéñma opened his eyes. He spoke with difficulty. “O Phälguna, see how my
head is hanging down. Fetch me a suitable pillow, O hero. You alone are equal
to this task.”
Understanding Bhéñma’s desire, Arjuna lifted his bow and fired several arrows,
charged by Vedic mantras. The arrows stuck in the ground beneath Bhéñma’s
head and formed a headrest. Bhéñma smiled. His arms were pierced all over and
resting on arrows, but he raised his right hand from the wrist to bless Arjuna.
“O son of Päëòu, you have properly understood my desire. This is the only
610

fitting pillow for a warrior slain on the battlefield.”
Bhéñma looked around. He was surrounded both by Päëòavas and Kauravas.
They stood with folded palms and gazed at his face. Duryodhana and his
brothers were shamefaced. They had failed to protect their finest fighter and
the leader of their forces. The old grandfather and Kuru guide had fallen.
Remorse consumed Duryodhana’s heart. It was by his insistence only that this
war had had to be fought and Bhéñma be slain.
Seeing the Kauravas’ shame and sorrow, Bhéñma reassured them. “I have
attained the end which is always sought by heroes. This bed is to me no less
than an excellent bed of the finest down and silk. Soon I will see my everliving ancestors in the blissful realms of paradise. Why should I lament?”
As Bhéñma spoke, a number of skilled physicians arrived carrying herbs and
balms. Bhéñma raised his head to speak, his rasping voice barely rising above a
whisper. “O kings of the earth, after paying proper respects to these Brahmins
who know mantras, and then rewarding them, please dismiss them. I have no
more need of physicians. My end has come and I am ready for it. It is not my
duty to allow myself to be treated by these physicians. I want to die from these
arrows. Let me lie here until the sun reaches the point of the compass occupied
by Vaishravana. Then I will depart for the higher regions.” Bhéñma’s head fell
back onto the arrows and he closed his eyes.
Duryodhana sent the Brahmins away. He stood for some time in silence,
looking at the fallen hero. Then, sighing, he and his brothers and all the kings
supporting the Kauravas circumambulated Bhéñma three times. They slowly
made their way back to camp, seeing nothing but desolation before them.
The Päëòavas also offered respects to Bhéñma before returning to their camp.
As they went, Yudhiñöhira said to Kåñëa , “O Janärdana, surely victory comes
to a man through Your grace, and defeat overtakes him through Your wrath.
You are our sole refuge. You assure Your devotees of Your protection. Nothing
is wonderful for one who has taken shelter of You, O Mädhava.”
Kåñëa replied, “These words, O foremost of all the earth’s rulers, could only
have fallen from your lips.”
Feeling sure that they would soon attain victory, the Päëòavas rested for the
night while the Kauravas lay tossing in grief.

611

Chapter 13
Droëa in Command
Dhåtaräñöra’s pitiful voice echoed around his great chamber. “How has Bhéñma
fallen? He who had arrows for teeth, a bow for a mouth, a sword for a tongue––
that chastiser of foes who spread terror and destruction among the enemy
ranks as the sun destroys darkness, who was as invincible in battle as the
mighty Indra, who could keep death itself under his control––how has he
fallen? How did Çikhaëòé and Arjuna bring about his end?”
The king was inconsolable. Saïjaya was himself grieving, and he sat at
Dhåtaräñöra’s feet with his head bowed. Crying, the blind monarch continued.
“After destroying the enemy troops for ten days, achieving the most difficult
feats, he has now set like the sun. As a result of my evil councils, that scion of
Bharata scattered an inexhaustible shower of arrows as Indra showers rain,
killing in battle hundreds of thousands of warriors. He now lies on the bare
ground like a great tree uprooted by the wind. How could he––whom even
Paraçuräma could not master, that atiratha of boundless power––have been
overcome in battle? O Saïjaya, surely nothing is wonderful in this world when
I hear that Bhéñma is fallen!”
The king asked Saïjaya to describe in detail how Bhéñma had been brought
down. Saïjaya had only told him the news of Bhéñma’s defeat and not the
details of how it had come about. Dhåtaräñöra listened in horror as Saïjaya
related the events leading up to Bhéñma’s fall. Tears sprang from Saïjaya’s eyes
as he envisioned the scene again. When Saïjaya finished his description,
Dhåtaräñöra again lamented.
“Surely my heart is made of stone since it does not shatter upon hearing this
news. Truth, intelligence, and political wisdom existed immeasurably in the
illustrious Bhéñma. Who could have defeated him? Surely my sons are crying in
grief now that he is gone. Like men desiring to cross the ocean, but who see
their boat sunk, they must be plunged in woe. Our army must be like a panicstricken herd of cattle deprived of its herdsman. When we have caused the
death of our powerful father, the foremost of virtuous men, what use are our
lives?”
612

Dhåtaräñöra sat in silence in the darkened chamber. His personal servants
stood nearby, their cämaras hanging limply by their sides. The soft strains of
mournful music could be heard, along with the Brahmins’ continuous chanting
of Vedic prayers in the palace temple.
After some minutes, the king asked Saïjaya to repeat the details of the battle.
“I desire to know of all the particulars of Bhéñma’s final day. Who fought by his
side and who at his rear? What did my sons do to protect that hero? What
other fights took place as Bhéñma faced the Päëòavas? Without knowing every
last detail I will not be able to rest, Saïjaya.”
Saïjaya described everything again. Dhåtaräñöra listened with rapt attention.
When Saïjaya finished, it was almost morning. The king had no desire to go to
his bed. He said, “Clearly we cannot avoid death by any means. All-powerful
Time ultimately consumes all in this world. O Saïjaya, please tell me what my
sons did after Bhéñma’s fall. Who did they select as their commander? How did
they find the strength to continue?”
As the sunrise approached, Saïjaya told the king what had happened at the
end of the tenth day. Then both men left to perform their ablutions,
Dhåtaräñöra being led away by his servants to his bath chamber. After their
religious rituals and prayers, they returned to the hall and Saïjaya began to
describe the events of the eleventh day.
***
After all the kings had left Bhéñma, Karëa quietly left his tent and rode across
the battlefield. As the moon rose in the eastern sky, he picked his way on his
red charger through the eerily lit scenes of destruction. Vultures flapped into
the air and hyenas growled as he made his way toward the spot where Bhéñma
lay on his bed of arrows. It was easy to find; a hundred warriors surrounded him
and had lit torches to keep the animals away.
Karëa dismounted and fell at Bhéñma’s feet. He spoke in a choked voice. “I am
Rädhä’s son, O foremost of Kurus. I am he upon whom you always looked with
enmity.”
Bhéñma opened his eyes and turned toward Karëa. Dismissing the guards, he
told him to come closer. He spoke affectionately. “Come, dear son. You were
always my opponent because you sought always to outdo me. If you had not
come here, then all would not have fared well for you.”
Bhéñma felt no anger toward Karëa. He had reprimanded him only out of
613

genuine concern for him. The old Kuru chief knew who Karëa was and had
always desired his welfare. He lifted his head slightly. “O mighty-armed one,
you are the son of Kunté––not Rädhä. Adhiratha is not your father––the
mighty sun-god sired you, O hero. This I have heard from both Närada and
Vyäsa. It cannot be false. O child, I bear you no malice. I spoke harshly only to
check you. Seeing that you would abuse the Päëòavas for no reason at all, I
tried to curb a behavior that would lead only to your own grief.”
Karëa knelt by Bhéñma’s side, his eyes dim with tears at the sight of Bhéñma’s
condition. Despite their many arguments, he had always respected the
grandfather. He could not deny Bhéñma’s nobility and power, and he knew his
words were never malicious, even if they were hard to accept.
Bhéñma closed his eyes in pain, then continued. “O Karëa, your birth was
attended with sin. Thus your intellect has always been perverted through no
fault of your own. For this reason I tried to correct you in the assembly of
kñatriyas. Yet your prowess and might are equal to those of Arjuna. You are
devoted to the Brahmins, attached to the duties of your order, and are in no
way inferior to a celestial. Today I relinquish any wrath I formerly felt for you.
If you wish to do me good, then join with your brothers, the Päëòavas. Let the
hostilities cease with my fall. Along with Duryodhana, be reconciled with the
Päëòavas and let us see all the world’s kings freed from anxiety and danger.”
Karëa’s head fell. “I know all this, O mighty-armed hero. I know I am Kunté’s
son. But she disowned me and I was raised by a charioteer. Having enjoyed
Duryodhana’s wealth and friendship for so long, how can I disappoint his
hopes? Setting at naught my wealth, sons, wife, and even my body and honor, I
will strive for Duryodhana’s good. To serve his interests I have incited the
Päëòavas against me. The result is inevitable and cannot now be avoided.
What man ventures to overcome destiny by his own endeavor?”
Karëa looked around the moonlit field. It was littered with bodies. The next
day he would fight. He had waited long. Each day hearing of the fight and how
many of Duryodhana’s soldiers were being slaughtered, Karëa had felt
increasingly frustrated. He longed to show his friend his gratitude for
everything he had done for him. Now his chance had come. Folding his palms,
he said, “O Sire, I cannot renounce the hostility I feel for the Päëòavas.
Although I know them to be invincible, protected by Vasudeva’s powerful son,
I will nevertheless fight against them. Please give me your permission. Please
also forgive any cruel words I may have uttered against you.”
614

Bhéñma looked into Karëa’s face and saw his determination. “If you cannot give
up your enmity for the Päëòavas, then, O Karëa, I grant you my permission.
Fixing your mind on heaven, fight with them to the best of your power. Arjuna
will deliver you to the blessed regions reserved for heroes who do not retreat.
Casting off arrogance and depending on your own prowess, go forth and seek a
warrior’s death. What can be more glorious for a kñatriya? Go with my
blessings. I forgive any harsh words you may have addressed to me.”
Bhéñma again closed his eyes. Karëa rose and mounted his horse. In a few
moments he had vanished into the darkness, leaving Bhéñma lying once more
in yogic meditation.
***
Immediately after sunrise on the eleventh day, both the Päëòavas and
Kauravas went to see Bhéñma. After paying their obeisances, they stood by as
maidservants smeared his forehead and temples with sandalwood paste. The
servants also sprinkled him with unbroken paddy and placed fragrant garlands
of forest flowers around his neck. Thousands of people came from the
encampments to see Bhéñma lying on his bed of arrows. They marveled at his
fortitude and determination. Like a great ascetic who, having fasted for years,
keeps his life force circling within his bones, the Kuru chief awaited his final
moment.
Putting aside their armor and weapons, the soldiers of the two armies gathered
around the fallen hero. Bhéñma opened his eyes and looked around, moving his
head slightly. He lifted his hand and said, “Please bring me water.”
Hearing Bhéñma address them in a rasping voice, the Kauravas quickly fetched
jars of cool water. They also brought food, which they set out before him.
Bhéñma shook his head. “I will no longer accept articles of human enjoyment. I
have passed away from the society of men and am lying here on an arrow bed
only until the moment is right for me to die. Where is Arjuna?”
Arjuna stepped forward and stood with folded hands before Bhéñma. “What
would you have me do, O Grandsire?”
“My body is burning. I am pierced all over with your arrows and feeling
extreme pain. My mouth is dry and I desire to drink water which only you can
supply.”
Taking the Gäëòéva from his shoulder, Arjuna said, “Yes, I will bring you
water.” He walked around Bhéñma three times, then fixed a bright golden arrow
615

to his bow. After chanting a number of Vedic aphorisms and empowering the
arrow with the celestial Parjanya weapon, he fired it into the earth close to
Bhéñma’s head. At once a jet of pure, cool water gushed out. The nectar-like
water rose up in a fountain and went directly into Bhéñma’s mouth.
A gasp went up from the assembled kñatriyas. They cheered and waved their
garments. The Kauravas shivered in fear as they saw Arjuna’s skill.
After slaking his thirst, Bhéñma said, “O mighty-armed hero, your act was not
wonderful because you are the ancient sage Nara incarnate. You are the best of
all archers and, along with Kåñëa, can perform deeds that even the gods cannot
accomplish. You possess every celestial weapon.”
Bhéñma looked at Duryodhana. “O son of Dhåtaräñöra, see here Arjuna’s
prowess. None can defeat him in battle, even if they are assisted by the
combined forces of the gods and Asuras. Therefore, let all enmity between you
cease from today on. Let the war end with my fall. Give half the kingdom to
Yudhiñöhira and live together in peace. This would be most beneficial to you
and your dynasty. If through perverted understanding you do not heed my
advice, you will soon regret your folly.”
Bhéñma was finding it a strain to speak. His voice trailed off and he closed his
eyes. Duryodhana said nothing. Karëa stood by his side, and he looked
balefully at Arjuna. It was clear that the battle would continue. The kings paid
their respects to Bhéñma once more and returned to their camps. Pulling on
their armor, cleaned and polished after the previous day’s fight, they mounted
their horses and chariots. They rode out solemnly toward the battlefield,
followed by waves of infantry clad in mail and wielding spears and swords.
Great elephants rocked about and trumpeted furiously. As the vast armies
amassed, conches were blown and drums beaten.
In his tent Karëa was attended by a number of servants. They fetched his
effulgent armor, studded with hundreds of gems, and his bright helmet. With
his mouth set in a firm line, Karëa fitted his iguana-skin gloves and leather
arm protectors. The servants loaded his chariot with thousands of oil-soaked
arrows, with their heads of iron and steel. They also loaded onto the chariot
fifty bows of the finest make, as well as swords, maces, axes, darts and lances.
Smeared with red sandal paste and garlanded with fresh flowers, Karëa
climbed aboard his chariot. All around him Brahmins performed Vedic rites to
invoke auspiciousness. As he moved off, musicians beat kettledrums and blew
trumpets. Standing on the broad terrace of his chariot, Karëa said to his driver,
616

“Take me at once to the place where Arjuna stands. Even if all-devouring
Death protects him, he will not escape me. I will confront him in battle and
either send him to the next world or go there myself, following Bhéñma’s trail.”
Soon, Duryodhana joined Karëa, and the two friends rode to the front of the
Kuru forces. The other warriors were cheered by the sight, and they roared and
twanged their bowstrings.
Seeing Karëa shining like a smokeless fire, Duryodhana felt that his enemies
were already slain. He smiled and said, “O foremost of men, in you I have
found a suitable commander for my troops. Tell me now what you consider
beneficial for our army. With Bhéñma fallen, we have no leader. An army
without a chief perishes like a rudderless boat on the high seas. Tell me who
you feel should be commander-in-chief.”
Karëa waved an arm toward the leading chariot fighters. “Practically any of
these great warriors could head your army. They are all acquainted with
martial science and possessed of undaunting prowess. Still, only one man can
be our leader. We must be cautious not to depress those who are not chosen.
Therefore, I feel we should select Droëa. He is the oldest and most
experienced. Indeed, he is the preceptor of many heroes fighting in this war.
None will object to his command. As the gods, hoping to defeat the demons,
made Kärttikeya their commander, so you should make Droëa the chief of your
army.”
Duryodhana agreed. He rode over to Droëa. As the two men were worshipped
and eulogized by bards and singers, Duryodhana said, “O great hero, among all
this host of kings none can be as good a protector as you. You are a Brahmin
and of noble birth. You know the Vedas, and your skill, power, and wisdom are
unparalleled. Like Indra leading the celestials, become our commander-inchief. Who can match you on the battlefield? Even Arjuna will not dare
approach us with you at our head.”
Droëa stood tall on his chariot, his great bow by his side. With his white hair
and beard, and his silver armor, he shone like the moon on a clear night.
Raising his hand in blessing, he replied, “I am versed in the Vedas and their six
auxiliaries, and I know the science of weapons. I will therefore offer battle to
Päëòu’s sons. Conquering the Païchäla and Somaka armies, I will range across
the field striking terror into our enemies’ hearts. But, O monarch, I doubt I will
be able to slay Dåñöadyumna, for that hero was born to kill me.”
Not caring for the prophesy, Duryodhana arranged for the ceremony to install
617

Droëa as commander. Duryodhana himself could ensure that Dåñöadyumna was
kept away from Droëa. In any event, it was hard to believe that the Païchäla
prince had the power to kill Droëa. The two had already met on several
occasions and Droëa had proved more powerful every time. Perhaps the socalled prophesy would prove to be nothing more than a rumor.
With the investiture complete, the Kaurava troops sent up a shout and played
their instruments in unison. With his head still wet from the sacred waters
used in the ritual, Droëa remounted his chariot and led the army into battle.
Duryodhana rode by Droëa’s side. As they proceeded toward the fight, Droëa
said, “O great King, I am honored by this office of commander-in-chief. I wish
to repay you in some way. Please tell me what you desire and I will endeavor to
accomplish it.”
Duryodhana thought for a moment and replied, “O preceptor, if you would
give me a boon, then capture Yudhiñöhira and bring him to me.”
Droëa looked surprised. “Fortunate is that eldest son of Kunté that you desire
his capture and not his death. Surely it is wonderful that not even you can feel
malice toward him. Why, O monarch, do you not wish to kill him? Would not
his death end this conflict and bring you victory? Could it be that, rather than
killing the Päëòavas, you wish to re-establish brotherly feelings among you?”
A sly grin played around Duryodhana’s mouth. “Yudhiñöhira’s death, O
teacher, would not bring me victory. If he were killed, Arjuna would be so
angry that he would utterly annihilate us. I have come to accept that even the
immortals cannot slay all five brothers. Thus I see Yudhiñöhira’s capture as the
means to secure my victory. With him under our control, the war will end.
Again challenging him to dice, I will send all five brothers back to the woods.
Thus will my victory be established.”
Droëa gazed at the smiling Duryodhana for a moment. It was obvious he had
experienced no change of heart. His mind was fixed. Still, Droëa thought, he
had a duty to perform. He took a deep breath. “If the heroic Arjuna does not
protect Yudhiñöhira, then you may consider him captured; but if Arjuna stands
before him, I will not be able to carry it out. Not even Indra with all the
celestials could overpower Arjuna and capture Yudhiñöhira before his eyes. I
may be his preceptor, but he is far younger in years and has acquired weapons
known only to the best of the gods. You must somehow draw him away from
Yudhiñöhira and then I will strive to take the king captive.”
Duryodhana cheered Droëa. Knowing that he was partial to the Päëòavas, the
618

Kaurava leader broadcast Droëa’s promise to all the other commanders. He
wanted to ensure that Droëa was held to his word. As the Kauravas heard of
the plan, they shouted in joy. Surely victory would soon be theirs. Who could
resist Droëa?
The news of Duryodhana’s plan soon reached Yudhiñöhira. He called Arjuna to
his side and said, “O foremost of men, you must now ensure that you are never
far from me in the fight. Droëa will be looking for his chance. The moment
you are gone, he will charge toward me like a lion seeking its prey.”
Arjuna stood before his elder brother, clad from head to toe in his
impenetrable armor. Lifting his Gäëòéva bow he replied, “I will not abandon
you, O leader of men. Although I could never stand to see Droëa killed, I will
not allow him to take you captive as long as I live. The sky with all its stars may
drop, the earth may shatter into fragments, but Droëa will not capture you in
my presence. Duryodhana’s plan is futile. Rest assured. O King, I am always
endeavoring to keep my vows. Do not be afraid, therefore, of Droëa.”
Arjuna mounted his chariot and took his place at the head of the army, along
with Dåñöadyumna and Abhimanyu. As they led their forces into battle, a
deafening roar filled the four quarters. Surrounded by his other brothers,
Yudhiñöhira followed close behind Arjuna, with the huge Païchäla forces
following him.

Chapter 14
“Yudhiñöhira Will Be Captured”
Again the armies collided on the field of Kurukñetra for the eleventh day of
battle. Karëa, coming fresh into the fight, carved a path of destruction through
the Päëòava forces. The Kaurava soldiers were delighted as they witnessed him
causing havoc among their foes. “Surely the Päëòavas will soon flee. Here is
Karëa, capable of crushing the celestial armies. Bhéñma has treated Kunté’s sons
with tenderness, but Karëa will not spare them.”
The din of battle resounded for miles, sending animals in distant forests
bounding away in fear. Billowing clouds of dust, like heaps of tawny silk, rose
up and obscured the sun. Weapons fell in thick showers on both armies, and
619

the terrifying slaughter began once again.
Droëa charged headlong into the Päëòava army. He fired thousands of razorsharp arrows that tore apart the warriors who stood before him. The fighters
fell like rows of cranes before a gale. Invoking celestial weapons, Droëa
destroyed his enemies as Indra destroys the Asuras. The Päëòava army quaked
before Droëa as he ranged about like Yamaräja holding his death-dealing staff.
Yudhiñöhira, alarmed at the destruction of his forces, spoke to Dåñöadyumna.
“Check Droëa’s onslaught! No time should be lost!”
With a roar, Dåñöadyumna charged Droëa, followed by Bhéma, the twins,
Abhimanyu, and other warriors. They surrounded Droëa and rained their
arrows on his chariot. Droëa’s eyes rolled in anger. Working his bow with
blinding speed, he repulsed his attackers like a storm blowing off clouds. He
sent men and chariots reeling across the battlefield in all directions. Like one
insane, he roamed the field releasing fire-like weapons. Beholding Droëa
rushing upon them like an angered Yamaräja, the Päëòava forces fled in
confusion and terror.
The terrific sound of Droëa’s bowstring was heard continuously. Just as Bhéñma
had done before him, he slaughtered the Päëòava soldiers. At the same time,
other great heroes among the Kauravas engaged with their counterparts. Many
furious one-to-one battles took place between the leading warriors of both
armies.
Droëa, his mind fixed on his promise to Duryodhana, ploughed relentlessly
into the Päëòava forces. Yudhiñöhira was stationed in their midst, protected by
many maharathas who covered his chariot on all sides. Arjuna was close by,
contending with a number of powerful chariot fighters who had been assigned
the task of leading him away from his brother.
As Droëa burst through the ranks of soldiers in front of Yudhiñöhira, he was
met by Kumära, a Païchäla prince protecting Yudhiñöhira’s chariot wheels. As
Yudhiñöhira fired his long shafts at Droëa, Kumära rushed toward him. The
prince sent a volley of arrows at Droëa that checked his progress. He pierced
the Kuru preceptor with hundreds of shafts, laughing and roaring all the while.
Not tolerating his attack, Droëa regained his senses and fixed a broad-headed
arrow onto his bow. Drawing it back to his ear, he fired it with deadly accuracy,
severing Kumära’s head from his body. Another Païchäla prince, Simhasena,
then struck Droëa with a hundred ferocious arrows, supported by his brother,
Vyaghradatta, who came at Droëa screaming out his fearful battle cry. They
620

both pierced Droëa’s arms and chest with their steel shafts. Unperturbed,
Droëa sent two razor-headed arrows in swift succession that cut off their
heads. As those handsome heads, decked with golden earrings and helmets,
dropped to the earth, Droëa pressed toward Yudhiñöhira. Seeing him approach
the Päëòava king, the Kaurava troops cried out, “Yudhiñöhira is captured!”
Cries of distress went up from the Päëòava army as Droëa came ever closer to
Yudhiñöhira. Hearing the shouts, however, Arjuna rushed toward Droëa,
mercilessly mowing down the warriors who stood in his way. All that could be
seen of Arjuna or his chariot as he fought his way toward his brother was a
constantly spreading network of arrows. Above that shower flew Hanumän
roaring frightfully from the banner.
Duryodhana ordered thousands of chariot fighters to charge Arjuna.
Recklessly, they advanced toward him. The battlefield around Arjuna appeared
to be one mass of arrows. Charging into the impenetrable wall of shafts, the
Kauravas were cut down, their chariots smashed. Droëa found it impossible to
approach Yudhiñöhira. His supporting divisions could do nothing to help him.
They were being destroyed by the inflamed Arjuna. Those that were not killed
turned and fled in fear.
As Arjuna created a fearful destruction among the Kaurava army, the sun
touched the western horizon. Droëa blew his conch to withdraw his troops.
Gradually the two armies disengaged and returned to their camps, praising
each other’s heroism.
***
Droëa was dejected as he took his place by Duryodhana’s side in the tent. He
had been helpless in the face of Arjuna’s prowess. Shamed at his inability to
contain his own disciple, he said to Duryodhana, “I told you already that when
Arjuna is by Yudhiñöhira’s side, I will not be able to capture him. You must
contrive some means to take Arjuna from his brother. I will then snatch
Yudhiñöhira, even before the eyes of Dåñöadyumna and all the other troops. I
will either achieve this or slay at least one of the Päëòavas’ greatest fighters––
whoever comes to Yudhiñöhira’s aid. However, you need to ensure that Arjuna
is busy elsewhere on the field.”
Hearing Droëa speak Susharma said, “Arjuna has humiliated me many times.
He bears malice toward me and my brothers. Remembering his antagonism I
can hardly sleep at night. Let us therefore undertake the task tomorrow of
621

contending with him. With fifty thousand chariot fighters who will not retreat
behind us, we will challenge Arjuna to combat. Either he will lay prostrate on
the field, or the earth will be relieved of the burden of my brothers and me and
our entire army.”
Duryodhana praised Susharma and a cheer went up from the other kings. With
his four brothers, Susharma took an oath before the sacred fire that he would
fight to the death with Arjuna the following day. After Brahmins had
sanctified his promise with mantras and holy water, he stood up and exclaimed,
“If we do not slay Arjuna or become slain by him, let us attain the regions
reserved for those who kill Brahmins, for drunkards, for those who forsake one
who has sought shelter, for those who have intercourse with another’s wife,
who are slayers of cattle, who abandon their own mother, or who are atheists.
We claim those regions if we flee from Arjuna in battle tomorrow. Otherwise,
may we attain the everlasting realms of happiness.”
After taking this vow, Susharma and his brothers retired for the night, leaving
Duryodhana enlivened and hopeful. Even if Susharma could not kill Arjuna,
which seemed likely, he would at least give Droëa the freedom he needed to
capture Yudhiñöhira. Duryodhana smiled at Karëa. Perhaps he would not need
to slay Arjuna after all. Between the promises of Droëa and Susharma, it
seemed the war would end in another way. The Kaurava prince did not care.
As long as he emerged victorious, by whatever means, that was all that
mattered. He rose from his seat and swept out of the assembly with his head
held high, Karëa following, grasping the hilt of his broad sword.
***
Early on the twelfth morning, news again reached Yudhiñöhira that Droëa was
intent on capturing him. He heard from his spies about Susharma’s promise.
When Arjuna was informed, he said to his brother, “Still you need not fear, O
King. Here is Sätyaki, my disciple and my equal in every respect. He will
remain by your side at all times. Even if I am away, you cannot be captured
while he is present.”
Reassured, Yudhiñöhira issued orders for the day’s battle. His forces were soon
moving toward the fight, causing the earth to vibrate and raising clouds of dust
as they proceeded in the formation shaped like an alligator.
As soon as Arjuna appeared before him, Susharma, who stood ahead of the
Kaurava army, challenged him. Bound by kñatriya codes, Arjuna accepted the
622

challenge and charged. He was immediately surrounded by the thirty thousand
chariots of the Samshaptakas and Trigartas. As the rest of the Päëòava forces
moved on across the plain to engage with the other Kaurava troops, Arjuna
began a furious battle with those fearless warriors. They let out deafening roars
and hurled their weapons at him. Hearing their elated shouts, Arjuna said to
Kåñëa, “Just see, O son of Devaké, how these men, who are about to fall in
battle, are transported with joy when really they should be weeping. Or
perhaps they are happy as they see before them heaven’s glowing regions,
which can never be attained by cowards.”
Arjuna lifted his gold-encrusted celestial conch and let out a mighty blast. All
four quarters were filled with the sound. Horses excreted and men fell from
their chariots. Others were paralyzed with fear and stood motionless for a few
moments. When the sound died away, they regained their senses and again
roared. Taking up their bows, they fired thousands of shafts fletched with
kanka feathers. In an instant Arjuna had shot arrows to counter every one of
his opponents’ swift-coursing shafts. They fell in pieces to the ground. Arjuna
pierced all the foremost charioteers who were bearing down upon him.
Susharma and his brothers responded with sharp-pointed arrows that struck
Arjuna’s arms and chest. A huge shower of other steel arrows fell on Arjuna’s
chariot, like a swarm of black bees going toward a tree full of blossoms.
Kåñëa drove the chariot and baffled the enemy attack. As he emerged from the
hail of shafts, Arjuna fired razor-headed arrows that cut down his foes’
standards. With arrows shot in swift succession he slew the four horses of
Sudhaman, one of Susharma’s brothers, and then cut off his head. As the
prince fell from his chariot, his four brothers increased the fury of their attack.
Tens of thousands of other chariot fighters and horsemen hurled their
weapons at him from all sides. At the same time, the Näräyaëa army from
Dwärakä rushed into the fight with terrible cries. Arjuna was completely
engaged in the battle as the rest of the Päëòava forces met the Kauravas some
distance away.
With their forces arrayed in a formation resembling an eagle, the Kauravas
closed on their enemies. Droëa, stationed at the head of the array, at once
made for Yudhiñöhira. Sätyaki charged Droëa, releasing his swift arrows by the
hundreds. He attacked the Kuru preceptor and rendered his two charioteers
unconscious with a volley of arrows. Piercing his horses with even more arrows,
he brought Droëa’s chariot to a halt.
623

Droëa was filled with rage, and he gazed at his antagonist with bloodshot eyes.
Considering that Sätyaki’s time had come, he shot a dozen snake-like shafts
that sundered his bow and pierced his armor. Unperturbed, Sätyaki grasped
another bow and replied with thirty of his own arrows. They struck Droëa and
he spun round in his chariot and dropped his bow.
Seeing the preceptor hard-pressed by Sätyaki, other Kaurava fighters came to
his aid. At the same time, other Päëòava warriors joined Sätyaki and a fierce
general fight followed. Droëa quickly regained his senses and fought on in total
rage. Thousands of Païchäla and Matsya soldiers surrounded him and he killed
them all, including the two powerful princes, Satyajit and Satanika.
Seeing his troops being mowed down, Dåñöadyumna came forward with
Çikhaëòé. Along with Sätyaki, Chekitana, and many other Päëòava heroes,
they managed to hold Droëa in check. As that battle raged, the soldiers on
both sides fell in waves. The battlefield was a morass of flesh and blood. Droëa
fought like a man possessed. The Päëòava army quaked in fear as he released
his celestial weapons that slew them by the thousands. Droëa forced all his
attackers to turn away from him in the fight. He could hardly be looked upon
and the Päëòavas surrounding him were routed.
Duryodhana laughed and spoke to Karëa, who was there at his side. “Behold,
Radheya, how these troops flee from the battle. They seem to spin around and
around as they look for a path by which to escape from Droëa. I think they
have lost all taste for battle. Surely they are seeing the world as being full of
Droëa. How will they return to the fight? What can even Bhéma do against the
warlike preceptor?”
Karëa was in a graver mood. “That Päëòava hero will never abandon the fight
so long as life remains in him. Nor will his brothers turn away from battle at
any time. Remembering the woes you inflicted upon them, they will rush
against us again and again. Even now the mighty Bhéma is coming forward.
Doubtlessly he will slay our forces in vast numbers. See too how Sätyaki and
Dåñöadyumna are rallying back to the fight, along with the twins and numerous
other maharathas among our foes. All of them are bearing down on Droëa
with a singleness of purpose. Let us prepare our forces without delay.”
Duryodhana looked across the field. He saw Bhéma’s chariot, drawn by its four
red horses, racing toward Droëa. Bhéma was flanked by Dåñöadyumna and
Sätyaki. The three warriors roared like lions as they approached the Kuru
commander. Behind them came a great wave of chariot fighters and horsemen,
624

releasing showers of arrows as they charged. Duryodhana broke from Karëa
and raced across the field, issuing orders for Droëa’s protection. A number of
Kaurava heroes came between the Kuru preceptor and his assailants and soon
the fight resumed with full force.
Duryodhana personally attacked Bhéma, his mind seized with anger. At the
head of a massive elephant force, he challenged the Päëòava with insulting
words. Bhéma laughingly shot spiked arrows at the elephants. Drawing his great
bow back to his ear he sent his shafts with such force that they felled the
elephants one after another. Bhéma’s chariot moved like the wind from side to
side as he rained down his irresistible weapons. He dispersed his attackers like a
tempest scattering clouds. The blood-soaked elephants, pierced all over,
appeared beautiful, like dark clouds lit by the rays of the setting sun.
Excited, Duryodhana approached Bhéma and pierced him with a number of
shafts. Bhéma turned his blood-red eyes toward the Kaurava and licked his lips.
Instantly he shot dozens of gold-winged arrows, which pierced Duryodhana
deeply. With a broad-headed shaft he brought down the black, gem-encrusted
serpent banner that flew above Duryodhana’s chariot. He then severed
Duryodhana’s bow with another shaft and sent up a roar.
Seeing the Kaurava leader afflicted by Bhéma, the barbarian king leading the
elephant division came forward on his massive beast. Without delay Bhéma
struck the elephant between the eyes with a powerful shaft that stopped it in
its tracks. With four more arrows he brought the elephant crashing to the
ground. As it fell like a mountain struck by a thunderbolt, the barbarian chief
tried to leap clear; but even as he jumped, Bhéma cut off his head with a razorheaded arrow fired with deadly accuracy.
Seeing their leader slain, the other elephant warriors fled. Duryodhana tried to
rally them, but without success. He moved away from Bhéma and saw
Bhagadatta coming up fast to assist him. The mighty fighter on his invincible
elephant Supratika rushed toward Bhéma, seeming to fly over the battlefield.
Bhéma fired his long shafts at the charging beast, but they fell harmlessly from
its body. In a moment the elephant reached Bhéma’s chariot and crushed it
along with its horses as Bhéma threw himself clear.
Supratika reared up again and again, screaming in fury and looking around for
Bhéma. The Päëòava ran beneath the beast and struck it with his bare arms. In
pain the elephant whirled around like a potter’s wheel. Bhéma came out from
beneath it and the elephant seized him in its trunk. Bhéma spun round and
625

freed himself from the twine of the trunk and again hid beneath the screaming
beast that was endeavoring to kill him.
Yudhiñöhira saw Bhéma and ordered a division of his own elephants to assist
him. As Supratika was diverted by the attack of enemy elephants, Bhéma saw
his chance and he dashed away.
A battle then ensued between Bhagadatta and the Päëòava forces mounted on
elephants, led by the Dasharna king. They surrounded Bhagadatta and covered
him with volleys of arrows. Bhagadatta fended off their shafts with his whirling
hook. Goading Supratika forward, he trampled and crushed the enemy forces
like a storm crushing a forest. Chariots, horsemen and infantry were mangled
as the great beast rampaged across the field. Impervious to its foes’ weapons,
the elephant caused chaos among the Päëòava forces. Soldiers fled and their
animals cried in terror. Rising above the sound were Supratika’s frightful
screams as it thundered about the field unchecked.
Some way off, Arjuna battled on alone against the Samshaptakas and the
Näräyaëa army. As he fought, he could hear Supratika’s screams. Recognizing
the sound he said, “O Madhusüdana, it is clear that the Pragyotisha ruler is
annihilating our army. I doubt if anyone can stop his elephant except us. What
then is my duty, O Kåñëa? I think I should proceed at once to where
Bhagadatta is roaring out his battle cry. Dispatching him and his beast to
Death’s abode, I will then return to this fight.”
Kåñëa agreed and urged Arjuna’s horses toward the rest of the Päëòava army.
As they raced away, however, the Samshaptakas called out from behind, “Why
do you flee from the fight? Turn and face us again, for you have not yet
defeated us.”
Arjuna was caught in a dilemma. He wanted to save his army from Bhagadatta,
but he could not avoid the Samshaptakas. No kñatriya worthy of the name
could refuse a challenge. He told Kåñëa to stop the chariot and turn round.
First he would wipe out the entire Samshaptaka force, then deal with
Bhagadatta. As Kåñëa wheeled the chariot around Arjuna still could not fix his
mind. There were hundreds of thousands of warriors supporting Susharma and
his army. They were spread out over a large area and it would take hours to
overcome them. By then, Bhagadatta and his unstoppable elephant might have
done untold damage.
Suddenly the Samshaptakas launched a coordinated attack on Arjuna.
Countless arrows descended upon his chariot, striking both him and Kåñëa.
626

Kåñëa dropped the reins and fell back in a swoon as the barbed steel shafts
covered Him. The chariot stopped and vanished beneath the hail of arrows.
Losing his patience, Arjuna decided to invoke the brahmästra weapon. He
fixed a golden arrow to his bow and chanted the sacred mantras to bring the
awful weapon into being. With consummate skill he directed it at his foes,
continuously firing long shafts imbued with the power of the brahmästra.
A solid wall of blazing arrows went toward the Samshaptakas. The warriors fell
to earth with their heads, arms and legs severed. Chariots were smashed into
fragments and elephants cut to pieces. Horses and riders fell dead by the
thousands. The whole army appeared to be on fire, struck by the beautiful but
deadly shafts shot by Arjuna’s mystic powers.
Kåñëa returned to His senses and said, “Well done, Pärtha. I think this feat of
weaponry would have been hard for Indra, Kuvera, or even Yamaräja himself.
Our enemies are routed. Those staying in the fight are being slain like insects
entering a fire.”
Arjuna asked Kåñëa to go quickly to Bhagadatta. He could return later to deal
with the rest of the Samshaptakas and their supporting armies. As swift as the
wind, the chariot flew over the battlefield and soon arrived where the battle
with Bhagadatta was taking place. Seeing Arjuna entering the fight,
Duryodhana detailed a large force of chariot fighters to attack him. They
rushed in a body toward Arjuna and rained their arrows, darts and lances upon
him. Bearing the attack with fortitude, Arjuna continuously worked the
Gäëòéva bow and sent whistling shafts at all the warriors who came at him.
Fearless of their lives, the Kaurava troops charged at Arjuna with shouts and
roars. The Päëòava cut them down with his arrows as a farmer cuts a field of
wheat.
Seeing Arjuna annihilating the troops, Bhagadatta raced toward him. He
showered a downpour of arrows onto Arjuna’s chariot and directed Supratika
to trample him. Arjuna calmly resisted his attack with volleys of his own shafts,
even as the shore resists the ocean. The two warriors hurtled about the field,
locked in deadly combat. Bhagadatta sent hundreds of arrows at both Arjuna
and Kåñëa, but Kunté’s son cut them down before they could reach him.
Supratika charged at Arjuna like a mountain rocking across the field.
Impervious to Arjuna’s arrows the animal screamed in fury as it bore down on
the golden chariot. Kåñëa masterfully drove the horses and evaded the charge,
feinting to the left of the beast. As he passed to Bhagadatta’s side, Arjuna saw
627

his opportunity to slay the unprotected warrior and his animal, but
remembering the rules of combat he desisted from the act.
Seeing Arjuna’s chariot slipping past, Bhagadatta’s elephant was overpowered
by rage and ran pell mell through the Päëòava forces. Hundreds of chariots,
with their warriors, horses and charioteers, were crushed and slaughtered.
Arjuna was infuriated by Bhagadatta’s remorseless attack. Moving quickly to
the front he sped four arrows at him which cut apart his bow. With two more
arrows he slew the two warriors who sat behind Bhagadatta.
The Pragyotisha monarch threw fourteen lances at Arjuna in quick succession.
Those jewel-encrusted javelins, with shining steel points, blazed as they sped
toward the Päëòava, their many small bells tinkling delightfully. Arjuna
immediately shot arrows that cut each of the lances into three pieces. As the
lances fell to the earth he fired another dozen shafts that broke Supratika’s
armor. It fell from the elephant’s body in fragments like meteors falling from
heaven. The dark beast then appeared like a mountain suddenly freed of its
surrounding clouds.
Bhagadatta hurled a long dart at Arjuna, its tip glowing red and emitting
sparks as it flew. Arjuna calmly cut it in two with a single razor-headed shaft.
He then cut the kings white umbrella and tall standard. With a further ten
shafts he pierced Bhagadatta, who replied with two dozen long lances. One of
the lances struck Arjuna’s diadem and knocked it from his head. Replacing his
diadem, Arjuna gazed at Bhagadatta with steely eyes. He shouted out, “Take a
last look at this world, O King.”
Bhagadatta quickly took up a new bow and covered Arjuna and Kåñëa with a
shower of barbed arrows. Arjuna released a cluster of flat-headed shafts that
cut his bow to pieces and pierced all his limbs. Taking up his golden hook,
Bhagadatta thought of the Vaiñëava weapon, which was in his possession.
Reciting the ancient aphorisms to invoke that irresistible weapon, he charged
his elephant hook with its potency and hurled it at Arjuna. All the warriors
witnessing the fight between Arjuna and Bhagadatta gasped as they saw the
missile, capable of killing all creatures, fly toward Arjuna.
Suddenly Kåñëa stood up from His place on the chariot. Throwing out His arms
He received the weapon full on the chest. As it struck Him, it turned into a
garland of celestial flowers and draped itself around His neck.
Arjuna was mortified. Why had Kåñëa interfered? Keeping his eyes on
Bhagadatta, who had been stunned by Kåñëa’s thwarting of the Vaiñëava
628

missile, he said, “O lotus-eyed one, Your promise was that You would drive my
horses and never enter the fight. Why have You interceded? I could
understand You taking it upon Yourself to protect me when I am incapable or
about to fall, but here I stand with all my faculties and weapons. Not even the
combined celestials and Asuras could defeat me. How have You felt it
necessary to act as You just did?”
Slowly circling the chariot around Bhagadatta, Kåñëa replied, “Hear, O sinless
one, the origin of the weapon that Bhagadatta released for your destruction.
Long ago, when I awoke from slumber in My form as Mahavishnu, the Earth
goddess came to Me seeking a boon. Knowing that I was inclined to grant
favors at that time, she said, ‘Please bestow upon my son Naraka the Vaiñëava
weapon. Let it be that he cannot be slain by any being.’
“I replied, ‘O goddess, it shall be so. Your son will be invincible, protected by
My weapon.’ She then went away and her son received the weapon, which he
later passed on to Bhagadatta. This weapon can slay any being within the three
worlds, including Indra and Rudra. Therefore, for your sake, O Arjuna, I
baffled the missile. Now you may slay your opponent, this implacable enemy of
the gods Bhagadatta, even as in days gone by I slew Naraka in a great fight.”
Understanding that Kåñëa had saved his life, Arjuna fixed his gaze on
Bhagadatta. He swiftly covered him with hundreds of straight-flying shafts. As
Bhagadatta parried the attack, Arjuna took up a long golden lance. He drew it
back and, invoking the power of Indra, hurled it with all his strength at
Supratika. It went into the elephant’s head right up to its golden wings.
Supratika stopped in its tracks, its limbs paralyzed. Although goaded by
Bhagadatta, it slowly fell to the earth like an enormous hill uprooted by a
thunderbolt. As his elephant screamed Bhagadatta leapt from its back.
Before Bhagadatta reached the ground, Arjuna shot a crescent-headed shaft
that tore open his breast and cut his heart in two. His bright turban fell from
his head like a petal falling from a lotus whose stem has been violently struck.
He dropped to the earth with his golden garland broken and scattered. His
arms and legs spread akimbo, he appeared like a god fallen from heaven when
his pious credits have expired.
Arjuna circumambulated his foe in respect. Then, turning his chariot toward
the Kaurava army, he rushed back into the battle.
Çakuni’s two brothers then attacked Arjuna with mighty yells. They were
backed by a thousand Gandhara horsemen. The warriors fell upon Arjuna,
629

releasing hundreds of arrows. Unperturbed, Arjuna took up a couple of razorheaded shafts and beheaded both princes. The horrified Çakuni then charged
at Arjuna. Invoking a mystical Asura weapon, he spread a fearful illusion that
covered the Päëòava. Clubs, iron balls, rocks, darts, barbed shafts, bludgeons,
swords, tridents, axes, and other weapons fell on Arjuna from all sides.
Ferocious animals, burning with hunger, attacked Arjuna along with Räkñasas,
carnivorous birds and demons. A thick gloom enveloped his chariot and harsh
voices reproached him from out of the darkness.
Arjuna invoked the lustrous celestial weapon known as the Gotishka and the
darkness dispelled. All his illusory assailants vanished, but huge waves of water
then appeared and rushed toward him. Arjuna quickly discharged the Aditya
weapon to dry up the waters. Seeing his illusions nullified, Çakuni turned and
took to his heels like a cowardly deserter. Arjuna turned on the Gandhara
forces and slaughtered them like a lion killing small animals.
Other Kaurava warriors charged into the fray and a general fight ensued
between the two armies. Yudhiñöhira remained near Arjuna, with
Dåñöadyumna and Sätyaki by his side. The Kaurava forces were broken and
dispersed by Arjuna and Bhéma, who fought together like a couple of enraged
gods.
Abhimanyu fought with Karëa, keeping the powerful warrior engaged, while
Dåñöadyumna directed his weapons at Droëa. As the foremost fighters
contended, Arjuna drove back Duryodhana’s huge army with his hundreds of
thousands of shafts. Bhéma spun around on foot, creating a carnage with his
whirling mace.
Droëa fought intensely, but he could not find any opportunity to seize
Yudhiñöhira. He slew numerous powerful fighters and wrought a massive
destruction among the soldiers, but the invincible Sätyaki guarded Yudhiñöhira
closely and, assisted by Dåñöadyumna and the Païchäla forces, kept Droëa at
bay.
As the sun reached the meridian, Droëa, seeing the Kauravas getting the worst
of the fight, decided to regroup. He sounded the retreat and recalled the vast
army to the western side of the field, where they were encamped.
Duryodhana was angry. “O preceptor, why have you not fulfilled your vow?
You did not capture Yudhiñöhira, and Arjuna ranges unchecked across the
field. Are your words to prove false?”
Droëa felt his patience tried. “It does not behoove you to address such harsh
630

words to one who is always striving to serve you. I have told you many times
that no one in the universe can conquer Arjuna. He has even held the threeeyed Mahadeva in battle. Now that Yudhiñöhira is aware of our aims, he is
keeping himself well-guarded. It will be difficult to capture him, but I will try
my utmost. My word that I will kill one mighty hero will be kept. I will now
form an array that even the gods could not penetrate. The remaining
Samshaptakas should again challenge Arjuna and take him to the southern
side of the field. We will then try to trap Yudhiñöhira and, in so doing, will at
least take the life of someone who comes to protect him.”
Droëa gazed across at the Päëòava army. If one of their principal fighters could
be killed, it would be a blow to their morale. He decided to form the Kauravas
into the chakravyuha, the circular array. That arrangement would likely result
in one of the Päëòava heroes being trapped, perhaps even Yudhiñöhira. Only
Arjuna knew the secrets of that formation. No one else among the Päëòavas
could resist or break it. Unless, that was, Arjuna had taught it to someone.
Droëa began giving the commands. He would soon find out.

Chapter 15
Abhimanyu’s Incomparable Power
After deciding to regroup the Kauravas, Droëa went over to Susharma and
said, “O King, your vow remains unfulfilled. Arjuna will doubtlessly accept
your challenge again. Go with your brothers and draw that hero toward the
south. We will try again to trap Yudhiñöhira.”
Susharma immediately left with his three remaining brothers. They were
followed by the surviving Samshaptakas, Trigartas and Näräyaëas. All the
warriors blew their conches and roared, their minds fixed on victory or death.
Seeing Susharma stationed across from him blowing his conch and shouting a
challenge, Arjuna broke away from the Päëòava army and rushed once more
toward him. Gradual maneuvering brought him toward the south, as Droëa
arranged the rest of the Kaurava forces into the chakravyuha.
Soon the circular array was formed, with the invincible Kaurava chiefs
stationed at its key points. In ranks the soldiers advanced toward the Päëòavas.
631

Duryodhana and his brothers stood in the center of the formation, supported
by Karëa and Kåpa. At its head stood Droëa and his son, backed by many kings
and their forces, who spread out behind him in a vast circle.
As Droëa closed on his foes, he let loose hundreds of winged arrows.
Immediately, a massive wave of shafts flew toward the Päëòava army, along
with lances, darts, iron balls and battle-axes. The warriors’ cries filled the air.
Seeing that his enemies had arranged themselves in the impenetrable
chakravyuha, Yudhiñöhira became thoughtful. Only Arjuna knew how to break
that array. He had mentioned it to his brothers, but he had not told them the
secrets he had learned from Droëa. But Yudhiñöhira recalled Arjuna saying
how he had once discussed the knowledge with Subhadrä and that Abhimanyu
had overheard him speaking. The prince was their only chance. Yudhiñöhira
called for him and said, “O son, I think that apart from yourself there are none
in our army who can break the arrangement of troops now advancing toward
us. Your father, Kåñëa and Pradyumna are the only warriors on earth who
know the secret of breaking it––and I understand that you are a fourth knower
of this secret, having heard it from your sire. O heroic prince, Droëa surely
intends to push through our forces with this unbreakable formation. Throwing
us into disarray, he will then try to capture me. Tell me, dear child, can you
smash through these troops today?”
Abhimanyu stood proudly in his chariot. Clad in bright armor, his bow clasped
in his hand and his standard waving in the breeze, the handsome youth looked
exactly like a powerful hero among the gods. Although only sixteen years old,
he was already one of the foremost fighters in the Päëòava army. But he
seemed uncertain as he replied to Yudhiñöhira. “O King, what you say is true. I
am conversant with the method of breaking and entering this array, but I do
not think it possible for me to get out again. My father has not yet taught me
that knowledge. I will be like an insect impelled by anger to rush into fire. If
any danger should befall me, I will be trapped.”
Yudhiñöhira reassured him. “Do not fear, O mighty-armed one. My brothers
and I will be right behind you, along with Dåñöadyumna, Sätyaki, and all the
Païchälas, Kekayas, Matsyas and Prabhadrakas. We will protect you from all
sides.”
Bhéma, who had overheard the conversation, added, “We will follow you
closely, O hero. Once we enter the array, we will smash it apart.”
Hearing his uncles’ assurances, Abhimanyu became confident. He raised his
632

sword and loudly said, “Today I will achieve something that will glorify both
my mother’s and my father’s family. I wish to please my father and my uncle.
All creatures will see me, a single child of the Vrishnis, crush the enemy host. I
will not consider myself the son of either Pärtha or Subhadrä if anyone I
encounter today escapes with his life, or if I fail to enter the array.”
Yudhiñöhira blessed the prince. “May your words prove true, O son of
Subhadrä, and may your strength increase even as you speak. Go now and we
shall be not far behind you, supported by troops who are no less than the
celestials.”
Abhimanyu looked at the advancing Kauravas. He ordered his charioteer, “O
Sumitra, urge the horses toward Droëa’s divisions. I will break his formation
apart as the sun dispels clouds.”
Sumitra, the son of Kåñëa’s charioteer, Däruka, drove toward Droëa. As the
chariot thundered across the field he spoke with apprehension. “It is my duty
to protect you, O best of men. Consider carefully the heavy burden that has
been placed upon you. Droëa is adept at all kinds of weaponry. He is
surrounded by warriors who have yet to be defeated, all arranged in a mighty
formation. You, on the other hand, are a child raised in luxury. You have not
known the rigors of hard battle. This will certainly be your most difficult
fight.”
Abhimanyu laughed. “O charioteer, who is this Droëa? Who indeed are all
these kñatriyas supporting him? I would fight with Indra mounted on Airävata
and attended by the immortals. How are these foes competent to fight a battle
with even a sixteenth part of me? I, who have the world-conquering Viñëu as
my uncle and the famous Arjuna as my father, will not quake with terror at the
sight of any enemy within the three worlds. Drive on, O Sumitra. Make
straight for Droëa.”
Sumitra looked at the solid wall of enemy troops. With a heavy heart he urged
on the horses, which were caparisoned in gold and silver. The chariot raced
toward Droëa, with Abhimanyu firing volleys of arrows at him and all the
warriors by his side.
Seeing the standard bearing the karnikara tree, Droëa recognized Arjuna’s son.
As the prince charged toward the Kauravas, he seemed like a young lion
attacking a herd of elephants. Droëa issued orders and began the
counterattack.
Abhimanyu carefully directed Sumitra, and his chariot feinted from side to
633

side as he came at an oblique angle toward the Kaurava ranks. Maintaining his
fierce attack on Droëa, he simultaneously hurled arrows at the warriors
fighting at his sides and rear. As they fell back under his assault, Abhimanyu
suddenly veered away to the right. Stunning Droëa with a hundred steel
shafts, he raced past him and broke into the formation as the Kauravas looked
on in amazement.
A frightful encounter ensued as the outer rank of the formation broke apart.
The confused battle between the prince and the densely packed troops
appeared like the eddies produced when the Ganges meets the ocean. Large
numbers of elephant fighters, horsemen, charioteers and foot soldiers closed in
around Abhimanyu, all roaring in delight.
Subhadrä’s son began to cut down his foes with his arrows. He rushed about
amid his enemies like a whirlwind. It seemed to the Kauravas as if they were
contending with hundreds of Abhimanyus. As various musical instruments
sounded, shouts of “Slay him!” “Fight with me!” and “Where are you going?”
mixed with battle cries, the twang of bowstrings, and the clash of weapons. The
cries of elephants, the roar of warriors, the tinkling of ornaments, and the
clatter of chariot wheels combined to create a deafening and confused din that
made everyone’s hair stand on end.
Abhimanyu ranged about slaughtering the Kaurava warriors by the hundreds
of thousands. His speed and agility were incomparable. The soldiers who faced
him were like moths flying into fire. Abhimanyu quickly covered the earth
with the bodies of slain warriors, like a priest laying kusha grass on the ground
during a sacrifice. Well-muscled arms graced with bracelets and gold bangles
were lopped off, still clutching weapons. Other arms lay with their hands
stretched out, looking like five-hooded serpents thrown about by Garuòa.
Handsome heads adorned with fine helmets and smeared with the best of
perfumes rolled on the ground like ripe fruits fallen from trees.
Once within the Kauravas’ vyuha, Arjuna’s son careened in all directions.
None of his foes could fix their aim on him, so swift was his momentum. His
arrows flew like streams of golden sunlight. He brought down huge elephants
with their riders, scattering their armors and caparisons. Horsemen fell from
their saddles, slain by shafts that passed clean through their bodies. Their
horses reared in fear and were cut down by Abhimanyu’s relentless volleys.
The animals lay about weltering in gore, their eyes bulging and tongues
hanging out.
634

Sending men and beasts to the blissful regions of departed heroes, Abhimanyu
charged repeatedly, uttering fearful war cries. As he displayed various
maneuvers, the Kaurava heroes thought him beautiful. They shouted in
appreciation. Despite their best efforts to train their weapons on him, they
could find no gaps in his defenses. Rather, as they approached him they were
struck by dozens of his speeding arrows.
The Kauravas appeared like the Asura army mangled by Skanda. Subhadrä’s
son moved fearlessly and swiftly through them, leaving a trail of carnage.
Thousands of Kaurava fighters threw down their weapons and fled the fight.
Forsaking their wounded relatives and friends, they ran wildly in all directions.
Elephants ran screaming and swift horses galloped at full tilt away from
Abhimanyu, leaping over the fallen soldiers who filled the blood-soaked earth.
Duryodhana was incensed. Reckless of his own safety, he rushed at Abhimanyu
with a roar. Seeing this, Droëa was alarmed and he shouted to the warriors
around him, “Save the king!” Açvatthämä, Kåpa, Karëa, Çakuni, Çalya, and
another half dozen heroes all converged on Abhimanyu. The young prince was
covered with a thick downpour of arrows. Spinning on the terrace of his
chariot he countered the arrows with his own, as Sumitra maneuvered his
chariot clear. He pierced every one of his assailants with stinging arrows that
could hardly be seen as they flew.
The Kaurava warriors then attacked Abhimanyu on all sides. They rained
down their shafts by the thousands, but the prince either warded them off or
dexterously evaded them. Some shafts penetrated his defenses and pierced his
armor, but he did not flinch. Taking careful aim, he sent a dozen arrows that
broke apart the chariot of King Ashmaka, a powerful Kaurava ally. With a
further six arrows he slew the king’s four horses, his charioteer, and the king
himself.
Seeing the monarch slain, the Kaurava soldiers turned and fled. Duryodhana
and Karëa fought side by side, sending their arrows at Abhimanyu in volleys.
Bearing the arrows like a mountain bears showers of rain, Abhimanyu sped at
Karëa a powerful arrow capable of piercing his armor. It struck him on the
shoulder and dug deep into his body. Pained, Karëa shook like a hill in an
earthquake and fell into a swoon.
Abhimanyu then stunned Duryodhana with sixteen arrows and followed that
by slaying four more kings supporting the Kaurava. Çalya and Açvatthämä
assailed him from both flanks at once. Exhibiting the speed and skill of his
635

father, Abhimanyu shot his steel-tipped shafts at Çalya and sent him reeling in
his chariot. As the arrows struck Çalya, Abhimanyu spun around and released a
dozen more at Açvatthämä. Droëa’s son was rocked by their force and he
squatted down on the terrace of his chariot.
The Kauravas facing Abhimanyu fled in greater and greater numbers. Only the
foremost heroes could stand against him. Even they were soon overpowered by
his furious attack. As he ranged about on his glittering chariot, Siddhas and
Cäraëas praised him from the skies. The Kauravas also cheered him, feeling
simultaneous awe and anger as they were forced back by his peerless martial
skills.
Abhimanyu slew thousands of Kauravas––anyone who came before him.
Çalya’s younger brother Madra, seeing Çalya afflicted by Abhimanyu, rushed
angrily at him. He hurled twenty blazing darts at him, but the prince cut them
to pieces. Abhimanyu counterattacked Madra with long shafts that shattered
his chariot and cut off his arms, legs and head simultaneously. As Madra fell
dead from his chariot, thousands of soldiers in his army charged angrily at
Abhimanyu. Calling out their names as they attacked, they shouted, “You will
not escape with your life today, even if it costs us our own lives.”
Subhadrä’s son met their attack with a deadly volley of arrows. He invoked
celestial missiles he had received from his father and uncle. His bow resembled
the blazing summer sun as he sent waves of horseshoe- headed and calf-toothheaded shafts slamming into the Kaurava warriors, tearing them apart. With
crescent-headed and barbed shafts Abhimanyu mangled his foes mercilessly.
He carved through their divisions unchecked, dispersing them as the sun
disperses mist.
Droëa could not conceal his admiration for Arjuna’s son. Duryodhana had
come up to him and the preceptor said, “Just see, O King, how this youthful
prince advances against our forces, giving delight to his friends and relatives. I
do not think any bowman is his equal. Surely he could annihilate our entire
host, if he so desired.”
But Duryodhana was enraged. Still, he smiled and said to Karëa, who had
stopped next to him, “It is clear the preceptor is affectionate toward Arjuna’s
son. Otherwise, why does he not slay him? None can resist the angry Droëa
when he stands with his weapons in battle. He spares this youth out of love for
Arjuna. Protected by Droëa, Abhimanyu is able to exhibit his prowess. Well,
the time has come to kill him. O Karëa, waste no time in slaying this arrogant
636

child. Crush him at once!”
Dushashana heard his brother’s words and replied, “Leave this to me. I will slay
him before the Päëòavas’ eyes. Hearing that I have killed this boy, Kåñëa and
Arjuna, the two braggarts, will surely go to the regions of the departed.
Without doubt, all their kinsmen will be consumed by grief and will follow
their path. Wish me well, O King. I will now challenge Subhadrä’s overly proud
son.”
Dushashana rushed at Abhimanyu with a loud cry. He fired a shower of arrows,
decked with buzzard feathers, that covered Abhimanyu’s chariot. The young
prince smiled as he recognized his antagonist––and he struck him at once with
two dozen shafts. Not tolerating the attack, Dushashana increased the ferocity
of his own assault. He fired at Abhimanyu arrows and darts that blazed
brilliantly as they flew toward him. The prince countered the missiles and
returned his own in large numbers. Both combatants exhibited various
maneuvers in their chariots, showing skills that delighted the onlookers. The
Kauravas sounded all kinds of musical instruments and cheered as Dushashana
pressed his attack on Abhimanyu.
Holding off his opponent’s attack, Abhimanyu called out to him, “By good luck
I find before me a vain warrior of cruel deeds and lost righteousness––he who
ever brays of his own prowess and knows only sinful deeds. With joy you
pierced Yudhiñöhira and Bhéma with your wicked words. Pay for that crime
now, O evil-minded one. Suffer for the sin of grasping the sinless Draupadé’s
hair. Reap the fatal fruits of your ignorance, violence, covetousness and
persecution of others. I shall now chastise you severely before all these
warriors, thus freeing myself from the burden of anger I bear against you.”
In a matter of seconds Abhimanyu fixed an effulgent golden arrow on his bow
and fired it with all his power. It dug deeply into Dushashana’s shoulder and he
dropped his bow. Abhimanyu struck him with a further twenty-five shafts that
burned like fire. Pierced on his chest and arms, the Kaurava squatted in pain
and fell into a swoon. His charioteer quickly carried him from the fight.
Seeing Dushashana overpowered, Karëa came to challenge Abhimanyu, but he
too could not defeat the young warrior. Abhimanyu gradually forced him back
with dozens of arrows. With his standard cut down and his armor shattered,
Karëa fell back and turned away. He was being supported by sons of
Adhiratha, whom Karëa considered his own brothers. One of them rushed at
Abhimanyu in a rage. He launched a hundred arrows at him and sent up his
637

battle cry. Abhimanyu turned to face the impetuous warrior. The young
prince, whose mind was free from malice, struck Karëa’s brother with thirty
powerful arrows. He broke his standard, killed his horses, and shattered his
chariot wheels. As his antagonist fired back, Abhimanyu lopped off his head
with a crescent-headed shaft.
The Kaurava troops cried out in sorrow. None of them were able to face
Abhimanyu, who stood on the field like a blazing sacrificial fire. He blew his
conch and began to range among the Kauravas, sending deadly shafts in all
directions. He slew thousands of men as he fought within the circle formation.
Yudhiñöhira, Bhéma, the twins, Dåñöadyumna, Drupada, Virata and other chiefs
among the Päëòavas had watched Abhimanyu break into the Kauravas’ midst.
As he entered the vyuha like an elephant breaking through a copse of trees, he
left a large gap in the outer ranks. The Päëòavas made swiftly for the gap,
intending to follow the boy into the formation.
Suddenly Jayadratha came forward and challenged the Päëòavas. Placing
himself between them and the smashed vyuha, the Sindhu king attacked all of
them with profuse arrows. Empowered by Çiva’s boon, Jayadratha fought
fearlessly. He checked all four Päëòavas. According to Çiva’s boon, the Sindhu
monarch did not encounter Arjuna, who was fighting with the Samshaptakas
far away on the battlefield. Arjuna’s brothers could not overpower Jayadratha
as they hurried to follow Abhimanyu.
The Päëòavas were astonished. Unaware of the boon, they were amazed at
Jayadratha’s ability to hold them all at bay. Even though the advancing
Päëòava warriors trained their weapons on him, they could not get the better
of him. As they struggled to get past Jayadratha, the Kauravas reformed. The
Päëòavas looked on helplessly as the chakravyuha closed, trapping Abhimanyu
inside.
Dozens of powerful Kaurava heroes came up to assist Jayadratha, praising his
prowess in holding off the Päëòavas. A fight took place on the edge of the
Kaurava formation, while Abhimanyu wrought havoc within it. Faced by
impenetrable ranks of warriors, the Päëòavas saw no way to reach Arjuna’s
son.
***
Within the formation Duryodhana grew increasingly anxious. No one seemed
able to stop Abhimanyu. Whoever went before him was either immediately
638

slain or forced to retreat. He had overpowered all the great Kaurava heroes,
including Karëa, Kåpa, Açvatthämä, Çalya, Kåtavarmä and Bählika.
Duryodhana himself had been stung by his shafts, and even Droëa seemed
unable to check him.
As Duryodhana gazed at Abhimanyu hurtling among his forces like a fireball
consuming everything in its path, Çakuni said, “We will not be able to slay this
prince by fair means. Find some other way to kill him. All of us together must
assail him before he destroys everyone.”
Hearing the suggestion, Karëa said to Droëa, “O preceptor, tell us how to kill
Abhimanyu.”
Droëa looked at Abhimanyu with respect and admiration. “Have any of you
seen any weakness in that prince? Although you have all attacked him with
care, you have not seen the slightest gap in his defenses. Indeed, all you could
see was his whirling bow, constantly drawn to a circle, firing flaming shafts.
That slayer of hostile heroes is affording me great delight, even as he afflicts
my limbs with his burning arrows. I see no difference between him and his
illustrious father.”
Karëa grew impatient upon hearing Abhimanyu praised. His voice rang out
again. “O Brahmin, I too have been wounded by this boy. Only my adherence
to kñatriya duty keeps me on the field. He has almost slain the king himself,
and he is annihilating our troops. Please tell us how we can check him.”
“Abhimanyu is virtuous and faithful,” replied Droëa. “He is powerful and has
been taught by both Arjuna and Kåñëa. Arjuna has shown him how to encase
himself in impenetrable armor. None of us will be able to strike him down.”
Droëa lowered his head as he went on, “There is, however, a way by which we
may be able to overcome him. O Karëa, listen carefully. If you can cut his bow,
the reins of his horses and his chariot wheels, then at the same time Kåtavarmä
can kill his horses and Açvatthämä can kill his charioteer, while Kåpa, the king
and I will attack him directly. Perhaps if six of us attack him simultaneously,
we will be able to overpower him.”
Droëa knew his advice was not in keeping with the codes of combat, but there
seemed no alternative. Ultimately, as the Kaurava commander it was his duty
to protect the army by whatever means. Heavy-hearted, Droëa prepared to
attack Abhimanyu along with the other five Kaurava chiefs. They surrounded
the prince and Karëa cut apart his bow. Kåtavarmä then killed his steeds and
Açvatthämä his driver. As Droëa and Kåpa assailed him from the front,
639

Duryodhana attacked him from behind. With his horses killed and his chariot
immobilized, the prince leapt down clutching his sword and buckler. Swiftly
whirling his sword he cut down the arrows that sped toward him.
The six Kauravas closed on Abhimanyu as he fended off their attack with his
sword and shield. Realizing he was hemmed in, Abhimanyu suddenly leapt high
into the air. By his mystic power he remained in the sky. With his golden
armor gleaming in the afternoon sun, he appeared like a great eagle as he roved
about in the air. He displayed various motions known as the Koriska and
others, wheeled about, and brandished his brilliant blue sword. Beneath him,
the Kaurava soldiers were filled with fear, expecting him to fall upon them at
any moment.
Droëa gazed up and fixed his aim on Abhimanyu’s sword. With a razor-headed
shaft he cut that weapon off at the hilt. At the same time, Karëa broke apart
his shield with four swift shafts. Abhimanyu descended weaponless from the
sky and picked up a chariot wheel. Remembering how Kåñëa had run at Bhéñma
holding a chariot wheel, he rushed at Droëa. Covered in blood, his long hair
flying in the wind, and his handsome face covered with dust from the field, the
prince was beautiful as he ran with the wheel raised above his head. Even
though overpowered and outnumbered, the son of Kåñëa’s sister showed no
fear.
As the boy came rapidly toward them with the steel-rimmed wheel, Droëa and
Kåpa broke it into many pieces with their arrows. Abhimanyu snatched up a
heavy mace that lay near him and bounded toward Açvatthämä, whirling the
mace over his head. Seeing him charging at him like the three-eyed Çiva at the
end of the yuga, Açvatthämä jumped off his chariot. As he landed on the
ground, Abhimanyu’s mace descended like a blazing bolt and smashed the
chariot to pieces, killing the horses and charioteer.
With arrows protruding from every part of his body, Abhimanyu whirled
about, wielding his mace. In a matter of minutes he slew Çakuni’s brother
Kalikeya, along with eighty of his followers. He then slew ten chariot fighters,
followed by a dozen elephants and fifty Kekaya warriors. Dushashana’s son,
Durjaya, charged on his chariot toward the prince. Abhimanyu quickly
brought down his mace from above his head and killed Durjaya’s four horses,
pressing them into the earth. Durjaya leapt clear, taking his own mace with
him. Landing on the earth near Abhimanyu, he bellowed out a challenge.
Abhimanyu ran straight at Durjaya. The two combatants fought angrily,
640

striking each other with their maces and producing sounds like thunderclaps.
Finally, in one wheeling maneuver, they struck each other on the head and fell
senseless to the ground.
After a few moments, Durjaya rose and lifted his mace again. Abhimanyu,
fatigued from his long fight against so many opponents, slowly rose to his
haunches. As he tried to get to his feet, Durjaya struck him on the crown of his
head with his full force. Crushed by the blow, Abhimanyu dropped lifeless to
the ground. As the Kauravas looked on, he fell backwards to the earth with his
limbs thrown out.
Droëa and the other Kuru chiefs surrounded the fallen prince. He appeared
like a wild elephant slain by a hunter. Thousands of troops came around him.
They looked on him as if he were a forest fire extinguished after consuming a
forest during the summer season, or a tempest that had died down after
crushing countless trees. He lay with a peaceful expression on his handsome
face, his red eyes gazing up at the sky. Even in death he was as lustrous and
splendid as the full moon in autumn.
The Kauravas roared with delight. Their indefatigable opponent was finally
brought down. They danced about on the field waving their weapons.
Overwhelmed with relief at being delivered from danger, they embraced one
another and laughed loudly.
In the sky many åñis and Siddhas looked down on the prince, who seemed to
them like the moon dropped from the heavens. They let out cries of woe and
exclaimed, “Alas, assailed at once by six Kaurava maharathas, this hero now lies
slain. This was highly unfair.”
All around Abhimanyu was a scene of utter destruction. Innumerable men and
animals lay slaughtered amid shattered chariots, weapons, armor and
ornaments. The field was all but impassable, choked with the dead and the
dying. Arms, legs and heads lay all around in a bloody mass. The battlefield
assumed an awful appearance, which struck terror into the hearts of cowards.
The sun had reached the western horizon just as the prince was slain. With joy,
the Kaurava troops withdrew from the field, leaving Abhimanyu lying amid
the carnage he had created.
Hearing the Kauravas’ cheers, Yudhiñöhira could guess what had happened. As
soon as he saw Jayadratha holding him and his brothers back, he had feared the
worst. His fears were confirmed as news of Abhimanyu’s death reached him.
Yudhiñöhira was distraught. He thought of Arjuna, still contending with the
641

Samshaptakas. Soon he would return. What would he say when he heard that
his young son had been sent alone into the chakravyuha? Yudhiñöhira
trembled. Why had he allowed the boy to go? Only because he feared his own
capture. He had caused Abhimanyu’s death. Turning to his other brothers,
Yudhiñöhira said, “Subhadrä’s heroic son, having never shown his back in
battle, has been slain. The child has now ascended to heaven. After slaying
numerous warriors, he has followed in their wake. Doubtlessly the boy, who
was equal in power to Kåñëa and Arjuna, has reached Indra’s opulent
mansion.”
Although himself afflicted by grief, Yudhiñöhira tried to console his brothers
and followers. “We should not grieve for this boy, who performed pious deeds.
He has surely attained the regions of righteousness that are ever sought by the
virtuous.”
In silent grief the Päëòavas withdrew. As they made their way to their tent,
they moved like wooden dolls. They slumped into their seats and sat gazing at
the ground. Yudhiñöhira wept. “Desiring to please me, the prince penetrated
Droëa’s array like a lion entering a herd of cattle. He forced the best of the
Kurus, all accomplished in weapons and fighting, to turn back. After crossing
the Kauravas’ ocean-like array, killing many of their heroes, Kåñëa’s nephew
has gone to the next world. How can I even look at Arjuna or the auspicious
Subhadrä bereft now of their beloved son? What meaningless, disjointed, and
incoherent words will we speak to Kåñëa and Arjuna when they return?”
Yudhiñöhira held his head in his hands. “Desiring only my own safety, I sent
this child into battle. I have thereby injured Subhadrä, Arjuna and Keçava. A
foolish man seeks his own gain without seeing the painful consequences that
will result. Thus did I act covetously, oblivious to what was sure to happen.
How could I have placed that child, who deserved every luxury and indulgence,
in the thick of battle? Now he lies slain on the cold earth. We too will soon
have to join him, consumed by the grief-laden glances of Arjuna.”
Yudhiñöhira’s cries filled the tent. All the warriors and kings present also wept.
Abhimanyu had been a great favorite among them. Even though he was only
sixteen, he had not hesitated to join his father in the war. His guileless and
cheerful attitude had endeared him to everyone.
“Although he was the son of one who could afford protection from the entire
celestial host, still he has been killed. Surely now the Kauravas have become
afraid. Filled with rage at the unfair killing of his son, Arjuna will annihilate
642

them all. Soon the mean-minded Duryodhana, seeing his forces massacred, will
give up his own life in grief. Alas, beholding the incomparable Abhimanyu
fallen to earth, I can derive no pleasure either from victory, the kingdom, or
even immortality itself.”
As Yudhiñöhira lamented, Vyäsadeva suddenly entered the tent. Yudhiñöhira
composed himself and stood to receive the sage. Along with his brothers, he
worshipped him and offered him a fine seat in their midst.
When Vyäsadeva was seated at his ease, Yudhiñöhira said, “O great Åñi,
Subhadrä’s son has been slain in battle by a number of vicious bowmen who
surrounded him on all sides. A mere child, he has been killed while contending
with overwhelming numbers. Wishing to do us good, he penetrated the hostile
array, but was trapped and slaughtered without mercy while we were held back
by the Sindhu king. Alas, my heart has been seized by an unbearable sorrow.”
Vyäsadeva’s reply was gentle. “O King, O son, you possess superior wisdom and
should not lament like this. Men of your caliber are never confused by
calamity. The heroic Abhimanyu has reached paradise after slaying numerous
enemies. His deeds far exceeded his years and he has attained everlasting fame.
Why do you grieve? O Yudhiñöhira, no creature can violate the law of death.
Death takes gods, Gandharvas, Dänavas, and all others away without fail.”
Comforted by Vyäsadeva’s presence, the Päëòavas listened to his soothing
words. When he stopped speaking Yudhiñöhira said, “So many of the earth’s
rulers now lie shorn of pride and power. Striving in battle, filled with hopes of
victory, they have fallen into the fire of their enemy’s anger. Now they lie
motionless on the earth. Seeing such slaughter we have come to understand
the meaning of death. O learned sage, why does death take men away?
Wherefrom did death arise? O grandsire, please explain this to us.”
Vyäsadeva closed his eyes. Although he was emaciated and covered with dirt
from his continuous austerities, he shone with a mystical effulgence that
spread around him like the glow of the moon. Sitting cross-legged on the costly
seat, he seemed like a dark gem set in gold. After a few moments, he began to
narrate the ancient history of the origin of death in the world––how Brahmä
first brought it into being. The sage then told the Päëòavas about the many
kings who had succumbed to death in the history of the world, even though
they were rich in asceticism and pious merits.
After mentioning each of the departed kings and describing their sacrifices
and pious acts, Vyäsadeva concluded, “When such personalities had to die,
643

each of them far superior to the prince in point of piety, you should not lament
for the boy. By laying down his life in battle he has gone to regions only
attained by those who perform the foremost of sacrifices. There he will reside
in unending bliss. No enjoyment in this world would be able to entice him
away from where he has now gone, O King. He shines like a god in a splendid
new body. We should grieve for those still living rather than those who have
attained such an end.”
Vyäsadeva exhorted Yudhiñöhira to remain firm and to finish the fight. Grief
achieved nothing other than to reduce the energy of those who indulged in it.
The sage concluded, “Know this as truth, dear child. Rise up and gird your
loins. Having heard about death and about Abhimanyu’s glorious end, give up
your lamentation and remain firm in your duty.”
Yudhiñöhira asked the sage how Jayadratha had been able to hold him and his
brothers in check, and Vyäsadeva told him about Çiva’s boon. “Thus was that
weak king able to achieve this astonishing feat. Had it not been for him, you
would have followed the boy and saved his life. Destiny is supreme, O King. No
man can change fate’s course. Knowing this, take heart and perform your Godgiven duty. Surely the Lord’s inscrutable will is meant for the world’s welfare.
If you simply follow His will, then you will understand everything in time.”
Vyäsadeva stood up and bade the Päëòavas farewell, then disappeared.
Yudhiñöhira was consoled, but he was still worried how to broach the news to
Arjuna. He would be back at any moment. No one would have dared inform
him of his son’s death on his way back to the tent. They would leave it to
Yudhiñöhira to do. The king looked at Abhimanyu’s empty seat, now draped
with his banner. Breathing heavily, Yudhiñöhira watched the tent entrance as
it flapped in the evening breeze.

Chapter 16
Arjuna’s Great Vow
As the sun set, Arjuna asked Kåñëa to drive him back to camp. After slaying
thousands of Samshaptakas, he got down from his chariot and, along with
Kåñëa, offered prayers to Sandhya, the goddess of twilight. The two friends
644

then mounted the chariot and made their way through the deepening darkness
toward Yudhiñöhira’s tent. As they traveled Arjuna suddenly felt an
inexplicable anxiety. He said, “O Govinda, why am I suddenly feeling
misgivings? Why is my speech faltering? I see evil portents all around me and
my limbs are becoming weak. I fear a great calamity has occurred. May all be
well with the king, my venerable superior, and his followers.”
Driving the chariot expertly through the day’s carnage, Kåñëa replied, “Seeing
all these slaughtered Kauravas I think everything fares well with your brothers
and ministers. Do not give way to evil thoughts. Probably a trivial calamity has
taken place.”
Arjuna, still anxious, tried to accept Kåñëa’s words. He said nothing as the
chariot moved across the field. He thought of Droëa. The preceptor had been
intent on capturing Yudhiñöhira. Had he succeeded? Arjuna trembled at the
thought. If anything had happened to Yudhiñöhira, or any of his brothers, he
would be unable to live. Even if it were the dead of night he would challenge
the entire Kaurava army to come out and fight, and he would exterminate
every last one of them.
Within an hour they reached the camp. As they entered its perimeters, Arjuna
looked around and said, “O Janärdana, I do not hear the auspicious sounds of
drums and other instruments signifying our success. The bards and minstrels
are not singing songs describing our victories. Everyone is turning their faces
away when they see me. No one has come forward to salute me in the usual
way. O Mädhava, is everything well with my brothers? Seeing these men so
obviously distressed, my mind is disturbed. Is Drupada well? Has the Virata
ruler encountered a calamity? O you of undeteriorating glory, what has
happened to our warriors?”
Then Arjuna began to suspect the truth. Abhimanyu had always greeted him
when he returned to camp, but today there was no sign of the boy. On his way
back he had heard from some of his soldiers that Droëa had formed the
chakravyuha. He knew there were only two warriors on the field who could
break into the array: Abhimanyu and himself.
Arriving at the royal tent, Arjuna dismounted and went in with Kåñëa by his
side. As he entered, he saw his brothers sitting with downcast faces. No one
said anything as Arjuna walked in. They could not hold his gaze and shifted
uncomfortably in their seats.
Then Arjuna saw his son’s empty seat. His heart stopped. He approached
645

Yudhiñöhira and bowed at his feet. Standing, he looked into his brother’s
downcast face. “O King, you are pale. I also see that Abhimanyu is not here,
nor does anyone welcome me. I heard that today the Kauravas formed the
chakravyuha. Save and except Abhimanyu, no one could have penetrated that
formation in my absence, but he did not know how to get out of it. Did you ask
my son to enter that terrible arrangement? Has that fierce bowman, that slayer
of hostile heroes, after breaking into the enemy ranks and killing thousands,
gone himself to Death’s mansion?”
Arjuna began to cry. Falling to his knees, he cried out to Yudhiñöhira in a
piteous voice. “Tell me how he fell, he who possessed mighty arms and red eyes,
who was born into our race like a lion born on a mountainside and who
resembled Indra himself. How was he slain in battle?”
Arjuna saw tears in Yudhiñöhira’s eyes. His own eyes flooded as he realized
what he had feared most was true. Yudhiñöhira’s silence confirmed it. Taking a
deep breath, Arjuna fought to control his mind. His head fell to his knees and
he sobbed. After a few minutes, he looked up and continued in a broken voice.
“What foolish warriors, urged on by evil destiny, ventured to slay my son? How
has that youth, who resembled the high-souled Kåñëa Himself in prowess,
generosity and Vedic knowledge, been killed? If I do not see that hero, who is
my second self, Keçava’s favorite, and so dearly loved by Kåñëa’s sister, then I
too will become a guest in Yamaräja’s abode. If I cannot behold him, that
modest boy of gentle speech and kind deeds, with curling dark locks, eyes like a
young gazelle, the tread of a furious elephant, and shoulders like a mighty lion,
then I will leave at once for Death’s limitless domain.”
Kåñëa stood by Arjuna’s side and placed an arm around his shoulders. The
Päëòava grieved loudly for some time, describing his son’s many qualities. His
brothers and allies sat in silence, their hearts riven by grief as he continued.
“Although younger, that boy was my superior. He was virtuous, grateful,
obedient to his elders, and always desirous of doing us good. Self-controlled and
sinless, he pursued only the path of piety and truth. He was faithful and
devoted to serving God in all his acts. In battle he would never strike first, nor
would he attack a helpless foe. He was the terror of his enemies and the shelter
of his friends. How has such a boy been slain?”
Arjuna fell to the ground, repeatedly crying out his son’s name. Composing
himself with difficulty, he said, “Today my son lies on the bare earth like one
forlorn, although he was always attended by the most beautiful women. He
646

who was formerly attended by servants and bards chanting his glories is now
attended by jackals and vultures. His face, which was worthy of being shaded
by royal umbrellas, is now shaded by dust and dirt. Alas! How unfortunate I am
to lose you, and how fortunate are the gods to gain you. Surely Yamaräja,
Indra, Kuvera and Varuëa, after receiving you as a welcome guest, are now
making preparations for your worship.”
Arjuna looked up at Yudhiñöhira, who looked back at his brother with
compassion. His eyes bloodshot and his face streaked with tears, Arjuna asked,
“Please tell me, O best of men, has my son gone to heaven? Did he have to
contend single-handedly with numerous heroes and give up his life after killing
them by the thousands? Surely he would have thought of me. Afflicted by the
mean-minded Duryodhana, and by Droëa, Karëa, Kåpa and others, he must
have thought, ‘My father will rescue me.’ I think all those ruthless warriors
felled him while he was calling out to me. Or it may be, as he was conceived in
the womb of a Vrishni princess, that he did not make such exclamations.”
Arjuna censured himself. How had he allowed himself to be taken away from
the main fight? Obviously Duryodhana had concocted a plan that required his
absence. Why had he not seen it? If he had, Abhimanyu would still be alive.
Without thinking about his kinsmen’s welfare, he had rushed off desiring glory
in battle. Now his son was dead.
Arjuna cried out, “Without doubt, my heart is made of stone that it does not
shatter into fragments. It will surely break apart when I hear the lamentations
of Subhadrä and Draupadé. What will I say to those gentle ladies? How can I
tell them that Abhimanyu now embraces the cold ground, weltering in his own
blood? What indeed will I say to Uttarä, his chaste and beautiful wife? The
Kauravas may rejoice only for as long as I do not return to the field. For slaying
my son they will have to grieve as I do now.”
Arjuna turned to Kåñëa. “Why did You not tell me what was happening today,
O Mädhava? Surely then I would have burnt the cruel Kauravas immediately.
How could they aim their deadly shafts at such a tender boy, attacking him
when I was absent? I do not think he found any protector while among those
vicious men. How could You allow this, O Kåñëa?”
Kåñëa comforted his friend with sober words. “Do not give way to grief. This is
the inevitable end of heroes who never think of retreating. Those who know
the Vedas have said that this is the highest and most desirable goal for a
kñatriya who knows his duty. Heroes always covet such an end. There is no
647

better death for a warrior than to fall in battle while facing the enemy.
Undoubtedly Abhimanyu has gone to regions only reached by the most pious
men. Do not lament, for you are plunging your brothers and followers in
sorrow. You know everything and it behooves you to console your kinsmen at
this time. Take hold of yourself and throw off this grief.”
Arjuna turned slowly to Yudhiñöhira. “O lord of the earth, tell me exactly how
my lotus-eyed son was slain.” His voice had become cold. His grief was giving
way to an intense fury. “How did he fight our wicked foes? I will consume all of
them with their elephants, chariots and horses. Why, O brother, did you not
do so yourself? How was my son slain when you, Bhéma, the twins, and so many
other heroes were present? Surely you all possess no prowess. Before your eyes
my son was killed.”
Arjuna gazed at his son’s empty seat. What was the use in blaming anyone for
Abhimanyu’s death? Destiny had willed it, as it willed the death of every living
creature. Yet still it was hard not to see how things might have been different.
Why had he not been by Abhimanyu’s side when he needed him most? Arjuna
shook his head as he continued. “I should rather blame myself. Knowing you all
to be cowards, I went away. Alas, are your weapons and armor mere
decorations? Are your bold words meant only to impress an assembly? All of
you together could not protect my son.”
No one spoke as Arjuna strode over to his seat, his long sword swinging by his
side, the Gäëòéva in his hand. His eyes blazed and hot tears ran down his
cheeks. He sighed repeatedly. No one dared to look at him. Only Yudhiñöhira
and Kåñëa, who were always agreeable to Arjuna, were able to say anything.
After a few moments Yudhiñöhira said, “O mighty-armed one, when you had
gone to fight the Samshaptakas, Droëa exerted himself to capture me. He
formed the unbreakable chakravyuha and advanced toward us, showering his
fire-like shafts in all directions. At that time, I asked your son to penetrate the
formation and allow us all to enter. Without delay the boy rushed forward and
entered the array like Garuòa entering the ocean. We followed him with
upraised weapons, but somehow the puny Sindhu ruler held us in check. We
have since heard from Vyäsadeva that Jayadratha received a boon from
Mahadeva that he would be able to stop us in battle. Your son was alone in the
formation. Six Kaurava maharathas surrounded him. They destroyed his
chariot, armor and weapons. Worn with fatigue, he was finally slain by a
seventh, Dushashana’s son.”
648

Arjuna wailed. Yudhiñöhira paused, then went on. “Before dying, he slew
countless heroes, many of them kings and maharathas. Now he has ascended to
heaven. Through the inscrutable workings of fate, he has attained his destined
end. Thus we have all been plunged into a burning grief.”
Crying out, “O my son!” Arjuna rolled on the ground. Everyone gazed at each
other with vacant eyes. They said nothing as Arjuna expressed his grief.
Gradually, he composed himself and got to his feet. Shivering as if with fever
and wringing his hands, he spoke in a low, controlled voice that seethed with
rage. “I say this truly: tomorrow I will slay Jayadratha, if indeed he does not
forsake Duryodhana in fear of his life. If he stays in the battle and does not
seek shelter of either Kåñëa or yourself, O King, he will die tomorrow.
Whoever tries to protect him––be it Droëa, Kåpa or anyone else––will find
himself struck down by my arrows. That Sindhu ruler caused my son’s death.
For this act of violence toward Abhimanyu and I, he will die.”
Arjuna felt all his anger directed toward Jayadratha, who had already shown
himself to be a despicable wretch when he had assaulted Draupadé. This time
he would not escape. Although Abhimanyu was assailed by six Kaurava
warriors at once and finally slain by Durjaya, it was Jayadratha who was to
blame. Many times warriors found themselves overwhelmed by superior odds,
but their allies and supporters could always come to their rescue. Abhimanyu
would surely have been saved if the Päëòavas had been able to reach him.
Jayadratha’s act was mean and unforgivable. Arjuna clasped his Gäëòéva
tightly. Soon that low-minded Sindhu ruler would reap the result of his hatred
for the Päëòavas.
Looking around at his brothers and allies, Arjuna went on. “If I do not kill that
wretch tomorrow, then may I never attain the regions meant for the righteous.
Let me instead go to the hell reached by those who ravish their own mothers,
or those who are malicious, ungrateful or miserly. Let me reach the dark worlds
inhabited by rapists, slayers of Brahmins, betrayers of trust, men who seduce
other’s wives, who are unkind to guests, and who deceive and cheat others. If I
do not kill Jayadratha tomorrow, then such will be my end.”
Arjuna’s voice seemed to shake the earth. “Now listen to one more vow I will
make. If I do not slay Jayadratha by sunset tomorrow, I will enter blazing fire.
Neither the celestials, Asuras, mortals, winged creatures, Räkñasas, åñis, nor any
other moving or unmoving creature will prevent me from achieving my aim. If
Jayadratha enters the nether regions or somehow ascends to heaven, I will still
649

find him and sever his head from his body. When this night passes away,
Abhimanyu’s enemy will see me as his death personified wherever he goes.”
After solemnly speaking these words, Arjuna violently twanged his bowstring,
producing sounds that reached the heavens. At the same time, Kåñëa, also
excited with rage, blew His conch shell, creating a sound that seemed to make
the universe vibrate.
As word of Arjuna’s vow got round the camp, the sounds of numerous drums
and other instruments could be heard, along with the fierce cries of many
warriors. The whole camp was filled with a joyous uproar. Surely the next day
the Kauravas would face their worst calamity so far. The enraged Arjuna was a
foe to be feared indeed.
***
In the Kauravas’ camp there was much rejoicing. Abhimanyu was one of the
greatest warriors among the Päëòava army. It was almost as if Arjuna himself
had been slain. Surely Arjuna would now be discouraged and lose his taste for
battle. Now that yet another of his sons was slain––this time the beloved
Abhimanyu––Arjuna’s energy would be sapped by grief. Duryodhana praised
Droëa and sat in his assembly to discuss the next day’s strategy. It should prove
easier to encounter their dispirited enemies. Perhaps the same formation could
be employed again. Maybe another powerful fighter could be trapped and slain.
As the Kauravas were speaking, they heard the din from the Päëòavas’ camp,
reverberating like the roar of the ocean. The Kauravas looked at each other in
surprise. Why would the Päëòavas be rejoicing? Should they not be feeling
despair?
Suddenly Jayadratha burst into the tent. His face was a mask of terror. He
stood panting before Duryodhana, sweat running down his face. The Kaurava
chief saw him trembling like a sapling in a storm. He asked him the cause of his
fear and Jayadratha replied, “He who was begotten on Päëòu’s wife by the
lustful Indra, that one of perverse intellect, has vowed to kill me tomorrow.
May good betide you all; I will now return to my home to save my life. Or, if
you wish me to remain, you had better assure my safety. In my view, O King,
you, Droëa, Kåpa, Karëa, and all the other rulers here are capable of saving a
man who is seized by Death himself.”
Jayadratha looked around the assembly with wild eyes. His boon from Çiva
could well prove to be his destruction. He had enjoyed his moment of glory, but
650

now as a result he faced the most deadly danger. Arjuna was famous for
keeping his vows, and he would now be angry. The Sindhu king continued.
“Having heard the Päëòavas’ rejoicings, I am struck with anxiety. Our spies
have told me that Arjuna has vowed either to kill me tomorrow or to enter
fire. Thus the Päëòavas are filled with joy rather than grief. I think it will be
wisest for me to return to my own country. No one can prevent Arjuna from
fulfilling his vow, not even the gods. We are about to suffer the greatest
destruction of our forces yet. Let me now go, my identity concealed.”
Duryodhana laughed. “O foremost of men, do not be afraid. What person can
seek to slay you when you stand amid the kñatriyas assembled here? I will
protect you, along with Droëa, Kåpa, Karëa, Açvatthämä, Çalya, Bählika, and
the other invincible heroes. Together with our troops we will stand between
you and Arjuna. He will not even be able to get near you tomorrow. Drive the
fear from your heart.”
Duryodhana realized that it would be a formidable task to check Arjuna from
fulfilling his vow. At the same time, this was a real opportunity to attain
victory. If Arjuna failed, he would certainly remember his promise to take his
own life. With both Abhimanyu and Arjuna dead, the Päëòavas would then be
finished. Duryodhana looked down at the quaking Jayadratha. It would be
worth deploying the whole army to protect him.
Jayadratha went over to Droëa. “What is the difference between me and
Arjuna in the proficiency of arms? You have taught us both. How is Arjuna
superior to me? Of what should I be wary when the battle comes tomorrow?”
Droëa replied, “I have taught both you and Arjuna equally, but by his practice
of yoga and asceticism, he has become superior to you. Still, I will do
everything in my power to protect you from him. Tomorrow I will form such an
array with all our troops that Arjuna will never reach its end. Even the gods
will not be able to pass the arrangement I will create to protect you.”
Droëa smiled. Jayadratha had only himself to blame for his present
predicament. Like Duryodhana, his hatred for the virtuous Päëòavas would
lead to his destruction before long. He placed a hand on Jayadratha’s shoulder.
“If somehow you should be slain, then you will attain heaven. Do not be afraid
of death. You have performed sacrifices and carried out your sacred duty as a
kñatriya. Therefore, fight without fear, your mind fixed on victory or paradise.”
Although he assured Jayadratha and understood Duryodhana’s mind, Droëa
knew that Jayadratha was as good as dead. Certainly Arjuna alone would not
651

be able to cross the entire Kaurava army, but Arjuna was not alone. With
Kåñëa driving his chariot, he could cross the universe, passing the four
Lokapälas in order to steal the gods’ divine nectar. Even without fighting,
Kåñëa would no doubt find some way to protect His friend. And he would need
to, for the Päëòava hero would face an almost impossible task the next day.
Cheered on by Droëa, the warriors shouted and blew their conches. The
Kaurava leaders began to plan their strategy for the following day. Jayadratha
felt his fear vanish and he set his heart on battle. Perhaps Arjuna’s vow would
be a blessing in disguise. Çiva’s boon may yet prove to be a boon indeed if it
ended up causing the Päëòavas’ destruction.
***
After hearing Arjuna make his vow, the Päëòavas and their followers spent a
little while discussing their strategy and then retired for the night. They would
decide the next day’s battle plans in the morning, after they received
information from their spies as to how the Kauravas were reacting to the news
of Arjuna’s promise.
Arjuna sat alone in his tent, burning with grief and anger. He could hardly
wait for the battle to begin. For over an hour he sat on his bed without moving,
his face covered by his two hands. As he sat shedding tears, Kåñëa came in and
sat down by his side. He spoke softly, but reproachfully. “O Pärtha, without
first seeking My advice you have made a difficult vow. That was rash. You have
placed a heavy burden on your shoulders. Alas, how will we avoid becoming
the butt of ridicule? I have heard from spies that Droëa vows to protect
Jayadratha. He will form a tremendous array guarded on all sides by the best of
the Kauravas. Six mighty maharathas, namely, Karëa, Açvatthämä, Bhurisrava,
Kåpa, Vrishasena and Çalya, will stand in the van of that array. Droëa himself
will stay within a secondary formation, Jayadratha by his side. You will first
need to vanquish those six heroes and pass through a thick array of fighters
before you can come anywhere near the Sindhu king. Then you will have to
fight with the preceptor.”
Arjuna did not reply. Kåñëa placed an arm around his shoulder. “In the
morning we will consult with your brothers and allies. We need to come up
with a strategy to ensure that your vow can be kept. However, O son of Päëòu,
it will not be easy to accomplish.”
Arjuna lifted his head. His voice was almost a growl. “The six chariot fighters
652

you have named are not equal to even half of my power. You will see me cut
apart all their weapons. The Sindhu ruler is a dead man. Before the eyes of his
wailing followers and of Droëa I will sever his head from his body. Even if a
celestial army headed by all the principal gods protects him, even if I must fight
against the personified oceans, mountains, heaven, earth, quarters, their
regents, and all mobile and immobile beings, still You will see him slain by my
arrows. I swear by truth itself that nothing will stop me. Especially with You at
my side, O Janärdana, my success is certain.”
Arjuna continued expressing his determination and confidence for several
minutes. He was prepared to face even Death personified armed with his
irresistible staff. “Tomorrow You will see me rip open the enemy ranks with
blazing shafts, like thunderbolts rending a mountain. Arrows shot with the
speed of the mind will fall by the tens of thousands from my Gäëòéva. I will not
restrain myself at all. All men will witness the power of the weapons I have
obtained from Yamaräja, Kuvera, Varuëa, Indra and Maheçvara. I will throw
the Brahmä missile and annihilate anyone who tries to stand in my way. The
earth will be filled with the bodies of men, horses and elephants, all bleeding
copiously and deprived of life.”
Arjuna got to his feet and stood before Kåñëa with the Gäëòéva clasped in his
hand. His face was flushed and his lips trembled. “The sinful Jayadratha has
forgotten his kinship with us and bears us only hatred. I will strike him down
tomorrow, making his friends and followers grieve.”
Arjuna ached for the battle to begin. His arrows seemed ready to leap from his
quivers and the Gäëòéva vibrated in his hand. He could not understand
Kåñëa’s apprehension. What possibility was there of the Kauravas standing
against him in his present mood? He placed his bow in its golden case.
Unfastening his gleaming armor, he asked, “O lord, master of the senses, why
do You admonish me? You know my prowess and You know Your own power.
When we are together, what are we not able to achieve? Jayadratha may be
counted among those already slain in battle. I am Arjuna, of unwavering vows,
and you are Näräyaëa. Truth resides in the Brahmins, humility is seen in the
pious, prosperity attends sacrifice, and victory, O Keçava, is always with You.
When this night has passed, You should ready my chariot, filling it with every
weapon. A great task is at hand.”
Arjuna and Kåñëa sat together breathing like a pair of infuriated serpents.
Afflicted by grief, Arjuna felt unable to rest. Kåñëa also displayed great sorrow.
653

While the Päëòavas had been in the forest He had helped raise Abhimanyu,
acting as a loving father toward His nephew. The boy had always been with
Him. Kåñëa had personally taught him many of his martial skills, and they had
often hunted and sported together in the forests around Dwärakä.
Seeing both Arjuna and Kåñëa excited with rage, the gods headed by Indra
became anxious. Surely the universe might be destroyed if they both gave vent
to their anger. Many ill omens were seen. Dry winds blew, thunder rumbled in
the clear sky, and thunderbolts fell to earth. The earth trembled and rivers
flowed backwards, while the cries of jackals and crows echoed everywhere.
Arjuna asked Kåñëa to go to the women’s quarters and console Subhadrä. The
Vrishni princess, along with Draupadé and other royal ladies, had come to the
battlefield to be with their husbands. Kåñëa went to her tent and found her
lying on the ground, weeping like a female osprey. Taking a seat near her, He
spoke consolingly. “O daughter of the Vrishni race, do not give way to this
grief. Abhimanyu has met the end always sought by heroes. After slaying the
enemy by the thousands, he has ascended to the highest regions of heaven.
Although a mere youth, he has attained a destination difficult to reach even
for accomplished yogés. Surely this is his good fortune. O amiable one, you are
the wife of a hero, the daughter of a hero, and the mother of a hero. Born also
into a race of heroes, you should not lament one who has met a hero’s death.
Nor will his death go unavenged. Tomorrow you will hear that Arjuna has
severed Jayadratha’s head from his trunk. Rise up and renounce your fever of
grief. You must now console your daughter-in-law, beloved sister.”
Subhadrä looked at Kåñëa from where she lay. Her eyes were red and her face
streaked with mascara. Her ornaments were strewn around her on the floor.
Nearby her garland lay crushed. Her words were frequently interrupted by
sobs.
“Alas, son of my unfortunate self, why did you go to war? O son, equal to
Arjuna in battle, how could you perish? How can I see your dark and handsome
face now soiled with dust and smeared with blood as you lay on the cold
ground? Having the Päëòavas, Vrishnis and Païchälas as your protectors, by
whom have you been slain like one helpless? Fie on Bhéma’s strength, Arjuna’s
prowess, and the Païchälas’ might! What use is their power when they could
not save a child from dying before their eyes? Today I see the earth vacant and
destitute of all beauty for I cannot see my son. My eyes are blinded by grief and
my mind is utterly confounded. O my child! You were like a hoard of treasure
654

seen and lost in a dream. Alas, everything in this world is fleeting and unreal,
like foam on an ocean.”
Kåñëa remained silent as His sister poured out her sorrow. She tossed about on
the costly carpet covering the floor of her tent. Her silk garments were in
disarray and her raven-black hair hung loose and disheveled. Beating her
breast, Subhadrä cried out to her slain son. “O my child, how shall I comfort
Uttarä? Overwhelmed by sorrow she resembles a cow bereft of its calf. Surely
the ways of destiny are mysterious, for even though you had Keçava as your
protector, you have been slain by evil men. O beloved son, may you attain that
end reached only by the most pious men, that end which is reached by those of
the strictest vows, who are self-controlled, modest, truthful, charitable, and
devoted to duty. May you ascend to the eternal regions that belong to men who
are faithful and always devoted to the Lord’s service, who have given up all
selfish thoughts and live only for the welfare of others.”
As Subhadrä rolled about in grief, Draupadé came into her tent, accompanied
by Uttarä. Also lamenting, they dropped to the ground next to Subhadrä. The
three ladies appeared like three mad creatures as they fell about uttering pitiful
cries.
With tears in His eyes Kåñëa sprinkled cool water on their faces, His voice
shaking as He addressed them. “O Subhadrä, throw off this grief. O Päïcälé, O
Uttarä, take heart. O most beautiful ladies, rather than lament we should pray
that all the members of our race attain the same state that Abhimanyu has
attained. All other warriors united can only dream of achieving the feats he
has single-handedly accomplished in battle.”
Kåñëa took His leave from the ladies and went back to Arjuna’s tent. It was
past midnight and the servants had spread out an auspicious bed of kusha grass
decorated with flower garlands and sprinkled with perfume on a thick rug.
With His weapons by His side, Kåñëa reclined peacefully, placing His head on
His arm. Within the tent Brahmins performed the usual nightly ceremony of
offering the victims of battle to Çiva, so that he might guide them safely to
their next destination.
Arjuna worshiped Kåñëa with various offerings, then lay next to Him on his
own bed. Kåñëa said, “O son of Påthä, rest now. You will have to achieve
tremendous feats tomorrow.”
Arjuna was assuaged by Kåñëa’s care. He lay gazing up at the high roof of the
tent. His mind flickered between thinking of Abhimanyu and thinking of
655

Jayadratha. That sinful wretch should have been slain long ago when he first
insulted Draupadé. This time Yudhiñöhira would not protect him. He would
soon taste the fruits of his wicked inclinations. As Arjuna lay thinking in this
way, he fell into a fitful sleep.

Chapter 17
Arjuna Slaughters the Kauravas
Some time before sunrise on the thirteenth day of battle, Yudhiñöhira rose
from his bed, awoken by bards and minstrels singing his praises. Melodious
songs were played as the Päëòava king performed his ablutions, assisted by a
hundred servants who fetched water in golden jars as well as soaps, unguents,
perfumes and other items. His limbs were daubed with pure sandalwood paste
as Brahmins chanted holy Vedic mantras. Servants then brought Yudhiñöhira
his fine white garments and adorned him with fragrant lotus and champaka
flower garlands.
Having bathed and dressed, the king faced east and worshipped Kåñëa with
Vedic prayers, his heart absorbed in love. After this he went before the sacred
fire and made offerings to Viñëu and the gods, invoking auspiciousness and
praying for victory in battle.
Emerging from his tent, Yudhiñöhira saw a number of aged and venerable
Brahmins. The old sages, a thousand in number, were accompanied by a further
eight thousand disciples. They uttered benedictions and blessed Yudhiñöhira,
who distributed charity to them. The king gave away jars of gold to each of the
Brahmins, as well as cows, horses, cloth, honey, ghee, fruits, and other valuable
items.
Then he entered the council chamber. He sat upon a throne made entirely of
gold and covered with a precious silk carpet. When he had taken his seat, his
orderlies came and decorated him with ornaments of pearl, gold, and priceless
gems. The monarch shone like a mass of clouds emitting bright flashes of
lightning. He was fanned by gold-handled yak-tail whisks as white as the moon.
Bards again sang his praises and the music and voices of the Gandharvas could
be heard in the sky. Outside the tent a tremendous clatter of chariot wheels
656

and horses’ hooves resounded as the other kings and warriors came to council.
Conch-shell blasts filled the air, and the measured march of infantry seemed to
shake the earth as the troops headed for the field.
As the kings took their places in Yudhiñöhira’s council chamber after first
bowing before him, a guard informed him that Kåñëa had arrived. Yudhiñöhira
ordered that He be shown in immediately and offered a fine seat by his side.
He personally stepped down from his throne as Kåñëa entered and showed Him
to His seat. Taking the offering of arghya held out by a Brahmin, Yudhiñöhira
performed the worship. Kåñëa waved to Sätyaki to sit with Him, and the two
Yädavas shared the same large throne next to Yudhiñöhira.
When he had again taken his seat, Yudhiñöhira began by addressing Kåñëa. “O
Madhusüdana, have You passed the night in happiness? Like celestials relying
on the thousand-eyed Indra, we depend on You alone for victory and indeed
for eternal happiness. Our very existence depends upon You. If it pleases You,
therefore, we ask that You somehow manage things so that Arjuna’s vow is
fulfilled. Help us to cross this ocean of grief and wrath. O Mädhava, become
our raft so that we do not sink in the vast Kuru sea. All glories to You, O
Kåñëa, O Viñëu, O Hari, O Janärdana. You are the foremost of all men. Närada
has pronounced You to be the best and most ancient of all beings. You always
protect Your surrendered servants, and we seek Your protection today.”
Kåñëa appeared pleased as Yudhiñöhira stopped speaking. He replied in a
sonorous voice, “In all the worlds, including the heavens, there is no archer
like Arjuna. That handsome hero will slay all your enemies. I will drive his
chariot and will do everything in My power to assist him. Today you will see
Jayadratha compelled to travel that road from which no traveler ever returns.
Vultures, hawks and jackals will feast on his flesh tonight. O Yudhiñöhira, even
if Indra and the gods come to his aid, he will still be delivered to Death’s
domain. Tonight, the victorious Arjuna will report to you that he has slain the
Sindhu monarch. Dismiss your grief and be attended with prosperity, O King.”
As Kåñëa spoke, Arjuna entered the assembly. He came and bowed before
Yudhiñöhira, who immediately stood to embrace him. Still holding his brother,
Yudhiñöhira said, “It is evident, O Dhanajaya, that you will have a great victory
today. Your appearance at this moment portends it, as does Kåñëa’s infallible
blessing.”
Arjuna touched his brother’s feet and went over to Kåñëa, bowing low with
folded palms. He then took his seat and the Päëòavas discussed the day’s
657

strategy. They had heard from their spies of Droëa’s plans to create a
formation surrounding Jayadratha, protected at every point by the foremost
warriors. Deciding upon a suitable counter-array, the Päëòavas got up and
went out for the battle.
Kåñëa fetched Arjuna’s chariot and equipped it with every kind of weapon.
Dressed in effulgent gold armor, He drove the chariot to the royal tent. Arjuna
came out and circumambulated the chariot with his Gäëòéva in hand. He then
mounted the chariot like the sun rising over the eastern mountains. Sätyaki
climbed aboard with him and the chariot moved off. Setting out to slay
Jayadratha, Arjuna appeared like Indra accompanied by Varuëa and Sürya
setting out to kill the Asuras.
Countless musical instruments rang out, while bards and Brahmins sang
Arjuna’s glories and uttered benedictions. Hearing the chants and cheered by
the other warriors as he went toward the battlefield, Arjuna felt confident and
eager for the fight. From behind him a delightful breeze blew, bearing the
fragrance of celestial blossoms.
Arjuna said to Sätyaki, “I think my victory today is assured. These signs all
around us point to it and my mind feels enthused. I will soon penetrate to the
spot where Jayadratha stands, passing through all the heroes who desire to see
my prowess and then go to Yamaräja’s domain. O mighty-armed one, do not
forget your prime duty to protect Yudhiñöhira. None can vanquish you in
battle, and the king is as safe with you as he is with me. With you by his side, I
will be able to attack Jayadratha with a peaceful mind.”
Sätyaki said that he would not leave Yudhiñöhira as far as he was able. The two
heroes continued to talk as Kåñëa drove the chariot toward the Kurukñetra
plain, where millions of men had already assembled for the battle.
***
As sunrise approached, Droëa issued orders for his great formation. Calling for
Jayadratha he said, “I will detail Karëa to stand by your side. He will be
supported by my own son, as well as Çalya, Kåpa and Vrishasena. They will
have with them a force of one hundred thousand horsemen, sixty thousand
chariots, twenty thousand infantry, and fourteen thousand elephants. This
detachment, with you in its midst, will form itself into an array shaped like a
needle. The formation will be protected by a second, impenetrable array in the
shape of a lotus. I will be at the head of that second formation. The king and
658

his brothers, as well as numerous other powerful warriors, will stand in that
array. At the front of these two formations I will create a semi-circular array
filled with warriors who will not retreat. At the foremost point before that will
be an array resembling a cart, which will serve to draw in and capture any
soldiers foolish enough to assail us from that direction. Indeed, I do not think
that even Çakra, thunderbolt in hand, could reach you today.”
Comforted, Jayadratha made his way to his position in the army. As he passed
through the troops they shouted out their battle cries. “Where is Arjuna?” they
cried. “Bring Bhéma here, I am ready to do battle!” The warriors whirled their
polished maces and brandished their swords. Maddened with pride, they roared
tumultuously. They slapped their arms and blew their conches, proceeding
swiftly and joyfully toward the battlefield.
Gradually, carefully following Droëa’s detailed directions, the Kauravas formed
themselves into the strategic array he had designed. It stretched for miles and
appeared like a collection of clouds covering the earth. The wonderful
configuration appeared so formidable that no one could imagine penetrating it.
At its rear stood Jayadratha, heavily guarded on all sides.
Droëa, clad in a coat of white mail and a beautiful turban, moved about
making the final arrangements. Seeing his shining chariot, with its crimson
horses and its standard bearing the mark of a Brahmin’s waterpot and deerskin,
the Kauravas were delighted.
In the sky the Siddhas and Cäraëas looked down with wonder at the Kauravas,
spread out in their tremendous formation. “Surely they will devour the whole
earth with its mountains, oceans and forests.”
Duryodhana looked at his army with satisfaction. He still had many infantry,
chariots, cavalry and elephants left. He gazed across at the advancing Päëòava
forces. How would Arjuna ever fulfill his vow? His promise had been rash. By
sunset the war would be over. Taking up his ornate bow, Duryodhana ordered
his charioteer to move off, eager for the battle to begin.
As the Päëòavas approached their enemies they saw Droëa’s formation with
amazement. It seemed to have no end and it appeared like the ocean rolling
across the battlefield toward them. Undaunted, Arjuna said, “O Kåñëa, just see
Droëa’s attempt to thwart my vow. The front lines are at least twenty miles
across, and it must be twice that distance deep. But I will seek out its weak
points and break it apart with fiery arrows. Before Droëa’s eyes I will cut down
the sinful Jayadratha.”
659

As the two armies converged, one of Duryodhana’s brothers, Durmarshana,
came to the front of the Kauravas. Roaring furiously he exclaimed, “Watch as I
check Arjuna, like the shore resisting the ocean. Let everyone see the irate and
indominatable Dhanaïjaya collide with me, like one mass of rocks colliding
with another. O warriors, stay or turn back as you wish. I will fight with the
Päëòavas alone to enhance my glory and fame.”
Durmarshana rushed across the field to begin the fight. He saw Arjuna’s
chariot at a distance, with Hanumän sitting on its towering standard. The
roars of the celestial ape could be heard throughout the Kaurava forces. They
mingled with the sounds of Arjuna’s conch, which he blew repeatedly as he
closed upon his foes. Both sounds filled the Kauravas’ hearts with anxiety as
they again remembered how fiercely Arjuna fought when he was angry. Droëa
had his musicians strike up cheering melodies, but a deafening clamor already
filled the field.
Arjuna saw Durmarshana charging at him and he said, “Drive swiftly toward
the Kaurava prince, O Mädhava. I will meet his challenge and send him and all
his followers reeling.”
Kåñëa drove the chariot straight into the mouth of the cart formation at the
Kauravas’ head. As Arjuna faced Durmarshana he was immediately surrounded
by thousands of chariot fighters. Thinking of his son he began to slay them
mercilessly. Worked up to the highest pitch of fury, he scattered his shafts in
all directions. The opposing warriors’ heads fell like lotuses torn from their
stems. Gold armor spattered with blood lay gleaming on the ground. Chariots
were smashed, elephants slain, and horses deprived of their riders. Headless
infantrymen ran about wildly, still clutching their swords, before falling lifeless
to the earth.
After a brief fight, Durmarshana was routed and put to flight. Wounded all
over his body, his armor shattered and standard broken, he raced away from his
enemy. Arjuna spared his life only to honor Bhéma’s vow.
In a short time Arjuna had slain several thousand of his foes. His chariot
hurtled about with such speed that the Kaurava troops felt there were
hundreds of Arjunas. In their fear and confusion, they struck and killed each
other. Crying in agony and steeped in blood, many heroes lay dying on the
field. Whoever came toward Arjuna soon found himself pierced by a fatal
shaft. No one could detect any weakness in him as he danced on the terrace of
his chariot, his bow always drawn to a circle. Kåñëa’s driving was unrivalled
660

and He constantly thwarted the Kauravas’ attacks.
Droëa and the other Kaurava chiefs were astonished to see Arjuna
annihilating their troops, even as the sun destroys darkness. The killing of
Abhimanyu had clearly turned him into a different person. He had been
formidable before, but now he was fighting with a frenzied passion, showing no
quarter. The warriors surrounding him broke and ran.
Seeing Arjuna pressing steadily through the Kaurava ranks, Dushashana came
forward on his chariot and challenged him. He was supported by a mighty
division of elephants that quickly surrounded Arjuna. The tuskers had large
bells around their necks which clanged as they raced about the field.
Arjuna sent up a fierce war cry and began to kill the elephants with winged
arrows that pierced their tough hides. Like a killer whale plunging through the
ocean, he penetrated the elephant division and brought them down one after
another. He struck each elephant with a hundred shafts and they fell like cliffs
broken by thunderbolts. Gushing streams of blood, they dropped, screaming, to
the ground. The warriors fighting on their backs were swept off by Arjuna’s
shafts, which penetrated two or three of them at once.
Seeing the elephant force in disarray, Dushashana fled. It was impossible to
face Arjuna in his present mood. The Kaurava raced up to Droëa and sought
his protection. Droëa licked his lips and moved through his forces toward
Arjuna. Seeing his preceptor advancing upon him with upraised weapons,
Arjuna folded his palms and bowed his head. He called out, “O Brahmin, wish
me well and bless me. I desire to pass through this impenetrable array. You are
the same to me as my own father, or as Yudhiñöhira or Kåñëa. Thus even as
Açvatthämä deserves your protection, so do I. Let me pass. I wish to slay the
Sindhu ruler. O lord, O best of men, see to it that my vow is fulfilled.”
“O Bhibatsu, you will not be able to conquer Jayadratha without first defeating
me.”
Droëa then shot a hundred arrows at Arjuna in swift succession. The Päëòava
skillfully countered them and replied with a hundred of his own. Droëa warded
off Arjuna’s attack with ease and at once pierced both him and Kåñëa with
shafts resembling blazing tongues of fire. He cut Arjuna’s bowstring and
covered his chariot with arrows. Arjuna attacked him back with six hundred
arrows fired with such speed that it appeared as if he had shot only one shaft.
He followed that with another seven hundred, then a thousand, then ten
thousand, training them on the warriors who supported Droëa.
661

Seeing him again slaying large numbers of the Kaurava troops, Droëa pierced
Arjuna’s chest with a powerful barbed arrow. Hit hard by that shaft, Arjuna
trembled like a mountain during an earthquake. Quickly regaining his
composure, he broke off the arrow which was embedded in his armor. He
focused his attention on Droëa and sent showers of arrows at him. Droëa
replied by covering Arjuna with shafts. Neither Arjuna nor Kåñëa nor their
chariot was visible as Droëa assailed them with countless arrows, which fell in
unbroken lines.
Working hard, Kåñëa drove the chariot away from Droëa’s arrows. As the
chariot came clear of the attack he said, “O Pärtha, there is no time to waste.
Jayadratha still stands a great distance from here. This battle with Droëa could
go on all day. Leave him aside and proceed ahead with all speed.”
Arjuna realized that Kåñëa was right. There was little chance of defeating
Droëa, nor did he relish fighting with him. Once again folding his palms,
Arjuna called out, “O my lord, I will now take my leave. You are my preceptor
and I do not wish to fight with you further. There exists no man in all the
worlds who can vanquish you in battle. Please bless me. I am going on.”
Kåñëa urged on Arjuna’s horses and the chariot raced away, leaving Droëa to
the right. As they passed him he shouted, “Where are you going, Dhanaïjaya?
Have you become afraid?”
Droëa again released volleys of arrows at Arjuna, but Kåñëa drove the chariot
so fast that all of his shafts fell short. With Droëa still calling, Arjuna sped
away, leaving him far behind. He was joined by Yudhamanyu and Uttamaujas,
two powerful Païchälas who had fought their way through to him. They
protected him on either side of his chariot as he rushed forward into the
hostile array.
As Droëa turned to chase Arjuna, the Päëòava commander, Dhristaketu,
challenged him with a roar. Droëa turned to face him and was immediately
struck by a volley of shafts. Droëa’s horses, chariot, and charioteer were all
covered by Dhristaketu’s arrows. Droëa blazed up like an infuriated mountain
lion suddenly roused from slumber. He released a razor-faced arrow that cut
apart his opponent’s bow. Dhristaketu then took up another bow and in an
instant fired a hundred more arrows. Not minding the attack, Droëa shot four
crescent-headed shafts that slew his enemy’s horses and cut down his
charioteer. Dhristaketu leapt from his stationary chariot, mace in hand, and
charged Droëa. Whirling about as he ran, he hurled the mace with all his
662

power and it flew at Droëa spitting fire. Droëa at once shot dozens of hammerheaded shafts that smashed the mace to pieces. Dhristaketu then picked up a
long lance from the earth and threw it violently, but again the Kuru preceptor
cut it down in mid-flight. Droëa then set a long, anjalika shaft on his bow.
Empowering it with mantras, he fired it from his fully-drawn bow and it struck
Dhristaketu on the chest. The shaft pierced right through the Chedi king and
entered the earth behind him.
Seeing his foe falling to the ground, Droëa looked around for Arjuna. The
Päëòava had disappeared into the throng. Droëa decided to make his way
swiftly toward Jayadratha. No doubt he would get his chance to meet Arjuna
there before too long.
After leaving Droëa, Arjuna plunged into the Kauravas. Like maladies
afflicting the body, he afflicted his enemies with fiery shafts. Roaring and
blowing his conch, he attacked the Kauravas as if demented. He launched
blazing arrows from the Gäëòéva end to end. They fell unfailingly upon men,
horses and elephants, leaving them floundering. Kåtavarmä challenged Arjuna,
setting at nought their long-standing friendship. The Päëòava and the Vrishni
fought. No difference could be detected between the two as they matched
weapon for weapon. It appeared as if Yamaräja were contending with Death
personified. Arrows charged with mantras collided in mid-air with mighty
explosions. Both men circled each other and released a continuous stream of
shafts. Both were pierced in all parts of their bodies as they sought for weak
spots in their foe.
Kåñëa again said to Arjuna. “Do not spare him. You are losing too much time.
Forgetting your relationship with him, crush him at once.”
Charged with Kåñëa’s admonition, Arjuna shot a cluster of shafts at Kåtavarmä
that broke his bow and sent him reeling. Taking his opportunity, Arjuna
rushed past him and pressed on into the Kaurava ranks. As Kåtavarmä came
back to his senses, he was assailed by Arjuna’s two protectors, who kept him at
bay as Arjuna pushed forward.
Then the Kalinga king, Srutayush, charged Arjuna. Whirling a huge mace, he
closed rapidly on the Päëòava. Arjuna sped three dozen shafts at him and the
king took up his own bow, sending fifty arrows back. After an exchange of
shafts, Srutayush leapt down from his chariot and ran at Arjuna with his mace
held aloft. Srutayush, the son of the River Parnasa, had received a boon from
Varuëa that his mace would prove irresistible to all. However, the god had
663

warned him, “Do not attack anyone who is not fighting or this weapon will kill
you.”
In the heat of the battle, Srutayush’s forgot Varuëa’s warning. As he reached
Arjuna’s chariot he swung his mace at Kåñëa and dealt him a great blow. Kåñëa
received the blow on his broad shoulders without shaking, even as a mountain
is unshaken by a tempest. In accord with Varuëa’s words, however, Srutayush’s
mace turned as he lifted it to again strike Kåñëa. It smashed into his own head
and killed him. The Kauravas wailed on seeing the hero killed by his own
weapon. His army fled, crying out in fear.
Sudakñiëa, a Kambhoja prince, challenged Arjuna and fired hundreds of
arrows at him. Arjuna warded off the shafts and Sudakñiëa hurled a dreadful
iron lance, furnished with bells and a long, spiked point. It blazed brilliantly
and emitted sparks as it flew. Hit by the lance, Arjuna fell to his knees in a
swoon. Kåñëa swiftly circled the chariot around as Arjuna recovered his senses.
Getting to his feet, Arjuna licked the corners of his mouth and glared at
Sudakñiëa. He drew the Gäëòéva back to his ear and shot a volley of shafts that
smashed the prince’s chariot. Arjuna then struck him on the chest with an
arrow charged with the force of a thunderbolt. With his chariot falling apart
all around him, the prince dropped headlong to the earth like a tree cut at its
root.
After killing the prince Arjuna encountered the armies of the Surasenas,
Abhisahas, Sinis and Vasatis. Driving into their midst, he dispersed them with
his weapons. Oblivious to the immense volumes of arrows which fell upon him,
which were either struck down by Arjuna’s own shafts or deflected from his
impenetrable armor, he annihilated the warriors as if appointed by Yamaräja to
bring on the end of the yuga. Continuously pressing forward toward
Jayadratha, he left a trail of devastation. Sixty thousand of his antagonists were
slain in less than an hour. The survivors turned and fled, crying out to
Duryodhana and Droëa for protection.
Three of Srutayush’s sons then attacked Arjuna, hoping to avenge their father.
They were powerful fighters. For some time, Arjuna’s chariot was hardly visible
beneath the shower of weapons they launched at him. Arrows, darts and lances
rained down on both Arjuna and Kåñëa. They appeared like the twin peaks of
a great mountain lashed by a violent storm. Gradually, however, Arjuna
checked his opponents’ missiles and his chariot again appeared on the
battlefield. Placing a long golden arrow onto the Gäëòéva, he invoked the
664

Çakra weapon, presided over by the king of the gods. Thousands of shafts went
toward the princes like streaks of lightning, cutting down all their arrows and
other missiles. Those deadly shafts struck the princes with terrible force,
severing their arms, legs and heads from their trunks. Many thousands of
Kaurava warriors supporting the princes were also annihilated.
Having swept away the three Kalinga princes, Arjuna sent up a triumphant cry
and charged into the thick array of Kauravas between himself and Jayadratha.
While the other Päëòavas and their forces engaged with the principal Kaurava
warriors, Arjuna ploughed through their army like a raging fire. All the other
Päëòava fighters were left far behind as he battled his way through the enemy.
Hearing that Arjuna was steadily approaching the Sindhu ruler, Duryodhana
spoke with Droëa, who had resumed his position near the Kaurava prince.
Droëa had thought it best to stay near Jayadratha, supporting his generals. He
would stand a better chance of checking Arjuna when flanked by Kåpa, Karëa
and Açvatthämä. The Päëòava would be hard-pressed to get past him again.
Duryodhana looked apprehensively at his commander, “O preceptor, Arjuna is
crushing our forces. Like a fire among dry weeds, the Dhanaïjaya fire,
strengthened by the wind of his anger, is swallowing up my forces. The
warriors protecting Jayadratha are trembling with fear. You are our only
shelter. Everyone came to the fight today believing that Arjuna would not
escape with his life when you faced him. O illustrious one, it seems you are
attached to the Päëòavas and therefore I have become confused, not knowing
what to do next.”
Duryodhana’s tone was imploring. He looked anxiously about the field. Karëa
stood at a distance with his weapons at the ready, but even he would find it
hard to check Arjuna in his present mood. Only Droëa could stop him, if he so
desired. There was not a warrior in all the worlds who could overpower Droëa
in battle. As Arjuna’s instructor, he knew everything about his mode of
fighting and any possible weakness. There could only be one reason why he
had not already slain Arjuna.
Duryodhana frowned. “To the best of my ability I have always tried to please
you, great Brahmin, but it seems you do not value my service. O man of infinite
prowess, although we are devoted to you, it appears you do not wish us well.
Although you live on our bread, still you injure us. I now see that you are like a
razor soaked in honey. If you had not assured me, I would not have prevented
Jayadratha from returning to his kingdom. Fool that I am, I believed you, and
665

as a result I have virtually offered him as a victim to Death. Indeed, a man
might escape even when he enters Death’s jaws, but there is no chance that
Jayadratha will escape when he faces the infuriated Arjuna in battle.”
Duryodhana wept tears of frustration, trying by any means to incite Droëa to
attack Arjuna. Afraid that he may have had the opposite effect, he spoke more
gently. “O hero, forgive my ravings for I am afflicted by grief. I fall at your feet.
Please save Jayadratha, and indeed our army, from the enraged and invincible
Arjuna.”
Droëa looked wearied. How many times did Duryodhana have to be told? “I am
not offended by your words, O ruler of men. You are the same to me as my own
son. Thus I have tried in every way to assist you. I have tendered you
wholesome advice, but you have not listened. I have made vows for your
benefit, fully intent on keeping them. Before all men I promised to capture
Yudhiñöhira, but it was to no avail. Again, I vowed to protect Jayadratha, but
how is it possible when we face Arjuna and Kåñëa together on one chariot? I
can only endeavor to my full extent; I cannot control the results. Destiny is the
ultimate controller, despite man’s exertion, and the Lord of destiny sits by
Arjuna’s side.”
Droëa shook his head and looked around at the thick ranks of warriors
protecting Jayadratha. Doubtlessly they would all soon lie dead. Arjuna would
spare none in his efforts to slay the Sindhu king, and Kåñëa would do anything
to protect his friend’s promise. He had already shown that enough times.
Duryodhana, however, was faithless and could not understand this simple
truth.
With a sweep of his hand Droëa indicated the forces surrounding him. “These
troops are the last line of defense for Jayadratha. I will not personally confront
Arjuna again, as I am needed here. Nor will he fight with me at present. When
I tried engaging with him, he simply left me standing.”
Droëa could understand that the situation was desperate. The Päëòavas had
thought out their strategy well. Their forces had pressed ahead behind Arjuna,
taking advantage of the chaos he was causing. All the chief Kaurava warriors
were engaged in different parts of the field, either fighting or remaining in
critical positions for Jayadratha’s protection. Someone had to check Arjuna,
but Duryodhana was the only one available.
Droëa continued, “O great hero, you are a mighty maharatha, possessed of fame
and skilled at defeating your enemies. Go to where Arjuna stands. Challenge
666

him yourself and arrest his progress.”
Duryodhana looked up in astonishment. “O preceptor, how do you honestly
expect me to stop Arjuna? I may be able to conquer Indra, armed with his
thunderbolt and heading the host of gods, but it will not be possible to conquer
Arjuna. He has already overcome you and Kåtavarmä, as well as slaying all of
the Kalinga rulers. He has also slaughtered myriads of fierce barbarian fighters.
How will I face him? O great one, I am dependent on you. Please save my
honor.”
“What you say is true, O King. No one can defeat Arjuna. Under normal
circumstances I would not risk you against him, but we face a dire calamity.
Still, you need not fear. I will make you invincible even to Arjuna. I will tie on
your armor in such a way that will make it impenetrable to both human and
celestial weapons. Even if the creatures of the three worlds come together
against you, still you need not fear. Arjuna knows how to do this, but no one
else on this battlefield. Take off your armor, O King, and I will tie it on again
while reciting the ancient mantras uttered by Brahmä himself. You may then
proceed fearlessly against the mighty Päëòava.”
Duryodhana quickly removed his golden armor. After Droëa had touched
water for purification and rinsed his mouth, he replaced it while intoning
mantras. When he had finished he said, “You will now be able to face any foe
with impunity. This celestial armor, invoked by my prayers, was originally
given by Brahmä to Indra. Clad in this armor, Indra fought and defeated
Våtrasura, who had overpowered all the other celestials. O King, go forward
and face Arjuna. There is no time to lose.”
***
As the sun reached the meridian on the thirteenth day, many terrific battles
were being fought between the respected heroes on both sides. Dåñöadyumna
was steadily pressing forward, hoping to meet Droëa in single combat. Bhéma
constantly sought out Dhåtaräñöra’s sons, while Yudhiñöhira engaged with Çalya
and his division of warriors. Sätyaki encountered Bählika, Sahadeva fought
with Çakuni, Ghaöotkaca and his Räkñasa hordes with Alambusha and his
supporters, and the other chief fighters among the Päëòavas fought opponents
of equal might. Fighting with human and celestial weapons, the great warriors
created a beautiful sight on the battlefield as they attacked and
counterattacked each other, displaying all their skills.
667

Meanwhile, Arjuna continued to plow through the tightly packed Kaurava
troops. Hearing news of his progress, Jayadratha shook with fear. Karëa and
Açvatthämä stood by his sides, grim-faced. Still some twenty miles from
Jayadratha, Arjuna fought on remorselessly. With his fiery shafts he created
breaches in the enemy defenses, and Kåñëa would then quickly drive the
chariot through. Wherever the chariot went, the Kauravas were driven back
like darkness at sunrise. Arjuna’s arrows slew men standing a full two miles
away. His well-tempered and polished steel shafts dropped from the sky like
showers of meteors. As Arjuna annihilated the troops who opposed him, Kåñëa
baffled their attacks by His skillful driving, exhibiting various expert
maneuvers as the chariot moved with circular, backwards, and sideways
motions.
Sometimes Arjuna’s progress was swift and at other times slow, but no one saw
him cease fighting for a moment. His bow was constantly drawn and arrows
flew out in endless streams. It took great courage to even look at him.
Thousands of warriors, careless of their lives, rushed against him and perished
like insects falling into a fire.
As the sun began its downward course, Arjuna was attacked by Vinda and
Anuvinda, the two princes of Avanté. Both were maharathas and they came at
Arjuna from both sides at once. Roaring in delight, the fearless warriors
charged at Arjuna, releasing their long-shafted arrows by the hundreds.
Surprised by their sudden appearance, Arjuna was hit hard by more than sixty
arrows. Kåñëa was pierced with the same number and the horses were all
caught with twenty arrows each. Blazing in anger, Arjuna shook off their shafts
and aimed his own arrows at his antagonists, looking for their vulnerable
points. He struck both of them and stopped their forward charge. The two
princes screamed out their battle cries and covered Arjuna with a downpour of
arrows. Ignoring the attack, Arjuna carefully aimed a couple of broad-headed
shafts and cut apart both their bows. With two more arrows he cut off their
standards, and with another dozen he slew their charioteers and horses. All
this happened in a matter of moments. Before the princes could do anything
Arjuna shot a crescent-headed shaft with full force that severed Vinda’s head.
Seeing his brother slain, Anuvinda leapt from his chariot bellowing with rage.
Clutching his mace he raced toward Arjuna. Anuvinda swerved from side to
side as he ran, determined to avenge Vinda’s death. Reaching Arjuna’s chariot,
he brought the mace down with all his power onto Kåñëa’s forehead. Kåñëa
668

remained firm. Utterly enraged to see Anuvinda strike Kåñëa, Arjuna shot five
short shafts that cut off his arms, legs and head. The prince fell down like
fragments of rocks shattered by an explosion.
Seeing both their leaders killed, the Avanté army rushed in a body at Arjuna.
The Päëòava slew them with arrows shot from the Gäëòéva which appeared
like showers of sparks flying up from a great fire. Whirling about in his chariot,
he consumed the army like a fire consuming a forest at the end of the summer.
Thousands of other troops then came at Arjuna. His chariot was completely
lost in the enemy ranks. Kåñëa found it impossible to move in any direction. As
the battle raged on, He said, “O Pärtha, such is the intensity of this fight that
even our celestial horses are becoming weary. We are still far from Jayadratha
and they need rest.”
Fighting continuously, Arjuna replied, “O Mädhava, I will create a path
through these foes. You may then take the chariot through, unyoke the horses,
and let them rest. Draw out the arrows from their bodies while I keep these
warriors in check.”
Arjuna directed a great stream of arrows at his enemies and forced them back.
He then leapt down from the chariot, still releasing countless shafts, and Kåñëa
drove away from him. The Kauravas, seeing Arjuna standing on the ground,
felt that their opportunity for victory had arrived. Roaring even louder, they
ignored Kåñëa and the chariot and trained all their weapons on Arjuna.
Arjuna fought on foot against them. He spun around and shot searing arrows
in all directions. The amazed Kauravas could not find any gap in his defenses.
To approach him was to rush into a solid wall of arrows. The meeting of
Arjuna’s shafts with those of his adversaries created a sheet of fire in the sky.
Scorched, the Kauravas fell back.
Arjuna ran over to where Kåñëa had released the horses. Kåñëa told him that
they needed water and Arjuna replied, “It shall be done.” Drawing back his
bow with a golden arrow fixed to it, Arjuna uttered incantations to invoke the
Varuëastra. He shot the arrow at the earth and at once a large lake appeared,
with swans, ducks, and other aquatic birds swimming amid lotuses and lilies.
The clear pond had been transported from the heavenly regions and was cool
and pleasing. A gentle breeze blew over it and celestial sages were seated on its
banks.
Invoking another mystical weapon, Arjuna constructed a shelter on the
lakeside made entirely of arrows. Kåñëa laughed and applauded him. He led the
669

horses into the shelter where, after drinking their fill, they lay on the grassy
ground. Kåñëa then removed their arrows and gently massaged their bodies.
The Kauravas had rallied and again surrounded Arjuna, who continued to
fight on foot. Showers of arrows, darts and lances fell upon him, but he stood as
firm as Mount Meru. He received the massive downpour of weapons like a
mountain receiving rain. Even as the single fault of covetousness destroys all a
man’s good qualities, he single-handedly destroyed his enemies. Contending
alone against countless warriors seated on chariots, horses and elephants,
Arjuna appeared wonderful. Celestials praised him and the Kauravas
themselves applauded his prowess. They marveled at the sight of the lake and
the shelter he had created. Despite strenuous exertions, they could not
overcome him even though he was disadvantaged by the loss of his chariot. His
speed, lightness of hand and agility were too great. As he held off the Kaurava
forces, Kåñëa harnessed the horses and drove up to Arjuna’s side. As He did so,
the mystical lake, with its birds, aquatics and åñis, vanished.
Mounted again on his chariot, Arjuna sounded his conch. Kåñëa urged on the
horses, and the chariot rushed into the thick of the Kauravas, with Arjuna
spraying deadly shafts on all sides. Like a storm agitating the ocean, he created
havoc among the enemy ranks. The Kauravas were beaten back and unable to
check his progress. Some of them called out, “Fie upon Duryodhana! It is his
fault that the earth now faces such a calamity. These two heroes will spare no
one.” Other Kauravas said, “Dhåtaräñöra should begin the preparations for
Jayadratha’s last rites. The Sindhu ruler will be killed today.”
Arjuna pressed forward relentlessly. Only four hours remained until sunset and
he still had ten miles of troops to cross. The bravest of the Kauravas rushed
against him, but like rivers entering the sea they did not return. Other
cowardly warriors, like atheists turning away from scripture, turned back from
the fight, thus incurring condemnation and sin.
The fire-colored chariot Kåñëa drove appeared like Sürya’s chariot driven by
Aruna. It tore through the Kaurava ranks. Rested and refreshed, the horses
raced ahead, seeming to rise up into the sky at every moment. Arjuna and
Kåñëa appeared like two fiery suns risen together at the end of the age. Anyone
coming near them was burnt by the fire of Arjuna’s weapons and fell lifeless to
the earth. The Kauravas facing Arjuna became dispirited and hopeless. They
struggled vainly to check him from reaching Jayadratha, but in less than an
hour Arjuna could see in the distance Droëa’s tall standard. With a
670

triumphant shout he said, “See there the preceptor’s banner, O Mädhava. I
think we are drawing close to the Sindhu king. He cannot be more than a few
miles away.”
Kåñëa again advised Arjuna to circumvent Droëa so as not to lose time, but
Droëa had already seen him and was shooting arrows that flew more than two
miles and pierced both him and Kåñëa. Bleeding from their wounds, they
appeared like two flowering karnikara trees. Kåñëa drove the chariot away from
Droëa’s attack, placing a body of Kaurava troops between them. He then
moved in a great circle around Droëa’s division. Arjuna continuously launched
his blazing shafts in unending lines that struck down men, horses and
elephants alike.
As Arjuna came within a few miles of Jayadratha, he was suddenly met by
Duryodhana. With his impenetrable armor shining brilliantly, the Kaurava
prince sent up a mighty roar and charged. Drawing up his chariot at a short
distance from his enemy, he shouted out a challenge.
Kåñëa stopped the chariot and said, “Behold Dhåtaräñöra’s powerful son
standing fearlessly before you. He has constantly hated the Päëòavas and is an
accomplished warrior, capable of contending with innumerable warriors at
once. I think, O sinless one, that the time has come when you should fight with
him. Upon him rests victory or defeat. Vomit upon him the venom of your
wrath, O Pärtha. It is your good fortune that has brought him before you alone.
Why has he risked his life in this way? Surely he will soon regret his folly.
Strike down this evil-hearted one and the war will be over. O Arjuna, kill him
and cut the root of the wicked Kauravas.”
Arjuna stared angrily at the bellowing Duryodhana. “Let it be so. Go closer to
this wretch so that I may punish him with sharpened shafts. I will now avenge
the wrongs he committed against Draupadé.”
Kåñëa drove the chariot toward Duryodhana. Seeing the Kaurava chief
exhibiting no fear, even though there was sufficient cause, many warriors
looked on and applauded. Others cried out in sorrow, considering Duryodhana
to be like a libation of ghee poured into a sacrificial fire. “The king is slain!
The king is slain!” they cried in terror.
Hearing their cries, Duryodhana laughed. “Dispel your fears. I will soon send
these two to Death’s abode.”
Duryodhana taunted Arjuna. “O Pärtha, let me see your prowess. Release all
the weapons you have learned from Droëa and received from the celestials.
671

Watch as I repulse your attack. Then I will sever your head along with
Kåñëa’s.”
Duryodhana immediately pierced Arjuna with three arrows that flew invisibly
toward him. With four more he pierced each of his horses, and with another
ten he struck Kåñëa. With another well-aimed arrow he cut the whip in
Kåñëa’s hand, which fell to the ground in two pieces. Arjuna drew the Gäëòéva
back to his ear and fired four steel-headed shafts that screamed through the
air. Hitting Duryodhana’s armor they fell harmlessly to the earth. Arjuna
released another sixteen arrows which were again deflected from his armor. He
shot twenty more shafts with even more power, but these were also ineffective
against Duryodhana’s armor.
Seeing this, Kåñëa said with surprise, “I have not seen this before. Your arrows,
capable of penetrating the earth, are falling uselessly from Duryodhana’s
armor. Is everything well with you, O Pärtha? Is the Gäëòéva losing its power?
Why are you unable to pierce your enemy? This is not the time to fail. What is
the cause?”
Arjuna understood. Looking at the laughing Duryodhana, he replied, “I think
Droëa has tied on Duryodhana’s armor today. It contains the might of the
three worlds. Only Droëa knows its secret and he has taught it to me. No
weapons can pierce this armor. Surely You know this, O Kåñëa, because You
know everything. Yet see how this fool stands before me. He is like a woman
clad in armor and does not know how to take advantage of his position. Even
though he is protected by an impenetrable coat of mail, I will still defeat him.
Watch as I send him reeling from my attack.”
Duryodhana stood fearlessly in his chariot and called to Arjuna derisively, “Try
again, O Pärtha. I think you are losing your touch.” He fired a thick volley of
shafts that covered both Arjuna and Kåñëa. The Kauravas watching the fight
were delighted to see Duryodhana impervious to Arjuna’s attack. They roared
and beat their drums.
Fending off Duryodhana’s arrows, Arjuna became incensed. With a taut smile
he slew Duryodhana’s four horses. He then broke apart his chariot with a
hundred hammer-headed shafts. Taking another four arrows with extended
points, he empowered them with mantras and aimed them carefully at the
Kaurava. The arrows struck Duryodhana on the tips of his fingers, the only
exposed part of his body, as he was releasing his own shafts. He screamed in
pain as they went under his nails. Dropping his bow he jumped about on the
672

terrace of his chariot, shaking his hand in agony.
Seeing their leader distressed, other Kaurava warriors rushed to his rescue.
They surrounded Arjuna with chariots, elephants and horses. Kåpa, who had
come to Duryodhana’s assistance, took him on his chariot, bearing the emblem
of a bull, and carried him to safety.
Arjuna again set to slaying the Kaurava troops. He soon managed to break free
from his assailants. As his chariot emerged from the enemy array, both he and
Kåñëa blew their conchshells with full power. That sound filled the battlefield
and terrified the Kauravas. Jayadratha also heard it in the distance and froze in
his chariot, looking fearfully in the direction of the sound.
Elsewhere on the field the other Päëòavas had been fighting and destroying
thousands of foes. The losses on both sides were great. The earth again assumed
a terrible aspect, with the bodies of slain men and beasts lying about amid the
wreckage of chariots, armor and weapons.

Chapter 18
Kåñëa’s Mystic Power
From some way off, Yudhiñöhira heard the blast of Arjuna’s and Kåñëa’s
conchshells. Fearful that his brother might be in danger and signaling for help,
he said to Sätyaki, “O grandson of Sini, I think the hour has arrived when you
must do the duty of a friend. You are wholly devoted to our welfare, and
especially to Arjuna’s. O hero, it is said that one who casts off his mortal frame
while fighting for his friend’s cause gets the same result as one who twice gives
away the entire earth in charity. I think Arjuna may now need your help. He
has single-handedly entered the Kaurava array. Please go to where he stands.
There is no one else who can assist him better than you.”
Sätyaki felt torn. Arjuna had specifically ordered him to remain by
Yudhiñöhira’s side and to follow his instructions. Now Yudhiñöhira was asking
him to leave. What would happen if while he was gone, Droëa attacked and
captured Yudhiñöhira? Arjuna would never forgive him. He revealed his
doubts. “O lord of the earth, there is nothing I would not do at your command.
As you have rightly said, I am ever devoted to Arjuna’s service. Thus I am
673

ready to penetrate even into the ranks of heavenly hosts to assist that foremost
of fighters. However, I must remind you of Arjuna’s words to me today.
‘Protect Yudhiñöhira until I return from slaying Jayadratha.’ How can I leave
you? Surely Droëa’s threat still hangs over you since he vowed to take you
captive.
Sätyaki reassured Yudhiñöhira. “Arjuna could not possibly be in any danger
because he is with Kåñëa. Who among the Kauravas could even threaten him?
Surely he has blown his conch after achieving a great victory. Probably he has
come close to Jayadratha. I am sure Arjuna is well, but if you cannot dispel
your anxiety, I will follow him. Nevertheless, without leaving you in the care of
someone able to protect you from Droëa, I cannot leave. Therefore, command
me as you will, O King.”
Yudhiñöhira pointed to the many warriors surrounding him––Bhéma,
Dåñöadyumna, the twins, Draupadé’s sons, Ghaöotkaca, and numerous others.
They would surely be able to hold off Droëa, should he attack. In any event,
the preceptor was likely to be occupied in the attempt to protect Jayadratha.
Seeing Yudhiñöhira’s determination that he go after Arjuna, Sätyaki felt
impelled to leave. After all, what if the Päëòava really did need help?
Although it seemed unlikely that Arjuna was in trouble, Sätyaki felt that if he
did not follow him, he would be censured as a coward. Looking around at the
Päëòava warriors fighting near the king, he said, “In accordance with your
order I will depart. May good betide you, O King. Plunging into the hostile
army, an ocean teeming with arrows, darts and lances, I will soon reach my
teacher and render him whatever assistance he may require. Let your fear be
dispelled.”
After going over to Bhéma and asking him to take his place by Yudhiñöhira’s
side, Sätyaki ordered his charioteer to drive into the Kaurava array in Arjuna’s
wake. He soon saw the trail of carnage the Päëòava had left behind. Fighting
his way past the remaining troops, Sätyaki encountered Kåtavarmä and a
terrible fight ensued between them. Sätyaki fought intensely, determined to
reach Arjuna as quickly as possible, and he soon overcame his opponent. Every
Kaurava warrior who came against Sätyaki was swiftly routed. Passing along
Arjuna’s path, he made rapid progress. Within an hour he sighted Arjuna’s
chariot in the distance, its tall standard appearing high above the battlefield.
Seeing this he took out his conch shell and blew a great blast.
Even after sending Sätyaki to assist Arjuna, Yudhiñöhira was still apprehensive.
674

He spoke with Bhéma. “Out of my own anxiety I have sent Sini’s grandson into
the hostile array formed by Droëa. I now fear for both him and Arjuna. O
mighty-armed hero, you alone are capable of holding the enemy at bay.
Therefore, go swiftly after your brother and Sätyaki. When you reach them
and find them safe, let go a mighty roar. My mind will then be relieved. With
you by their side, nothing will be impossible for Arjuna and his disciple. I will
consider Jayadratha already slain.”
Bhéma laughed. “What danger can there be for Arjuna? But if it is your desire,
then I will go after him. You will soon hear my shout. Let your mind be at
ease.”
Before leaving, Bhéma went over to Dåñöadyumna and said, “I am now
proceeding after my brother. Remembering Droëa’s vow, stay close by the
king’s side. You are born for that Brahmin’s destruction. In your presence
Yudhiñöhira can experience no danger.”
Reassured by Dåñöadyumna, Bhéma charged into the Kaurava ranks. Like
Sätyaki before him, he saw the slaughter Arjuna had wreaked. Going along the
track made by both Arjuna and Sätyaki, his progress toward his brother was
swift. He quickly overcame the fighters who challenged him and soon reached
his brother. Seeing Arjuna’s standard at a distance, with Sätyaki’s chariot not
far off, Bhéma roared tremendously.
Arjuna, who had already met Sätyaki, heard his brother’s roar and said to
Kåñëa, “Here now is the mighty Bhémasena. I do not see how the Kauravas will
be able to protect Jayadratha from me when I am united with my brother and
Sätyaki.”
Arjuna had been surprised to see his disciple. At first he had reproached him,
fearful for Yudhiñöhira’s welfare, but Sätyaki had reassured him that the king
was protected. He saw that Droëa was also tied up in protecting Jayadratha, so
there was no immediate danger for Yudhiñöhira. Arjuna had then embraced his
beloved student, who had performed an amazing feat in passing through the
Kauravas in such a short time. Praising his prowess, Arjuna told Sätyaki to
help him reach Jayadratha.
Only two hours remained until sunset. Arjuna still had to overcome Karëa,
Açvatthämä, and other powerful Kauravas before he could reach Jayadratha.
Doubtlessly Droëa himself would also fight to his full power to protect the
Sindhu king. Duryodhana had recovered from his wounds and had come back
to the fight with many of his brothers. All of them stood between Arjuna and
675

Jayadratha. It was by no means certain that the Päëòava would fulfill his vow.
Now that Bhéma had arrived, however, the Kauravas were shaking like a forest
struck by a gale. Arjuna was bad enough, but when he fought with Bhéma and
Sätyaki, no one would be able to stop him.
The three Päëòava heroes advanced toward the division which formed
Jayadratha’s last line of defense. Karëa came forward to meet them, and Bhéma
challenged him. Karëa rushed at him, furiously releasing hundreds of arrows.
Warding off the shafts, Bhéma replied with a hundred of his own. Both
warriors glared at each other with eyes like blazing coals. They circled one
another in their chariots, their gaze fixed on the other and waiting for his
move. The two antagonists suddenly began shooting showers of deadly shafts.
Their bowstrings cracked like thunderclaps and their arrows struck each
other’s armor with resounding thuds. Neither flinched under their opponent’s
attack nor showed any quarter. The surrounding troops looked on in
amazement. Some of them, seeing Karëa’s dazzling speed, considered Bhéma
doomed, while others, seeing Bhéma’s uncontrolled rage, felt that Karëa’s end
had arrived.
Bhéma assailed Karëa with all his power. He looked at him with unbridled
contempt. Here was one of the prime causes of the Päëòavas’ suffering. This
was the one who had laughed in the dice game and ordered Draupadé to find
another husband. Indeed, it had been he who had suggested she be disrobed.
He had always conspired with the Kauravas to bring about the Päëòavas’
downfall. His mocking words as they left for the forest still rang in Bhéma’s
ears. Now at last he stood against him in battle. Fearlessly, Bhéma closed on
Karëa, stretching his golden bow back to his ear as he discharged his arrows.
He sent so many shafts at his enemy that they screened him from view. Karëa
countered the attack and quickly emerged from the network of shafts. He
pierced Bhéma with nine well-tempered steel arrows that flashed from his bow
like lightning.
Undaunted, Bhéma went even closer to Karëa, constantly releasing steel shafts
that struck him in every part of his body. Intent on smashing Karëa with his
mace, the Päëòava brought his chariot right up to him. As they came together,
Bhéma’s black-hued horses mingled with the milk-white horses of his enemy.
The great horses merging together appeared like beautiful black and white
clouds combining in the sky.
The Kauravas cried out in anguish as they saw the furious Bhéma resolved on
676

Karëa’s destruction. The Päëòava swung his mace and Karëa quickly
countered with his own. The two maces collided with a shower of sparks and a
sound that deafened the onlookers for some moments. Contending at close
quarters, Bhéma and Karëa appeared like a couple of infuriated mountain lions
fighting to the death. Their charioteers pulled back the horses and the two
chariots again broke apart. Both men again took up their bows and fired shortshafted arrows and blazing darts at one another. As they circled each other,
constantly discharging their weapons, they resembled two clouds discharging
rain in the monsoon season. Their arrows, decked with gold, seemed like rows
of maddened swans ranging through the heavens.
Kåñëa and Arjuna both felt that a heavy burden had been placed on Bhéma.
The enraged Karëa was a formidable foe. Although he had encountered the
Päëòavas on several occasions, he had never been in his present mood. Now he
seemed like the lord of death come for the destruction of all creatures. But
Bhéma skillfully held off his attack. Everyone cheered him as he countered
Karëa’s innumerable arrows with his own. As Bhéma and Karëa battled,
Arjuna and Sätyaki maintained a ceaseless attack on the Kauravas. Elephants,
horses and men fell dead all around them, pierced by their irresistible shafts.
Bhéma suddenly cut Karëa’s bow in two parts with a razor-faced arrow. He then
struck down one of his two charioteers and launched fifty straight-flying shafts
at his immobilized foe. Karëa shrugged off the arrows and took up a lance. Like
Indra hurling his thunderbolt, he threw the lance with all his might at Bhéma.
Inlaid with gold and gems, it flew with a glaring brilliance, its tip emitting
orange flames. Seeing it leave Karëa’s hand, Bhéma took out seven crescentheaded arrows and fired them in swift succession. They flew end-to-end and
cut the lance into eight pieces. With a further twenty shafts Bhéma then struck
Karëa on the chest and sent up a great roar.
Without a second’s delay, Karëa took up and strung another bow. He released
a dozen swift arrows while Bhéma was fixing more shafts on his own bow. Even
the celestials were surprised to witness Karëa’s deftness and skill. Moving his
chariot rapidly from side to side, Bhéma’s charioteer Vishoka evaded Karëa’s
arrows, which whistled past the Päëòava. The battle between the two heroes
went on like a fight between two mighty elephants for the leadership of a herd.
They assailed each other untiringly, roaring all the while. Sometimes they
laughed, sometimes they reproached one another, and sometimes they blew
their conches. They flashed scornful glances at each other as they fought, each
677

seeking victory over the other.
Bhéma once again cut apart Karëa’s bow, then immediately slew his four horses
and his second charioteer. Summoning all his strength, he sent a terrific
downpour of arrows that completely enveloped Karëa. His horses and
charioteers slain, and himself struck everywhere and continuously, Karëa was
confounded and did not know what to do. Seeing his friend in such a
predicament, Duryodhana commanded his brother Durmukha to rescue him.
Braving Bhéma’s arrows, Durmukha raced over to Karëa and quickly took him
onto his chariot. But even as Karëa leapt across to the chariot, Bhéma killed
Durmukha along with his charioteer and horses.
Shocked, Karëa quickly circumambulated the dead Kaurava and then ran
across to another warrior’s chariot. As a number of Duryodhana’s other
brothers came to his support, he resumed his assault on the Päëòava. Smiling
to see so many of his sworn enemies before him, Bhéma fought with greater
intensity. He killed another three Kaurava princes and yelled out his battle
cry, making the rest of them shake with fear. In the distance, Yudhiñöhira
heard the victorious shout and was relieved. Everything was clearly well with
Arjuna and Bhéma.
So fierce was Bhéma’s attack that no one could stand before him. Another four
of Dhåtaräñöra’s sons were each killed by a single arrow from Bhéma’s bow.
Finally, even Karëa himself was overpowered and pierced by so many shafts
that he turned and fled.
Bhéma fell upon the Kauravas with a manic fury. Targeting Duryodhana’s
brothers he began slaying them like a lion slaying deer. The Päëòava’s arrows
fell on the Kauravas like poisonous serpents. Remembering all the wrongs they
had committed against him and his brothers, he ruthlessly cut them down. As
he ranged about the field Bhéma came upon Vikarëa. He remembered how he
had fearlessly spoken in Draupadé’s defense during the dice game. The
Päëòavas knew that Vikarëa felt genuine affection for them and supported
their cause, even against his elder brother, but duty had ultimately compelled
him to fight for Duryodhana.
Bearing in mind his vow to kill all one hundred brothers, as well as his duty as
a kñatriya, Bhéma did not hesitate to attack Vikarëa along with his brothers.
With golden-winged shafts he cut down the brothers one after another. Finally
he slew Vikarëa with three arrows. As the prince fell to the earth, Bhéma went
over to him and circumambulated his body. He felt a twinge of sorrow, but
678

thinking of the exalted destination he was sure to attain, he again became
cheerful. The virtuous Kaurava hero had always performed his religious duties
and had died in battle while facing his foes. Doubtlessly he had gone to the
celestial regions.
After paying his last respects to Vikarëa, Bhéma again launched himself into
the fight. Nearby, Sätyaki was driving back Droëa’s troops, moving toward the
preceptor himself, while Arjuna was pressing inexorably toward Jayadratha.
Not much time remained until sunset, and the three Päëòava heroes fought to
the extreme limits of their power.
***
Duryodhana was grief-stricken. Bhéma had just killed more than thirty of his
brothers. He remembered Vidura’s warnings. Why had he not heeded them?
Surely Bhéma was not human, nor was Arjuna. Both of them were annihilating
his forces like Indra and Mahadeva wiping out the Asuras. Not far away,
Sätyaki was single-handedly destroying the Trigarta army. It seemed that all of
the Päëòava warriors were aided by divine power. Perhaps Kåñëa was indeed
the Supreme Person. Duryodhana remembered the Dänavas’ assurances. Even
if those celestial beings were assisting him, it would prove to no avail against an
enemy assisted by God himself. Despite the overwhelming odds, the Päëòavas
were steadily crushing his forces. The greatest fighters in the three worlds were
among his army, but they could make no impression on the Päëòavas. He too
could do nothing, it seemed, even while clad in Indra’s celestial armor.
The prince looked at the sky. The sun was not far from the western horizon.
Perhaps all was not yet lost. Arjuna still had to pass Droëa and his son. If they
were supported by other invincible Kaurava warriors, then Arjuna may well be
thwarted. Duryodhana urged his charioteer to drive quickly to Droëa. One last
strategic effort was needed. He and the preceptor could form all the great
fighters in the vicinity into a solid line to protect Jayadratha. Surely even
Arjuna would not have enough time to fight his way past Droëa, Karëa, Kåpa,
Açvatthämä, Çalya and a dozen other warriors, all standing together.
As Duryodhana raced toward Droëa, Sätyaki fought with the powerful Kuru
hero, Bhurisrava. As they encountered each other both men bore in mind an
old enmity between their two fathers. Sätyaki’s father, Sini, had once defeated
Somadatta, Bhurisrava’s father, in a fight at a svayaàvara. Sini had dragged
and kicked Somadatta in the presence of many kings. After this, Somadatta
679

had pleased Çiva and received a boon that his son would do the same to Sini’s
son. Now the two sons were meeting in battle for the first time. They traded
arrows by the thousands, but neither could gain an advantage over the other.
Both warriors hurled lances and javelins with all their power, but saw their
opponent unfailingly cut them down with well-aimed arrows. Roaring like a
couple of bulls, they contended at close quarters. Both men’s horses and
charioteers were slain and their chariots smashed to pieces.
The two dauntless fighters jumped clear of their broken chariots. They drew
out their sky-blue swords from their jeweled scabbards. Holding bull-hide
shields inlaid with gold and silver carvings, they slowly circled one another. As
they came together they displayed various skillful motions, describing circles
and moving swiftly from side to side. They leapt into the air and swung their
great swords, striking each other with all their power. The clash of their swords
rang out across the battlefield. Sparks flew up as the weapons collided or fell
upon the fighters’ armors. Both warriors thrust and parried with a speed and
skill that amazed the onlookers, who shouted out praise and encouragement to
both men. Suddenly, with one mighty blow, both swords shattered. Throwing
them aside, the two men fell to wrestling. They struck and seized each other,
rolling about on the ground with grunts and roars. Displaying every kind of
wrestling skill, they fought on, each determined to kill the other.
Gradually, Sätyaki tired. It had taken a superhuman effort to reach Arjuna,
and that was now taking its toll. Bhurisrava saw his chance and he seized his
opponent’s hair. Dragging him across the field, the Kuru warrior repeatedly
kicked and punched him.
Not far away Kåñëa saw what was about to happen and he said, “Quickly, save
your disciple who has become exhausted while fighting for your good. See now
the danger he faces.”
Arjuna looked across at Sätyaki. Bhurisrava had picked up a discarded sword
and was raising it ready to cut off his enemy’s head. Seeing Sätyaki’s perilous
position Arjuna at once placed a razor-headed arrow on his bow. Releasing it
with full force, he cut off Bhurisrava’s arm just as he brought down the sword.
The arm, still clutching the sword, dropped to the earth like a five-hooded
serpent falling from heaven. Bhurisrava, with blood spurting from his shoulder,
looked around in anger and surprise. Who could have so flagrantly ignored the
rules of combat? To attack an enemy without warning was unthinkable.
Seeing Arjuna nearby, Bhurisrava realized it had been him. Shocked, he
680

reproached the Päëòava. “Alas, O son of Kunté, how could you perform such a
cruel and heartless deed? You were not engaged with me, but still you covertly
cut off my arm. Have you learned this from Droëa, Kåpa, or perhaps Indra? I
think not, for none of those personalities could ever approve such an act. Nor
could you, born in a noble line, have performed this mean deed of your own
accord. I think rather that this was done at the instigation of the deceitful
Kåñëa. The Vrishnis are a race of low and mean-minded men, ever given to
shameful conduct. Why have you chosen to befriend them, Arjuna? Just see
the result.”
Moving closer to Bhurisrava, Arjuna called out, “It is evident that with the
body’s decay the intellect also suffers, since, O hero, you have directed so many
useless reproaches at us. You know well that I am fully aware of the codes of
combat, as well as the meaning of all moral precepts. How could I commit a
sinful act? Kshatriyas fight their foes while supported by their own men. Why
then should I not protect Sätyaki, who is fighting on my behalf, careless of his
own life? Indeed, it is my first duty to afford him protection. Had I stood by
and watched you kill him, then I would have been guilty of sin.”
Bhurisrava dropped to his knees and held his wound. He listened in silence as
Arjuna continued. “You were prepared to kill Sätyaki when he was weaponless,
fatigued, and fallen to the earth. Seeing this I acted swiftly to save him. As
Sätyaki was unprepared for your assault, so you were unprepared for mine. You
should not censure me. Rather, you should reproach yourself for failing to
guard against an attack while standing on the battlefield. Tell me, O mightyarmed warrior, how you would have acted toward your own dependent in such
circumstances?”
Bhurisrava, whose lifeblood was quickly ebbing, made no reply. Deciding to
give up his life while absorbed in mystic meditation, he used his left hand to
spread out a bed of arrows. With difficulty he gathered the shafts and placed
them together in a makeshift seat. As he sat on the arrows, his eyes fixed on
the sun, all the other warriors on the battlefield stopped fighting out of respect.
The Kauravas then rebuked Kåñëa and Arjuna.
Unable to tolerate their abuse, Arjuna shouted back, “It is my solemn vow that
no one on my side shall be slain as long as I am in a position to protect them. It
is surely not right for you or Bhurisrava to condemn me for saving an unarmed
man from an armed antagonist. But, O great heroes, who would not condemn
the killing of the unarmed and careless Abhimanyu by a group of powerfully
681

armed warriors standing on their chariots?”
Bhurisrava remained silent. His anger had gone. He and Arjuna were friends
from long ago and, hearing the Päëòava’s words, spoken without malice, he
could see his own fault. Realizing that his destined end had arrived, he closed
his eyes and fixed his mind on Viñëu, preparing to observe the sacred Praya
vow of meditating until death.
Arjuna spoke again to the fallen Kuru fighter, “O great one, the love I bear for
you is equal to that I bear for my own brothers. With my permission, and also
that of Kåñëa, go now to heaven.”
Kåñëa added, “You have been devoted to sacrifice and worship of the Supreme
Lord. Therefore go to My kingdom, ablaze with effulgence and coveted even by
Brahmä. Assuming a spiritual form equal to My own, mount upon the back of
Garuòa, who will carry you to that eternal abode.”
As Kåñëa spoke, Sätyaki recovered from his swoon and rose to his feet. Seeing
his enemy seated nearby, he took up his discarded sword and rushed at him. As
everyone present cried out to stop him, he swung the sword with all his
strength and cut off Bhurisrava’s head.
There was shocked silence. No one praised Sätyaki for killing Bhurisrava, who
had already been slain by Arjuna. Some of the Kaurava troops spoke among
themselves. “Sätyaki was only the instrument, for this hero’s end had surely
been ordained by fate. The Creator himself has moved Sätyaki to kill
Bhurisrava, and we should not give way to anger, which is always the cause of
man’s grief.”
Others among the Kauravas, such as Duryodhana and Karëa, rebuked Sätyaki.
Turning around with the bloodied sword still in his hand, Sätyaki called out to
them, “You sinful men can only speak of virtue, for your acts are never
virtuous. Where was your righteousness when Abhimanyu was slain? I vowed
long ago to slay any man who threw me down in battle and kicked me. I was
always destined to kill Bhurisrava. It is the hand of fate that moves all men.
Where is my fault? In ancient times the sage Välméki said, ‘One should always
act in battle in ways which give pain to the enemy.’”
Everyone remained silent. None on either side considered Sätyaki’s act noble.
They all praised Bhurisrava in their minds, for he had gone to the highest and
most holy regions. They looked at his head lying on the ground, which, with its
curling blue locks and eyes red like a pigeon’s, was charming even in death.
After a moment of respectful silence, the warriors on both sides blew their
682

conches and the battle began in earnest. Taking up the Gäëòéva, Arjuna said
to Kåñëa, “Urge on the horses, O Mädhava. The sun is fast falling toward the
western hills. The Sindhu ruler is well protected by the foremost Kuru fighters.
My task will not be easy. O mighty-armed one, drive the horses in such a way
that I may not be thwarted.”
Arjuna’s chariot rushed off toward Jayadratha, whose standard was just visible
beyond the thick array of Kaurava troops. At once Duryodhana, Karëa, Çalya,
Açvatthämä, Kåpa and Vrishasena attacked. They were supported by tens of
thousands of charioteers, horsemen and elephants. All the warriors charged
Arjuna like a stormy sea crashing onto the shore. With his razor-headed arrows
Arjuna at once severed the limbs of fighters all around him. As the sun
assumed a crimson hue he relentlessly slaughtered the Kaurava troops.
Although they were being decimated, the Kauravas were cheered to see the
sun almost on the horizon. Surely the Päëòava would fail in his vow.
Determined to hold Arjuna back, Kåpa and Açvatthämä attacked him from
both sides. They rained countless arrows on both him and Kåñëa. At the same
time, Duryodhana, still encased in his impenetrable armor, assailed him from
the front with Karëa. From Arjuna’s rear Çalya roared out his challenge and
immediately sent hundreds of shafts at him. Arjuna moved with blinding
speed. Whirling about on the terrace of his chariot he sent arrows at every one
of his assailants. All of them were either pierced or had their bows shattered by
Arjuna’s shafts. Bhéma again tackled Karëa, and at the same time annihilated
the troops supporting him. Sätyaki took on Çalya and Vrishasena, killing
thousands of their soldiers.
Arjuna slowly forced back the Kauravas who stood before him. Faced with an
endless stream of blazing shafts, they struggled vainly to hold him in check.
Both Açvatthämä and Kåpa displayed masterful skills, but Arjuna checked
every one of their weapons with his powerful arrows. He pierced his attackers
with burning missiles launched from the Gäëòéva with all his power. The sky
appeared as if illuminated by a constant shower of meteors. In his wrath,
Arjuna resembled the eternal Çiva slaying the Asuras with his divine Ajagara
bow.
Numerous monarchs and warriors came forward to attack Arjuna, clutching
bows, lances, maces and swords. Advancing furiously on the Päëòava, they
were destroyed in moments by his irresistible arrows. The twang of the
Gäëòéva, continuously resounding, resembled the roar of clouds seen in the sky
683

at the end of the epoch. Warriors were dispatched to Death’s kingdom by the
tens of thousands.
The Kauravas began to panic. They called to one another amid the confusion
and carnage. Blood-spattered bodies lay everywhere in tangled and twisted
heaps. The cries and moans of dying men mingled with the roars and battle
cries of the surviving fighters. Wherever the warriors looked they saw Arjuna’s
standard carving through their ranks. His snake-like arrows fell from the sky as
if rained down by Indra. Even Droëa, coming against Arjuna with all his
strength, could not check him. He called out to his troops, who were starting to
flee, trying to rally them back to the battle.
Less than half an hour remained until sunset. Droëa ordered his son, Kåpa,
Karëa, Çalya, Duryodhana, and a number of other maharatha warriors to stand
before Arjuna, who could now see Jayadratha. They all began hurling weapons
at the Päëòava, screening him from Jayadratha. Arjuna, although so close to
his foe, began to despair. Only minutes remained till sunset, and he could
hardly see Jayadratha, so thick was the shower of arrows, darts and lances
thrown by the Kaurava heroes.
Kåñëa saw His friend’s predicament. He raised His right hand and immediately
His Sudarçana chakra appeared at the end of His outstretched finger.
Throwing that disc, He covered the sun like an eclipse and at once darkness
enveloped the field. Thinking that the sun had set, the Kauravas cheered.
Jayadratha was still alive. Now Arjuna would enter fire. Surely the war was
over.
Confounded, Arjuna looked around, but Kåñëa reassured him. “O Pärtha, there
is still time. Fix your eyes on the southern quarter, where Jayadratha stands.
The Kauravas have lowered their weapons and the Sindhu ruler now stands
unprotected. In a moment he will come before your sight. Place upon the
Gäëòéva an arrow charged with Brahmä’s power and sever his head.”
Arjuna immediately did as he was told. As he raised his bow with the brilliant
golden shaft attached, Kåñëa said, “This monarch has received a boon from his
father. The old Sindhu king, Vridhakshatra, blessed him that whoever makes
his head fall to the earth will himself die, his own head shattered in a hundred
pieces. I know that Vridhakshtra now sits some miles from here at
Samantapanchaka Lake, deep in meditation. Therefore, empower your arrow
to carry Jayadratha’s head to his father’s lap.”
After saying this, Kåñëa withdrew His chakra. Suddenly it was light again, the
684

sun clearly visible just above the western horizon. Arjuna instantly released his
arrow. It flew like a comet straight at Jayadratha, who was standing fearlessly
on his chariot, caught unawares by the sudden reappearance of the sun.
Severing his head from his neck, the arrow carried it high into the sky and out
of the sight of all the warriors. After traveling a great distance, it deposited the
head on Vridhakshatra’s lap. Startled, the monarch quickly stood up. As his
son’s head fell on the ground, his own head broke into a hundred pieces and he
fell dead.
The Kauravas cried out in grief. They realized the darkness had been Kåñëa’s
illusion. Duryodhana fell to his knees in his chariot. He dropped his weapons
and hot tears flowed from his eyes. All of his warriors were struck dumb as they
slowly left the battlefield.
Overjoyed at the success of His friend, Kåñëa embraced Arjuna. “By good
fortune you have slain Jayadratha and his wretched father, a constant enemy
of the gods. I do not think that even Kärttikeya could have achieved this. You
killed an entire akshauhini of soldiers. Your prowess resembles Rudra’s. Today
Duryodhana and his followers are surely realizing that their end is near.”
Still perspiring from his prodigious efforts, Arjuna smiled. “By Your favor only
has all this been achieved. O Kåñëa, it is no wonder that one whom You
support gains victory. Yudhiñöhira will surely regain his kingdom. My brothers
and I are ever at Your service.”
Kåñëa once again embraced Arjuna and then drove the chariot toward their
camp. As they headed back, they surveyed the large number of warriors lying
all over the field. The earth seemed to be filled with men, horses, elephants
and chariots. Thousands of servants and physicians came from the camps to
tend the wounded, who lay moaning with arrows and lances protruding from
their bodies. Millions of shining arrows were strewn across the ground, along
with broken maces, swords and armor. Bright gold ornaments gleamed amid
fragments of shattered chariots. As darkness fell, the earth seemed as
resplendent as the autumnal sky studded with countless stars.
Kåñëa blew His conch loudly, gladdening the hearts of the Päëòava warriors.
Reaching Yudhiñöhira, Arjuna folded his palms and worshipped him with a
joyful heart. Yudhiñöhira dismounted from his chariot and embraced Arjuna
with tears in his eyes. Kåñëa got down from the chariot and touched
Yudhiñöhira’s feet in respect. The Päëòava king embraced Him and said, “O
Govinda, it is by Your grace that we stand victorious today. Our enemies are
685

drowned in a sea of grief. Everything is certain for those You favor. Simply by
seeking Your shelter, one is assured of all good fortune. Those who desire to
please You never meet with sin or reversal.”
Trembling with transcendent happiness, Yudhiñöhira went on praising Kåñëa
for some time. When he had finished, Kåñëa replied, “The wretched Jayadratha
has been consumed by the fire of your anger. Duryodhana’s vast and proud
armies are gradually being annihilated, O Bharata. Having insulted and
angered you, the low-minded Duryodhana faces destruction, along with his
followers. Those who have chosen to become your enemies are already
defeated, although you bear no malice toward any living being.”
Bhéma and Sätyaki, their bodies covered with arrow wounds, came and stood
before Arjuna. After embracing them both, Arjuna said tearfully, “By good
fortune do I see you both, freed from the Kaurava ocean, in which Droëa is an
invincible alligator and Kåtavarmä an invincible shark. It was fortunate that
you made Karëa, Kåpa and Çalya flee. Both of you are as dear to me as my own
life. With you as my support and protectors, I have no fear.”
The Päëòavas headed joyfully back to their camp, blowing their conches and
praised by bards and eulogists.

Chapter 19
The Kauravas Rally
After Jayadratha’s death, the Kaurava warriors expressed their sorrow. Seeing
so many of their number slain, the soldiers condemned Dhåtaräñöra and his
son. Censuring them for their wicked policies, the warriors praised Yudhiñöhira
and his brothers. Sunk in despair, Duryodhana rode back to his camp. He sat
on the terrace of his chariot with his head lowered. Unable to look at anyone,
his mind dwelt only on the day’s events. Surely there was no warrior equal to
Arjuna. Neither Droëa, Kåpa, nor even Karëa could stand before him. Indeed,
the whole army combined could not stop him from killing Jayadratha.
Duryodhana wept in his agony. Entering his tent he took his seat, followed by
Droëa and his other generals. No music played in his camp, and the bards were
silent.
686

Struggling to maintain his composure, the Kaurava prince addressed Droëa in
a voice strained with grief. “O preceptor, behold the carnage among the kings
who have come to our side. Even the mighty Bhéñma lies prostrate on the
battlefield. The Päëòavas have slaughtered seven akshauhinis of our troops.
Today your disciple fulfilled his vow and killed Jayadratha, even though you
opposed him with an impenetrable array of troops. Many lords of the earth,
desiring to do us good, have gone to Yamaräja’s abode. How can I repay my
debt to them? Being nothing more than a coward, I have destroyed my friends
and relatives. The earth should swallow me, covetous, sinful and opposed to
virtue as I am. My own grandsire lies on a bed of arrows due to my wicked
desires. What will he say when he meets me in the next world?”
Duryodhana stopped speaking and wept openly. He buried his head in his
hands and cried out the names of his slain brothers. Karëa came over and
comforted him. Gradually he gained control of himself and sat up. He sat
staring straight ahead for some time, wringing his hands and breathing heavily.
His mind moved between despair and the desire for revenge. All was not lost.
The Kauravas still had Droëa, Karëa, Açvatthämä, and other powerful heroes.
Perhaps they could yet defeat the Päëòavas, or at least capture or kill
Yudhiñöhira. In any circumstance, surrender was impossible. It would be better
to be slain down to the last man than to hand over the kingdom to the
Päëòavas after all this. That was the least the surviving Kauravas could do to
repay their slain colleagues.
With tears running down his face, Duryodhana continued. “O foremost of
warriors, I swear that I will obtain peace only by slaying the Päëòavas or by
being slain by them. I will follow the path taken by our friends and relatives.
Seeing us overpowered by our enemies, our partisans are losing faith in our
power. They are openly praising the Päëòavas. With Bhéñma fallen and you
fighting only mildly, O preceptor, our troops think we have no protector. It
seems that Karëa alone is anxious for our success. Like a fool I have depended
on one who is a friend only in words. Greedy for wealth and sinful, my mind
blinded by desire, I have placed my hopes where they were bound to be
thwarted. As a result, Jayadratha and so many other great kings all lie dead on
the battlefield. O Droëa, permit me therefore to lay down my life in battle, just
as all these men have done.”
Droëa removed his helmet and long gloves, placing them by his side. His
sinewy arms were lacerated with arrow wounds, and skilled physicians applied
687

herbal dressings to the cuts, but Duryodhana’s reproachful words stung him
more than the wounds. He turned to the prince. “Why, O King, do you pierce
me with words as sharp as darts? I have repeatedly told you that no one can
defeat Arjuna in battle. Seeing Bhéñma brought down I am convinced that we
are doomed. The dice Çakuni threw against the Päëòavas have returned
against us as blazing arrows. Vidura warned you of this, but you did not heed
him. He who ignores his well-wishers and goes his own way is stupid and is
soon reduced to a pitiable condition. You have brought about this calamity
upon us all by dragging Draupadé into the Kuru assembly and insulting her.
Such a sinful deed cannot go unpunished.”
Droëa had heard enough from Duryodhana. He reminded him of every wicked
act he had performed against the Päëòavas, making it clear that the Kauravas
had no one to blame but themselves for their present suffering. They had been
warned many times that fighting the Päëòavas would not result in success.
Droëa looked at Duryodhana and his surviving brothers. Bhéma had already
slain half of them. The remainder were a sorry sight in their grief and
frustration. Droëa felt that it was still his duty to afford them whatever
protection he could, but there was little hope. Standing up with his hand on
his ivory-hilted sword, he said, “Seeing me sinking in the ocean of the
Päëòavas’ prowess, you should not enhance my grief, O King. Hear now my
final determination. I will not take off my armor again until all of the
Païchälas are slain. My son will kill the Somakas. With those two armies gone,
it may be possible for us to defeat the Päëòavas.”
Droëa indicated Kåpa. “Here is the invincible äcärya. Our enemies cannot kill
him. Let him exert his full power to kill the kings who have sided with the
Päëòavas. O Duryodhana, worship Brahmins and offer them many gifts. Make
offerings into the sacred fire and propitiate the deities. We will make one last
great effort. Tomorrow I will ride at the head of your army with my weapons
ablaze. You will see me penetrate the Päëòava ranks like a lion entering a herd
of cows.”
Cheered by Droëa’s words, the Kauravas slowly retired for the night,
exhausted from the day’s fighting.
***
Dhåtaräñöra sat silently on his throne. By his side Saïjaya gently dabbed his
brow with a soft cloth soaked in cool water. The old king had lost
688

consciousness when he heard how Bhéma had slain over thirty of his sons in
one day. Returning to consciousness he learned that Arjuna had succeeded in
his vow to kill Jayadratha. Struck dumb with grief, he moaned softly. Was
there any hope for the Kauravas when their entire force could not prevent
Arjuna from reaching the Sindhu king? The blind monarch spoke in a voice
barely rising above a whisper. “O best of all my servants, tell me how my
surviving sons are now faring, having seen their army routed and Jayadratha
slain. Day by day my fame dwindles. Numerous powerful warriors on my side
are being killed. All this is due to the adverse influence of fate.
Dhåtaräñöra broke off, shaking his head. “Arjuna smashed into our host, which
was protected by Droëa and Karëa. Even the gods could not have stopped him.
Surely he is as irresistible as the surging ocean. And then there is Bhéma.
“Half my sons are dead. Bhéma will not rest until he has killed the other half.
In the meantime, Arjuna, aided by Dåñöadyumna and Sätyaki, will annihilate
the other Kuru heroes. It is hard to believe. At the beginning of the war, our
army outnumbered the Päëòavas two to one. Now only four of our eleven
divisions remain to the Päëòavas’ three. The odds are now almost equal.”
His head down, Dhåtaräñöra listened as Saïjaya described the conversation
between Duryodhana and Droëa. Hearing that the preceptor had again vowed
to slay the Päëòava forces, the old king became encouraged. The war was not
over. Droëa and Karëa were still alive, as well as Kåpa, Açvatthämä, and a
number of other warriors. They would be burning with anger and a desire to
avenge Jayadratha’s death. Perhaps, too, Arjuna would be fatigued after
exerting himself so tremendously. Things may yet turn the other way. Wars
had often been won by rallying troops when all had seemed hopeless.
Saïjaya, seeing Dhåtaräñöra looking more hopeful, said, “O King, you should
not forget that Kåñëa is the Päëòavas’ guide and protector. It was due to His
help that Arjuna succeeded today. Your men have no hope if they oppose
Keçava in battle. He is the unfailing defender of the righteous and the
annihilator of the demonic. Steeped in sin and ignorant of virtue, your sons
are bringing a terrible calamity upon themselves and their friends. Their single
hope lies in returning the Päëòavas’ rightful property. However, O King, I fear
the opportunity for that has passed. This is your fault. It will result in a massive
destruction of kñatriyas.”
Dhåtaräñöra remembered the inconceivable form Kåñëa had displayed in the
hall where he now sat. After that, he had heard about Kåñëa’s many glories
689

from the åñis––descriptions he had heard before. Trying to bring the king to
his senses, the åñis had again reminded him how Kåñëa had killed numerous
Asuras, who were capable of assuming forms at will and who had terrorized
even the gods.
Feeling a strange sense of peace as he thought of Kåñëa, Dhåtaräñöra said,
“Even if by chance we are able to defeat the Päëòavas, we will still have to
contend with Keçava. For their interests He will take up His irresistible discus
and rush against my forces like the all-consuming fire of universal destruction.
After destroying the Kurus He will offer the earth to Kunté. I do not see how
we can attain victory. Duryodhana is ignorant of Kåñëa’s position and power.
The faithless fool is a slave to his own senses. He can never understand the
Absolute Truth. He is like a child who wishes to extinguish fire with his hands.
Arjuna and Kåñëa are united as one soul. Their aims and desires are one, and
even the mighty Çiva cannot thwart them.”
Thinking of his son, the king again felt sorrow fill his heart. Would he ever see
him again? It seemed unlikely. He would probably die in this battle. Yet the
ways of fate were inscrutable. Even Kåñëa, it seemed, could not prevent
Abhimanyu’s death. Surely He could not have wanted that son of His dear
friend and sister to die. Gripped by the duality of realizing the inevitable and
yet hoping to resist it, the king rose from his seat and his servants led him
away. He told Saïjaya to return the next day and recount any events of the
night, and how the battle began again.
***
As the sun rose on the fourteenth day, Duryodhana, seething as he recalled the
events of the previous day, spoke with Karëa. “How was it possible for Arjuna
to penetrate our ranks yesterday? Before your eyes he slew Jayadratha. Even
with Kåñëa’s devious trick, it should still not have been possible. My once vast
army has been reduced to a pitiable few by Çakra’s son. Surely this must be
Droëa’s desire. I cannot accept that the preceptor is fighting to his full power.
If he had opposed Arjuna with all his strength yesterday, then Jayadratha
would not have been killed. Arjuna is exceedingly dear to the magnanimous
Droëa. Fool that I was, I believed him when he promised to protect Jayadratha.
Now I am despairing.”
Karëa did not agree. “I do not think you should blame the preceptor. Heedless
of his own life he fights our enemies furiously. It is not his fault that he failed
690

to prevent Arjuna, guided by Kåñëa, from fulfilling his vow. Clad in
impenetrable armor and wielding the Gäëòéva bow, he is formidable. It was no
wonder to me that he overcame Droëa. Furthermore, the preceptor is old and
not so agile or quick. How can he contend with Arjuna on equal terms?”
Karëa and Duryodhana were riding out on their chariots as they spoke. Ahead
of them in the distance they saw the Päëòava forces spread across the horizon.
With their armor and weapons glinting in the sun, their army appeared like a
sparkling sea. Their roars and conch blasts were answered by the Kauravas’
warriors.
Karëa put on his helmet as he continued. “In my opinion, destiny is supreme.
Despite our efforts and our numbers, and even though our army contains the
greatest heroes, still, fate makes our endeavor futile. O King, a man afflicted by
adverse fate finds all his exertions useless. We have constantly antagonized the
Päëòavas, yet they have always emerged unharmed. I do not see that they are
superior to us in either intellect or power, nor do I feel that you have
miscalculated through lack of understanding. It is fate alone that controls
everything. If destiny has decreed that we should suffer reversals, then nothing
in our power can alter that fact.”
Duryodhana remained silent. Perhaps Karëa was right. Fortune had surely
favored the Päëòavas. But fortune was always flickering. Surely it was time it
favored him. Droëa had sworn to annihilate the Païchälas and Somakas, the
major remnant of the Päëòava army. If he kept his vow, then they might still
attain victory. The prince clenched his teeth and looked at Droëa, who was
busy marshaling the troops into formation. It would not help if he censured
him any more.
Duryodhana’s chariot reached the other Kuru leaders and he issued orders and
made arrangements. Having agreed upon a strategy for the day’s fighting, the
Kauravas formed themselves into an array shaped like a turtle. In response, the
Päëòavas aligned their troops in an arrangement resembling a shark. The two
armies came together cheering, their weapons clashing as a huge cloud of dust
rose above the battlefield.
Determined to end the conflict as quickly as possible, Bhéma sought out the
remaining Kaurava princes. As he charged into the enemy ranks, he was
surrounded by elephants and horsemen, who rained down their weapons on
the roaring Päëòava. As a fierce battle began, Dåñöadyumna and the twins
rushed against the Madraka army. Susharma and the remainder of the
691

Samshaptakas, remembering their vow, challenged Arjuna. Sätyaki stayed
close to Yudhiñöhira, protecting him along with Çikhaëòé and other chariot
fighters.
Droëa encountered the Païchälas and showered them with tens of thousands
of arrows. Invoking celestial weapons, he swiftly cut them down. A powerful
king named Sibi, charging at the head of the Somakas, roared out his battle cry
and challenged Droëa. He struck him with thirty arrows and slew his
charioteer. Droëa was infuriated and replied with ten arrows made of steel. He
slew Sibi’s four horses, cut down his standard, and severed the king’s head as he
stood in the fight.
Duryodhana ordered another charioteer onto Droëa’s chariot, and Droëa
continued to fight the Païchälas and Somakas together.
Bhéma was surrounded by a number of Kaurava princes. They assailed him
from all sides with arrows. Not concerned about their attack, Bhéma jumped
down from his chariot and ran over to one of them. Leaping onto his chariot,
he smashed him with his fists. With all his limbs broken the prince toppled
lifeless from his chariot. Bhéma leapt down and raced over to another prince,
striking and killing him in the same way. Karëa came to the Kauravas’
protection, hurling a flaming dart at Bhéma as he ran across the field. Bhéma
faced that dart and caught it, immediately hurling it back at Karëa. As it flew
toward Karëa, Çakuni cut it down with a razor-headed shaft.
Oblivious to the Kauravas’ arrows, Bhéma caught hold of another prince and
killed him with one mighty slap. He then remounted his chariot and blew his
conch. With a volley of gold-winged shafts he smashed the chariot of Durmada,
another of Duryodhana’s brothers. Durmada ran over to his brother
Duskarna’s chariot and leapt aboard. Both princes stood together firing their
straight-flying arrows at Bhéma by the hundreds. Bhéma rushed at Duskarna
and demolished his chariot with a single mace blow. The two princes jumped
clear, but Bhéma leapt down and pounded them with his fists. Struck
repeatedly by Bhéma they both fell dead, their bodies pulverized.
Seeing Bhéma ranging among them like an all-destroying tempest, the
Kauravas cried out in fear. “Surely this is Rudra himself come as Bhéma for our
annihilation! Let us flee for our lives.”
The soldiers ran wildly from Bhéma. No two were seen to be running together
as they fled without looking back. Returning to his chariot, Bhéma fought with
Duryodhana, Kåpa and Karëa. As he battled alone, a number of other Päëòava
692

warriors came to his support and a violent struggle ensued.
Elsewhere on the battlefield Somadatta encountered Sätyaki. Enraged at his
son’s slaughter, the Kuru leader bellowed, “Why, O Satvata hero, have you
forgotten the religious codes of warfare and taken to evil practices? How can a
virtuous person strike one who has laid aside his weapons? This will lead to
your downfall, O mean-minded one. You will now suffer the consequences of
your vile act. I swear by my two sons that I will either kill you or be killed by
you today. If this does not come to pass, then may I fall into dreadful hell.
Stand ready, wretch, for I will now let go my deadliest weapons.”
Somadatta blew his conch and roared like a lion. Sätyaki was infuriated by his
speech and he thundered back, “O descendent of Kuru, I am not afraid of you
or your empty words. Why should one conversant with kñatriya duty quake
when confronted by such threats? Fight to your utmost power, either alone or
with your supporters, and I will slay you. I killed your son along with many
other powerful Kurus. Indeed, they have all been slain by the anger of the
virtuous and ever-truthful Yudhiñöhira. Having chosen him as your enemy, O
lord of men, you too will follow the path they have taken. Guard yourself. I
swear by Kåñëa’s feet and by all my past pious acts that I will kill you today.”
Both men began to discharge volleys of arrows. Observing the fight from a
distance, Duryodhana sent a large division of horsemen to support his old
uncle. Ten thousand of them hemmed in Sätyaki and covered him with arrows.
Dåñöadyumna saw Sätyaki’s position and came to his aid, along with a great
force of Päëòava warriors. A deafening tumult arose as the two armies met.
Somadatta concentrated his attack on Sätyaki, sending a cluster of bloodsucking shafts at him. The Vrishni hero responded with arrows that pierced
Somadatta’s armor and made him swoon. His charioteer carried him away from
the fight.
Droëa rushed into the battle hoping to slay Sätyaki. Shouting out his battle
cry, he hurled powerful weapons at the Vrishni warrior, who was contending
with the thousands of other fighters all around him. Yudhiñöhira and the twins,
seeing Sätyaki under attack by Droëa, roared in anger and entered the fight.
They assailed Droëa from all sides and diverted his attack from Sätyaki. Bhéma
and Dåñöadyumna joined them, and Duryodhana, Karëa and Kåpa came to
support the Kauravas. With the heroes on both sides backed by numerous
troops, a fierce and confused fight ensued. Arrows, darts, lances and other
weapons flew through the air. Maces collided in showers of sparks and swords
693

clashed. Wrathful warriors hacked and lunged at each other. The heads, limbs
and entrails of slain warriors covered the ground. With screams and roars they
fell upon each other, blinded by rage.
Some way off, Ghaöotkaca was moving across the field. The Räkñasa was
mounted on an eight-wheeled chariot made of black iron and spread with
bearskins. Furnished with all types of weapons, it emitted a terrifying noise as
it moved across the field. It was a celestial chariot, and it was drawn by beasts
of the underworld who resembled elephants but who had horns and blazing red
eyes. On its banner was a great black vulture with outspread wings and feet,
and it gave off frightful screeches. Around its sides were red flags and rows of
bones. Ghaöotkaca stood on the chariot like a dark mountain. With his long
fangs, arrow-shaped ears, unnatural eyes and bald head, his sight sent the
Kaurava troops dashing away in terror. He was surrounded by an akshauhini of
Räkñasa warriors armed with maces, spears, rocks and trees. They advanced
into battle with roars that shook the earth.
Seeing him advance, Açvatthämä came before him. Proud of his ability with
weapons, he stood unmoving as the Räkñasas approached. Ghaöotkaca laughed
and used his mystic powers to make a shower of rocks fall on Açvatthämä and
the soldiers supporting him. With the stones fell arrows, spears, axes and clubs.
Releasing an arrow charged with mantras, Açvatthämä checked the downpour.
Ghaöotkaca then released fifty shafts that dug into Açvatthämä’s armor and
body. Droëa’s son, maintaining his equilibrium, replied with a dozen arrows
that cut into the Räkñasa. Ghaöotkaca, rocked by the assault, took up a
thousand-spoked wheel with a razor-sharp edge. It shone like fire and was
studded with gems. Spinning it, the Räkñasa hurled it at Açvatthämä.
With twenty crescent-headed shafts, Açvatthämä broke the wheel to pieces. It
fell uselessly to the ground like the purposes of a man under the influence of
adverse destiny. Ghaöotkaca followed the attack with a volley of shafts that
completely covered Açvatthämä. The Räkñasa’s son, Anjanaparva, then came
to his side and joined the assault on Açvatthämä. He attacked him with
hundreds of long arrows fitted with barbed heads and soaked in oil.
Swallowed by shafts, Açvatthämä appeared like Mount Meru drenched by a
shower of rain. His charioteer swiftly wheeled his chariot around, and as he
came clear of the onslaught, he released an arrow that cut down Anjanaparva’s
standard. With two more shafts he slew his two charioteers. He then killed his
horses, and with another razor-faced arrow cut apart his bow.
694

Anjanaparva leapt from his chariot brandishing a scimitar embellished with
golden stars, but he had hardly fixed his gaze on Açvatthämä before Droëa’s
son cut the weapon apart with three arrows. The Räkñasa took up a mace
decked with gold. Swinging it around, he hurled it at Açvatthämä, who broke it
to pieces with his arrows. Anjanaparva jumped into the sky and rained down
trees and rocks onto his opponent. At the same time, Ghaöotkaca fired
thousands of fire-tipped shafts at Açvatthämä. Simultaneously countering
Ghaöotkaca’s attack and fighting Anjanaparva, Açvatthämä shot arrows into
the air which pierced Anjanaparva all over his body. As the Räkñasa descended
to the ground, Açvatthämä released a broad-headed shaft with all his strength.
Empowered by mantras, the shaft tore off Anjanaparva’s head, which fell to
the earth like a black boulder, its bright earrings gleaming like seams of gold.
Shaking with grief and rage, Ghaöotkaca roared, “Stand and fight! You will not
escape alive from me today.”
Açvatthämä lowered his bow and replied derisively, “O celestially powerful
one, you should fight with others. As Bhéma’s offspring you are like my son. It
is improper for me to fight you, nor do I feel angry with you. Leave now while I
still feel kindly disposed toward you, for a man excited by rage may kill even
his own self.”
Ghaöotkaca was even more incensed and he seemed to blaze as he bellowed,
“What!? Am I like an ordinary man that you are trying to frighten me with
your words? I am the emperor of the Räkñasas. My prowess is no less than that
of the ten-headed Rävaëa. O son of Droëa, stay for only a moment more in
this fight and I will put an end to your life.”
The maddened Räkñasa fired his long arrows at Açvatthämä, but Droëa’s son
struck them all down before they could reach him. Both warriors released
clouds of arrows which appeared to fight each other in the sky. The shafts
collided, creating sparks and fire that illuminated the battlefield. By his mystic
power, Ghaöotkaca disappeared from view and suddenly assumed the shape of a
towering mountain abounding in peaks and trees. At its summit was a fountain
that incessantly showered spears, darts, swords and heavy clubs.
Remaining calm, Açvatthämä invoked the Vajra weapon which destroyed the
Räkñasa’s illusion. Ghaöotkaca again appeared in the sky wielding his bow.
With his numerous gold ornaments he seemed like a blue cloud adorned with a
rainbow. He invoked a weapon that sent a thick shower of rocks onto
Açvatthämä. The heavy stones shook the earth as they fell. Reciting ancient
695

incantations, Açvatthämä at once invoked the Väyavya weapon. Unlimited
numbers of arrows flew from his bow and smashed all the rocks as they fell
from the sky. With the divine wind weapon Açvatthämä went on to assail the
Räkñasa army and destroyed thousands of them.
Ghaöotkaca returned to the ground and mounted his chariot. Surrounded by a
host of Räkñasas, who had the heads of lions and tigers and rode upon fearfullooking animals, he charged. Açvatthämä stood firm as the hordes rushed
toward him screaming in discordant voices. Led by Bhéma’s son, they appeared
like an army of hideous-looking ghosts and spirits with Rudra at their head.
Ghaöotkaca released ten arrows that struck Açvatthämä like thunderbolts.
Açvatthämä rocked in his chariot, but kept his balance. Ghaöotkaca fired
another shaft that broke Açvatthämä’s bow, but he strung another one in a
matter of seconds. By means of celestial weapons he shot hundreds of
thousands of sky-ranging shafts with golden wings. Sorely oppressed by those
arrows, the Räkñasa forces looked like a herd of elephants attacked by a lion.
The shafts fell upon their broad chests and arms, piercing through their armor
and digging into their leathery skins.
Açvatthämä became like Çiva when he had destroyed the powerful Asura
Tripura in a long past age. His celestial weapons claimed the lives of countless
Räkñasas. More and more of the demons appeared on the battlefield, rising up
from the nether regions to join Ghaöotkaca. They rushed in a body at
Açvatthämä, wielding spiked maces, scimitars, clubs, lances, axes, and many
weapons unknown to men. They hurled them at Droëa’s son and roared
exultantly. Seeing all the weapons falling on Açvatthämä, the Kauravas felt
distressed, but Droëa’s son soon dispelled the attack with thousands of his own
shafts. He emerged from the shower of missiles and destroyed the Räkñasas by
celestial weapons. Fiery darts from his bow consumed the Räkñasa army.
Açvatthämä annihilated Ghaöotkaca’s forces.
With his eyes rolling in anger, Ghaöotkaca ordered his charioteer to charge
Açvatthämä. He discharged arrows like poisonous serpents at Açvatthämä and
checked his attack. Completely covering Droëa’s son with shafts resembling
long barbed poles, Ghaöotkaca sent up a great roar. Other warriors entered the
fight, some supporting Ghaöotkaca and others Açvatthämä. Dåñöadyumna came
up to Ghaöotkaca, while Çakuni and his followers supported Açvatthämä.
Drupada and his army attacked the Kauravas surrounding Duryodhana, with
Bhéma following him on his chariot, his mace whirling as he rushed into battle.
696

As a fervent battle ensued between the armies, Açvatthämä suddenly released
a shaft that looked like the rod held by Death personified. Charged with the
force of Indra’s thunderbolt, it struck Ghaöotkaca on the chest and threw him
to the ground. Dåñöadyumna saw him fall and he quickly took him up onto his
own chariot and carried him away.

Chapter 20
The Night Battle
As the sun approached the western hills, Sätyaki once again encountered
Somadatta. He told his charioteer to bear him toward the Kuru. “His time has
come. I will not return from this battle without slaying him.”
Somadatta confronted him without fear. The two kñatriyas pierced one
another with snake-like arrows. They roared furiously and circled one another,
each maintaining a fierce assault on his opponent. With blood running from
their many wounds, they looked like a couple of kinshuka trees in full bloom.
Casting angry glances, the heroes fought relentlessly, looking for weakness in
the other.
Somadatta’s father, Bählika, rode up to assist his son. Seeing this, Bhéma came
to Sätyaki’s aid. Bählika met him with a volley of arrows. Shrugging off the
shafts, which were deflected by his thick armor, Bhéma raised his bow. He shot
hundreds of yard-long arrows at Bählika, but the old warrior cut them down in
mid-flight. He retaliated with a long steel shaft fitted with a barbed point.
Fired with all Bählika’s power, the arrow struck Bhéma on the chest and
pierced his armor. Bhéma trembled and swooned. Regaining his senses as
Bählika closed in to press his advantage, Bhéma took up an iron mace and
hurled it at his opponent. It sped through the air like a fireball and struck
Bählika on the forehead. The Kuru general died instantly and he fell headlong
from his chariot.
Somadatta, still fighting with Sätyaki, cried out in grief as his father died. He
trained his arrows on Bhéma, but Sätyaki showered him with shafts and drew
him away from the Päëòava. Somadatta fought in a frenzy. He cut Sätyaki’s
bow in two with a broad-headed arrow and struck him with countless more.
697

Sätyaki took up another bow and with a volley of shafts cut down Somadatta’s
standard and killed his charioteer and horses. Somadatta stood his ground and
covered his foe with arrows that flew in straight lines from his bow. Sätyaki
raised a spear and hurled it at Somadatta’s chest with all his power, but
Somadatta cut that iron lance with arrows as it coursed toward him. Sätyaki,
screaming in anger, again sundered his opponent’s bow. At the same time, he
smashed his armor with a number of crescent-headed shafts.
Seeing his opponent momentarily stunned, Sätyaki took up a long arrow
resembling a golden spear. He fixed it to his bow and charged it with mantras.
The shaft hit Somadatta in the chest and split his heart in two. He fell from his
chariot like a sal tree severed at its root. The Kauravas wailed in anguish.
Seizing their advantage, the Päëòava forces pressed them back with a brutal
assault. Headed by Bhéma, Yudhiñöhira and the twins, they flew against their
dispirited foes with furious yells.
Duryodhana went over to Karëa. “The time has now come, O you who are
devoted to your friends, when your friends seek your assistance. O Karëa, save
my soldiers. The Päëòavas are roaring in ecstasy and crushing our forces like
Indra crushes the Asuras.”
Karëa reassured the anxious Kaurava. “O King, I will soon destroy the
Päëòavas. The time has come for me to kill Arjuna. With him gone, his
brothers will be finished and your victory will be assured. I will employ the
unfailing dart Indra gave me. Give up your sorrow. After killing Arjuna, I will
destroy your other enemies and hand you the earth.”
Karëa broke away from Duryodhana and roared. He looked at the dart secure
in its golden case at the front of his chariot. So far, no opportunity had arisen
for him to use it. Arjuna had always been engaged in some other part of the
field. But things were coming to a head. The war was reaching its climax and
all the great fighters would soon meet in fights to the finish. He would
challenge Arjuna to single combat. One way or another, it would be their final
encounter.
Kåpa was nearby and overheard Karëa’s words. He laughed. “Well spoken, son
of Rädhä. If only words were sufficient, Duryodhana could consider himself
successful. O hero, we have yet to see your words backed by action. Whenever
you have encountered the Päëòavas, you have been defeated.”
Kåpa reminded Karëa of the incident with the Gandharvas in the forest and of
the battle on Virata’s field. “Your boasts are like the roaring of rainless autumn
698

clouds. They will cease the moment you face Pärtha in battle. Roar now while
you are still beyond the range of his arrows, for when you are pierced by his
shafts, you will be silent forever.”
Upset by Kåpa’s words, Karëa replied, “Why do you revile me, O Brahmin?
Wise men who know their own power roar and speak of their strength. Thus
they gain inspiration to perform great deeds. You will soon see the proof of my
boasts when I slay Arjuna, together with Kåñëa, Dåñöadyumna and all their
followers.”
Kåpa looked disdainfully at Karëa. “Your words are little more than a
madman’s ravings. Arjuna cannot be slain by any creature within the three
worlds, nor can the virtuous Yudhiñöhira be conquered. Simply by his angry
glance he could, if he desired, consume all beings. It is only his compassion and
piety that allows us to live. Kåñëa always protects him and his brothers, and no
one can know or approach Kåñëa. It is only your impudence that allows you to
think you can face Arjuna in battle.”
Karëa tried to smile through his rising anger. “No doubt your words are true,
twice-born one. The Päëòavas are all this and more. Yet I am greater and will
still vanquish my enemy. Do not underestimate me and consider me an
ordinary man. I still have in my possession Indra’s infallible dart. It will kill
whomever I hurl it at. Indra himself told me that. The gods’ words are never
futile. I plan to direct this dart at Arjuna. When I slay him, he will join his
father in heaven. His brothers will then be incapable of continuing the fight.
This is why I roar, O weak Brahmin, seeing our imminent victory.”
Karëa lost control of his temper and insulted Kåpa. He accused him of favoring
the Päëòavas and threatened to cut out his tongue if he again spoke in such a
way. Raising his voice he went on, “I see no real prowess in the Päëòavas’ feats.
We are also destroying their forces. The fact that great heroes like Bhéñma,
Bhagadatta, Bhurisrava, Somadatta, Jayadratha and others now lie on the
battlefield is only due to fate. How could the Päëòavas have slain such men,
especially in the presence of Droëa, you, the king, me, and other heroes? Only
adverse destiny is to blame; but you, O most base of men, choose to praise our
enemies. You will soon see their actual power when they meet with me in
battle.”
Açvatthämä heard Karëa insulting his maternal uncle. Droëa’s son had never
had much time for Karëa, who showed little respect for his elders. Now he had
gone too far. Kåpa was a Brahmin and the Kurus’ teacher. He did not deserve
699

to be mistreated by the charioteer’s son. Açvatthämä took out his sword and
jumped from his chariot, roaring at Karëa. “How dare you speak like that, fool!
The äcärya spoke the truth about Arjuna and his brothers, but because you are
envious you could not tolerate it. O wretch of a charioteer, you brag too much
and do little. We have already seen your power when matched against Arjuna.
Even the celestials and Asuras could not overcome Arjuna. Still, you hope to
somehow defeat him yourself. Besides his own strength, Arjuna has the
unconquerable Kåñëa as his ally. O vilest of men, I will not stand by as you
insult my uncle. Stand before me and I will cut your head from your body.”
Karëa came down from his chariot to meet Açvatthämä’s challenge. Seeing
two of his most powerful fighters ready to fight to the death, Duryodhana
became alarmed. He ran forward and stood between them, placing a hand on
each of their shoulders.
Karëa drew out his sword and said, “O best of the Kurus, stand aside. This one
of evil understanding shall now taste my power.”
Still holding onto both men, Duryodhana said, “O Açvatthämä, please forgive
him. Do not be angry with Karëa. The Päëòavas are shouting out their battle
cries and coming at us from all sides. I need you both if we are to overpower
them. Be pacified.”
Seeing Duryodhana’s anxiety, Açvatthämä calmed himself and said, “O Karëa,
I forgive you. Arjuna will soon enough crush your swelling pride.”
Reluctantly, Karëa pulled away from Duryodhana and lowered his sword. Still
seething, he glared at Açvatthämä.
Kåpa, who was naturally of a mild disposition, said, “O wicked- minded Karëa, I
also forgive you. It is a fact that Arjuna will soon destroy your arrogance.”
While the Kuru chiefs had been speaking, the battle raged around them. The
exultant Päëòava forces had pushed forward and were routing the Kauravas.
Karëa, still furious from Açvatthämä’s rebuke, looked around at the Päëòava
troops. It was time to show his full power. He remounted his chariot and
charged into the fray. Drawing his long bow back to his ear, he began to release
shafts that flew like fire-tipped rockets. Charioteers and horsemen fell by the
hundreds as the arrows whistled from his bow.
Some of the Päëòava warriors shouted, “Here is Karëa! O Karëa, most sinful of
men, give us battle.” Others said, “This crooked-minded man is the root of all
these evils. He deserves to be killed by every king who values virtue. Arrogant
and sinful, he abides by Duryodhana’s order. Slay him at once!”
700

Yudhiñöhira marshaled his troops into a force that surrounded Karëa.
Thousands of warriors rained down arrows, darts, lances and iron balls covered
with flaming oil. Seeing himself assailed by so many warriors, Karëa displayed
his skill as he whirled about on his chariot and countered their attack.
Thousands of weapons dropped uselessly to the earth as Karëa fearlessly cut
them to pieces with his arrows.
Shaking their bows and roaring, the Päëòavas stepped up their attack. They
covered Karëa with a mass of arrows that screened him from view, but Karëa
broke through the assault by firing his own shafts with blinding speed. Coming
clear of the shower of weapons, he launched a counter-offensive. He mowed
down the Päëòava troops. Sending arrows inspired by mantras, he slew
thousands of warriors at a time. As Karëa ranged about like the sun pouring
forth scorching rays at noon, the Päëòava army cried out. They looked about
for a protector and ran here and there in fear.
Bhéma then rushed forward and challenged Karëa. Karëa clenched his teeth
and shot a powerful shaft that cut down Bhéma’s standard. As the tall pole fell,
he fired four more arrows that killed his horses. With another five shafts he
pierced Vishoka, who leapt down and ran across to Sätyaki’s chariot, arrows
protruding from his body.
Incensed, Bhéma took up a long, steel-tipped lance. Balancing it in his hand he
hurled it with all his power. Karëa cut it down with ten arrows. As the
fragments of the lance fell to the ground, Bhéma took up a resplendent sword
and a shield decorated with a hundred moons. He leapt from his chariot and
rushed at Karëa, who destroyed the shield with a dozen razor-faced arrows.
Undaunted, Bhéma flung the sword and it flew at Karëa like a dart, hitting his
bow and cutting it in half.
Karëa took up another bow and aimed hundreds of shafts at Bhéma. Bhéma
bounded high into the air and landed next to Karëa’s chariot. Seeing him
appear like Yamaräja himself, Karëa ducked down in his chariot. His
charioteer urged on his horses and the chariot pulled away from Bhéma. Karëa
stood again on the terrace of his chariot and launched fifty steel arrows at
Bhéma almost as if they were one. Pierced by the shafts, Bhéma ran into the
midst of an elephant division. With blows from his fists he felled a number of
the beasts, surrounding himself with their bodies to protect himself from
Karëa’s chariot. Seeing Karëa still trying to reach him, Bhéma lifted one of the
elephants and tossed it at him. Karëa cut the elephant to pieces with arrows
701

and continued his attack. He rained down shafts, trying to slay Bhéma, who
had no weapon, but Bhéma nimbly dodged Karëa’s arrows and leapt into the
air.
Maddened, Bhéma hurled horses, chariots, elephant limbs, and anything else he
could find on the field, but Karëa cut everything to pieces with his arrows.
Bhéma practically breathed fire. He knew he could kill the charioteer’s son
with his bare hands, but he wanted to respect Arjuna’s vow. Therefore, it was
not yet time for Karëa to die. Deciding to leave the fight, he came out from
behind the elephants and ran toward the Päëòava warriors. Karëa did not
relent. He struck Bhéma with hundreds of powerful arrows that checked his
progress on the field. Remembering his promise to Kunté, he did not attempt to
kill Bhéma. Karëa knew he could kill only one Päëòava: Arjuna.
Karëa rode over to Bhéma and hit him on the head with the end of his bow,
laughing. “O ignorant and impotent fool, go and fight with others. You are no
match for a real man. Your only prowess lies in eating. The battlefield is no
place for a boy like you. Rather, you should renounce the warrior’s life and
remain in the forest. Go now while I am still inclined toward you. Find Arjuna
and Kåñëa and ask for their protection.”
Controlling himself with difficulty, Bhéma replied, “O wicked fool, I have
repeatedly defeated you and it is only by your fate that you still live. How do
you indulge in such vain bragging? Even if you defeated me, what would it
prove? The ancients have seen even Indra’s victories and defeats. Come down
from your chariot and wrestle with me if you dare. I will show you how I killed
Kichaka.”
Suddenly, Arjuna appeared on the battlefield not far from Karëa. Seeing him
standing over Bhéma, who was on foot, he sped a number of arrows at him.
Bhéma took the opportunity to escape. Karëa looked up and saw his antagonist.
Licking his lips he glanced down at his Çakti weapon. Soon the Päëòavas
would lament.
Arjuna struck Karëa with a volley of shafts that made him wince and drop his
bow. Quickly regaining his senses, he responded with a hundred straight-flying
arrows. Arjuna cut them down and continuously struck his foe with countless
other shafts. As Karëa struggled to regain his composure, Arjuna released a
long arrow resembling a serpent. Inspired with mantras the shaft flew straight
at Karëa with the speed of the wind. Açvatthämä saw the arrow flying for
Karëa’s destruction and, remembering his duty as a kñatriya and his debt to
702

Duryodhana, cut it down with a razor-headed shaft inspired with mantras. He
then turned to attack Arjuna and draw him away from Karëa, who was
fatigued from his fight with Bhéma.
As the armies supporting the principal warriors surged forward, a general fight
ensued. Karëa lost sight of Arjuna as he was engaged by other Päëòava
warriors.
***
The sun was setting, but neither side sounded the retreat. As twilight set in,
they continued fighting with full force. More than three-quarters of the
warriors on both sides had been slain. It was obvious that the war would soon
be over. Darkness fell with both armies frantically seeking victory, contending
by the light of thousands of torches. Barely able to distinguish friend from foe,
they savagely assailed another. Blazing arrows lit the sky, and the wreckage of
burning chariots silhouetted soldiers locked in battle. The moon rose and cast
an eerie glow across the battlefield, which rang out with the continuous clash
of weapons and the cries of warriors.
Arjuna, having annihilated almost all of the Samshaptakas, turned the full
force of his weapons onto the surviving Kauravas. Displaying his longpracticed skill of striking invisible targets, he destroyed his enemies like a fire
destroys dry grass. The Kauravas screamed in terror as his arrows came out of
the darkness and cut them to pieces. They fled, falling over one another in
their haste to escape.
Duryodhana called to his fleeing troops, “Stop! Do not fear. I will destroy
Pärtha along with all his brothers. Stand and fight, for you will now witness my
incomparable prowess.”
The prince shouted orders and charged in Arjuna’s direction, followed by a
large division of charioteers and horsemen. Seeing this, Kåpa went to
Açvatthämä and said, “The king has lost all caution in his rage. Recklessly, he
is rushing at Arjuna. If he is not checked, Arjuna will burn him to ashes. Go
and stop him.”
Açvatthämä went after Duryodhana and called out, “O son of Gändhäré, as
long as I am living, you need not fight. I will check Pärtha. Why did you not
order me, who am always devoted to your welfare?”
Clutching his bow and a handful of arrows, Duryodhana shouted back, “It
seems that your esteemed father is protecting the Päëòavas like his own
703

children. You too have not yet displayed your full power in battle. Otherwise,
how could my enemies still survive? Fie on my avaricious self, for whose sake so
many kings have died. O son of Kripi, be gratified. Slay my foes with your
celestial weapons, which are equal to those of Çiva himself. Who is there who
can stay within range of your missiles? O son of a Brahmin, you are surely
capable of routing the Päëòavas and all their forces. Go speedily into battle
and do us good. We now depend on you.”
Duryodhana had stopped some distance from Arjuna. He could see Hanumän
on his banner glowing in the darkness. Arjuna’s chariot roved about the field
leaving a trail of destruction as flaming arrows shot out in all directions.
Açvatthämä replied, “O Kaurava, it is true that the Päëòavas are dear to my
father, just as they are dear to me. We are also dear to them. But in battle, it is
different. All friendships are forgotten. Karëa, Çalya, Kåtavarmä, Kåpa, my
father and I are doing all we can to defeat them.”
Açvatthämä was tired of hearing Duryodhana’s continuous accusations,
especially against his father. Seeing the Kaurava prince as his equal in age and
accomplishments––and his inferior in caste––he reproached him. “Surely, O
King, you are mean-minded and possessed of crooked intelligence. Because you
are conceited, sinful and avaricious, you trust nobody. Nevertheless, I will not
abandon my duty. Today I will use all my power for your sake. You will see the
Païchälas, Somakas and Cediç totally destroyed. I will send whoever confronts
me to Yamaräja’s mansion for their final reckoning.”
Açvatthämä’s chariot pulled away from Duryodhana and charged straight into
the thick of the battle. Plunging into the Païchäla forces, he called out, “O
mighty chariot-warriors, strike me in a body and show your prowess. Stay in
battle and be calm, because I will now display my power.”
Great showers of arrows were immediately directed at Açvatthämä, who
quickly countered the attack. Before the Päëòavas’ eyes he began annihilating
the troops that surrounded him. Dåñöadyumna approached him and shouted,
“O preceptor’s son, why are you slaying ordinary soldiers? Here I am. If you are
really a hero, then fight with me. I will soon dispatch you to Death’s abode.”
Dåñöadyumna struck Açvatthämä with thick flights of dreadful-looking arrows.
They pierced his body like maddened bees entering a flowering tree in search
of honey. Açvatthämä became as furious as a kicked serpent. With blood
running from his wounds, he dauntlessly resisted Dåñöadyumna’s attack with
his own shafts. Rebuking him in harsh words, he covered him with a volley of
704

steel arrows.
Dåñöadyumna laughed. “O Brahmin of wicked understanding, do you not know
my origin and destiny? I will slay your father, and then I will kill you. You can
leave today in safety. I will not kill you while your father still lives, for he
deserves his death before you. When the sun rises tomorrow, I will cut him
down with my arrows. A Brahmin who forgets his duty and takes up arms is a
sinful wretch who deserves to be killed by any honest kñatriya.”
Beside himself with rage, Açvatthämä fired innumerable arrows at
Dåñöadyumna. The Païchäla prince stood unmoving on his chariot and warded
off Açvatthämä’s attack. As the fight between the two heroes continued, the
celestials watched in awe from the sky. Both men displayed mystical weapons,
which lit up the heavens. Unable to gain the advantage over Dåñöadyumna,
Açvatthämä suddenly slew his horses and charioteer. He then rushed past him
and slaughtered the Païchäla troops by the thousands. Before anyone could
check him, he had sent ten thousand horsemen and infantry to the next world.
Yudhiñöhira, Bhéma and the twins came swiftly to protect the troops, and a
general battle ensued by the light of the rising moon. Heroes engaged with
heroes and troops battled troops. As they fought on into the night, they
recognized each other only by their shouts as they called out their names. With
the onset of night, Ghaöotkaca felt his strength doubled. Having recovered
from Açvatthämä’s attack, he came back to the fight. Seeing him on the
battlefield again, Kåñëa said to Arjuna, “Behold Bhéma’s mighty son. In my
opinion, he is the only warrior, other than yourself, capable of defeating
Karëa. We should at once send him against the charioteer’s son. Just see how
Karëa is destroying our troops. He is like the rising sun even at this grim hour.
His arrows are mangling our troops. Look, they are fleeing in every direction.”
Kåñëa pointed to Karëa’s standard, lit up by torches and visible in the distance.
Bent on annihilating the remaining Päëòava forces, he ranged about the field
with his bow constantly drawn, sending out fire-tipped arrows in unending
lines.
Kåñëa continued. “I do not think the time has come when you should confront
Karëa. He still has Indra’s Çakti weapon, which he is preserving for you, O
Pärtha. Therefore, summon Ghaöotkaca and order him to check the arrogant
suta’s son. The Räkñasa chief is conversant with every kind of Asuric weapon
and will surely be a great threat to Karëa.”
Arjuna looked across at Karëa. He longed for the moment when he would be
705

able to curb his pride once and for all. The Päëòava knew about his Çakti
weapon, but it did not bother him. He had faced every kind of celestial missile
before in battle. Kåñëa’s infallible advice, however, should be followed. Perhaps
the Çakti was more powerful than he thought. Arjuna summoned Ghaöotkaca
and the Räkñasa soon appeared before him, encased in armor and ready with
bow and sword. Offering obeisances before both Kåñëa and Arjuna, he said,
“Here I am, O rulers of men. Please order me.”
Kåñëa replied, “Take my blessings, O Ghaöotkaca, and hear what must be done.
The hour for you to display your prowess has arrived. I do not see another who
can accomplish what you can do. Over there stands the powerful Karëa,
hurling his weapons and scorching our army. None can stand before him but
you. Therefore, become the raft which will carry us across the frightful
Kaurava ocean, where Karëa is its shark. Rescue your fathers and uncles, for
this is the reason why a man begets sons. You are indeed a worthy son of
Bhéma, O Räkñasa, as you always desire his welfare. Use your illusions and
power to check the fierce bowman Karëa. Päëòu’s sons, headed by
Dåñöadyumna, will engage with Droëa and his forces.”
Arjuna told Ghaöotkaca that he would send Sätyaki to protect him from other
attacks as he fought with Karëa. He should simply concentrate all his power on
the suta’s son and his followers.
Ghaöotkaca was overjoyed at the opportunity to serve his uncle and Kåñëa. “I
am up to this task, O Bharata. I am surely a match for Karëa and any other
powerful hero who cares to face me. As long as the world exists, men will speak
of the battle I will fight tonight. Fighting in the Räkñasa mode, I will spare no
one, even those who solicit mercy with folded palms.”
Bowing again before Arjuna and Kåñëa, Ghaöotkaca then left and rushed
toward Karëa. He launched flaming arrows at him from a distance of two miles
and bellowed out his challenge. Seeing the huge Räkñasa bearing down upon
him, Karëa stopped slaughtering the Päëòava troops and turned to face him.
As a violent encounter took place, Alambusha approached Duryodhana and
said, “Permit me to engage with the Päëòavas, O King. I desire to slay them
and offer their blood as an oblation to my deceased relatives. By some Räkñasakilling charm they managed to kill my brother Baka and my father Jatasura,
but they will not escape me, for this night hour has doubled my power.”
Duryodhana smiled at the Räkñasa. “Go and challenge Ghaöotkaca. He is of
your race and is waging a terrible battle with Karëa. Ever devoted to the
706

interests of the Päëòavas, he is creating carnage among my troops.”
Alambusha looked across at Ghaöotkaca and licked his lips. “I go at once.” He
mounted his iron chariot with its spikes protruding from the sides and, uttering
a deafening roar, charged.
Ghaöotkaca, screaming hideously, maintained an unending assault on Karëa
and, at the same time, destroyed thousands of the warriors who supported him.
As Alambusha came at him, he laughed and released a powerful volley of long
iron shafts with flaming points. The scorching arrows struck Alambusha and
checked his progress. Employing his Räkñasa powers, Ghaöotkaca then caused a
tremendous downpour of shafts to appear on the battlefield. They fell on
Karëa, Alambusha, and all the Kauravas surrounding them. Alambusha
displayed similar skills to produce arrows which countered those of his foe. For
some time the two Räkñasas fought, both exhibiting mystical illusions. Flaming
rocks and lances fell from the sky. Ferocious beasts and ghastly-looking wraiths
and spirits rose from the ground; their screams terrified the Kaurava soldiers
who ran in fear. Even in the dark of night, an even denser darkness suddenly
set in, making everything invisible.
As one Räkñasa created an illusion, the other countered it with his own power.
They fired countless arrows at one another and hurled darts, maces, iron balls,
axes and lances. They roared in fury, making the earth vibrate. Ghaöotkaca
succeeded in smashing his opponent’s chariot with a number of steel shafts
shot in swift succession. Alambusha leapt down and flew at Ghaöotkaca with
outstretched arms. He struck his antagonist with his bare fists, and Ghaöotkaca
shook like a mountain in an earthquake. Raising his own bludgeon-like arm, he
dealt a crushing blow to Alambusha that sent him sprawling. Ghaöotkaca
jumped onto his foe and pressed his neck, but Alambusha wrestled himself free.
The two Räkñasas fought hand to hand as the hair of onlookers stood erect in
fear. Striking and kicking, they threw each other to the ground. Both changed
shapes––one becoming a great serpent and the other an eagle, one an elephant
and the other a tiger, then a pair of sharabhas. Rising into the sky, they
appeared like two planets colliding. They fought wonderfully, attacking each
other with mallets, swords, spears, trees and mountain peaks.
Gradually, Ghaöotkaca’s superior strength began to tell. Seeing Alambusha
tiring, he seized him by the hair. He dashed him to the ground and dealt him a
great kick. Taking hold of a shining scimitar, he jerked his head upwards and
severed it from his trunk. Ghaöotkaca got onto his chariot still holding the
707

head. He went over to Duryodhana and tossed it into his chariot. Seeing the
blood-soaked head, its face contorted and hair disheveled, Duryodhana was
shocked. He looked over at Ghaöotkaca, who shouted, “Just see your friend, O
King, whose great prowess you have personally witnessed. You are destined to
see Karëa and indeed yourself meet a similar end. The scriptures say that one
should never go before a king with empty hands. Accept, then, this head as my
gift to you. Be free from anxiety only for as long as I do not slay Karëa.”
Ghaöotkaca turned away from Duryodhana and resumed his attack on Karëa,
who was hemmed in by Päëòava warriors striving to hold him in check. The
Räkñasa sent a stream of shafts at Karëa and the fight between them carried on
in earnest. Like two tigers tearing each other with their claws, they mangled
each other with their lances, arrows and darts. Their blazing shafts lit up the
battlefield. No one could look at them as they released their weapons. Covered
with wounds and steeped in their own blood, they resembled two hills of red
chalk with rivulets flowing down their sides. Even though both were
endeavoring to their utmost, they could not make the other flinch. The twang
of their bows filled the four quarters like the continuous rumbling of thunder.
Realizing that he could not overpower his foe with arrows, Ghaöotkaca invoked
the Räkñasa weapon. Karëa was immediately encircled by a force of demons
armed with large rocks, lances, trees and clubs. Other Räkñasas appeared in the
sky and rained down an incessant shower of javelins, battle-axes and iron
wheels on Karëa and the Kaurava army. Everyone fled in alarm. Only Karëa,
proud of his strength, did not flee. With tens of thousands of arrows he
checked the Räkñasa illusions and countered their weapons. Ghaöotkaca
rushed at Karëa with his mace whirling above his head. Karëa cut the mace
apart with a dozen arrows and pierced his chest with twenty more. Stopped in
his tracks, Ghaöotkaca hurled at Karëa a razor-edged discus adorned with
jewels and shining brilliantly. Karëa again cut the weapon to pieces almost as
soon as it left the Räkñasa’s hand.
Seeing his discus fall in fragments, Ghaöotkaca blazed up in anger and covered
Karëa with arrows as Rähu covers the sun. Karëa countered his attack and
sent a similar number of shafts at his foe. Ghaöotkaca rose into the sky and
soared above Karëa’s head. He dropped rocks and trees on him by the
hundreds, but Karëa smashed them to pieces with his arrows. Invoking a
celestial weapon, Karëa pierced Ghaöotkaca all over his body with so many
arrows that he appeared like a porcupine with erect quills.
708

Ghaöotkaca used his own illusory powers to counter Karëa’s weapon, then
disappeared from view. Suddenly, showers of arrows began to appear from all
parts of the sky and from every quarter. They fell upon the Kauravas and
Karëa from all sides. Karëa invoked other divine weapons, but Ghaöotkaca
appeared in a form with many huge heads and swallowed them. He ranged
about the heavens and on the ground, seeming to be in many places at once.
At one moment he was seen in a vast form and in the next he was as small as a
thumb. He entered the earth and went high into the sky. Appearing at a great
distance, he suddenly reappeared right next to Karëa.
Ghaöotkaca created a mountain on the battlefield which issued forth a shower
of weapons. Karëa, unruffled, broke the mountain to pieces by means of a
celestial missile. The Räkñasa then created a dense blue cloud above Karëa that
dropped a thick shower of boulders. Karëa blew the cloud away with the
Väyavya weapon. With limitless arrows, he continuously destroyed the Räkñasa
illusions. Thousands of demons then attacked Karëa with every kind of deadly
weapon. Karëa checked all his attackers with swift shafts shot with such speed
that they could not be seen until they struck their target. The afflicted Räkñasa
forces appeared like a host of wild elephants assailed by an angry lion. Karëa
destroyed them like the god of fire burning down all creatures at the end of
creation. Only Ghaöotkaca could stand before the enraged Karëa as he
released his weapons.
Bhéma’s son then created a chariot created by his own powers of illusion. The
chariot resembled a hill and was yoked to a hundred goblin-headed asses as big
as elephants. They drew Ghaöotkaca close to Karëa, and the Räkñasa hurled a
celestial lance at him that blazed through the sky like a lightning bolt. Amazing
all the onlookers, Karëa caught the lance and threw it back at Ghaöotkaca.
The surprised Räkñasa leapt clear and the lance hit his chariot, smashing it
into a thousand flaming pieces and killing its horses and charioteer. As his
chariot exploded, Ghaöotkaca rose again into the sky. Karëa directed
numerous celestial weapons at him, but he avoided them all by his agility and
illusory powers.
He multiplied himself into a hundred forms so that Karëa could not
distinguish which of them was actually his enemy. Then he made ferocious
animals appear from all directions. Lions, tigers, hyenas, fire-tongued snakes
and iron-beaked vultures issued forth and ran screaming or roaring at Karëa
and the other Kauravas. Packs of wolves and leopards with gruesome features
709

rushed across the field, along with numerous ghosts, pishachas, jinn and men
with beasts’ heads. Karëa remained steadfast on his chariot and struck all the
creatures with straight-flying shafts. Uttering incantations sacred to the sungod, he burned up his assailants by the tens of thousands. Struck by Karëa’s
mantra-charged arrows, their bodies fell to the earth in charred and mutilated
pieces.
Ghaöotkaca vanished from sight and boomed out at Karëa from across the sky,
“Your end is near, wretch. Wait and I will slay you.”
Karëa, unable to see his opponent, covered the sky with arrows. Suddenly, a
great red cloud appeared in the heavens, casting a red glow over the battlefield.
It emitted flashes of lightning and tongues of fire. The cloud roared as if
thousands of drums were being beaten simultaneously. From it fell countless
gold-winged shafts, spears, heavy clubs, spiked bludgeons, razor-edged discuses
and numerous other weapons. They dropped on the surviving Kauravas, who
wailed in distress. From out of the cloud flew thousands of Räkñasas clutching
spears and battle-axes. They ranged about the sky like flying mountains. With
blazing faces and sharp teeth, the monstrous demons struck terror into the
Kauravas’ hearts. Descending onto the battlefield, they slaughtered
Duryodhana’s forces without mercy. A confused din arose in the gloom of the
night battle as thousands of brave warriors lost their lives. Unable to stand
against their attackers, the Kauravas fled. As they ran they cried, “Run! All is
lost! The gods with Indra at their head have come to destroy us.”
Karëa alone, covered by arrows, remained fearless. He fought back against the
Räkñasas, warding off their attack and sending his blazing steel shafts into the
sky and in all directions. Closing on his intrepid foe, Ghaöotkaca hurled four
irresistible lances that slew Karëa’s horses. Karëa saw him swiftly approaching,
his scimitar held high. All around him he heard the Kauravas’ wails and cries:
“O Karëa, use Indra’s weapon to slay this colossus. Otherwise, he will kill us all
with his mighty illusions.”
Karëa reflected. There was no alternative. The Räkñasa was consuming all his
celestial weapons. Nothing could stop him except the infallible Çakti. Seeing
that Gatotkacha would also slay him, he forgot about Arjuna and snatched the
Çakti weapon from its gold case. Placing it on his bow he aimed it at the
Räkñasa while uttering the mantras. The battlefield around him became
brilliantly illuminated, as if the sun had risen. Fearful winds blew and thunder
resounded in the heavens. Karëa released the weapon and it flew like a fireball
710

at Ghaöotkaca. The Räkñasa saw his end approaching and suddenly expanded
his body to an immense size. Towering above the battlefield, he was struck full
on the chest by the Çakti. It passed clean through his body and flew up into the
sky, disappearing into the heavens to return to Indra.
Slain instantly, Ghaöotkaca fell toward the Kauravas. His huge frame crushed a
complete division of warriors as he hit the ground. As he died, his frightful
illusions vanished. Seeing his opponent killed, Karëa roared with joy.
Duryodhana and his brothers shouted with him and the Kauravas beat drums
and blew conches. They surrounded Karëa and praised him with cheerful
voices.

Chapter 21
Dåñöadyumna Encounters Droëa
Beholding Bhéma’s son killed and laying like a hill on the battle-field, the
Päëòavas shed tears of grief. To everyone’s amazement, however, Kåñëa uttered
loud war cries and laughed. Dancing on the terrace of Arjuna’s chariot, He
clapped His arms in happiness. He embraced Arjuna with tears in His eyes.
Arjuna looked at Him with surprise. “Why, O Madhusüdana, are You showing
delight at such a time? Our troops are crying in sorrow. We also are griefstricken to see Hiòimbé’s son slain. O all-knowing one, tell me truly why You
have lost Your mind. I consider Your fickleness to be as incredible as the ocean
drying up or Mount Meru walking.”
With His hand on His friend’s shoulder, Kåñëa replied, “O Dhanaïjaya, I feel
an overwhelming happiness. Now that Karëa has discharged his Çakti weapon,
you may consider him dead. No person could have confronted him in battle if,
like Kärttikeya himself, he stood with the Çakti in hand. By good fortune he
has been deprived of his natural armor and now of the dart he received in
exchange for the invulnerable coat of mail. He is now like an infuriated,
venomous serpent stupefied by incantations, or like a fire with quenched
flames.”
Kåñëa told Arjuna that ever since He had heard that Karëa had received the
Çakti, He had been in anxiety. He knew the weapon’s terrible power. Even
711

Arjuna would have been unable to check it. Now it had been spent. Karëa
could not use it again.
Arjuna looked at Ghaöotkaca. The Çakti must surely be something
extraordinary if it had brought down that mighty Räkñasa. Why, then, had
Karëa not used it earlier against him?
Seeing Arjuna’s mystified expression and understanding his mind, Kåñëa said,
“Each day Dhåtaräñöra’s sons would counsel Karëa to use his Çakti and slay you,
O Pärtha, and he would come out firmly resolved to do so. It was I who
confounded his attempts. Keeping you at other parts of the battle, I gave him
little chance to release the dart. He was always awaiting his chance. It would
not have been long until he encountered you in single combat. O Pärtha, now
you need have no fear of that encounter.”
Arjuna realized that it must have been more than just Kåñëa’s tactical
maneuvers that had saved him. Karëa had surely had opportunities to hurl the
weapon. His intelligence and memory must have been confounded by the
indwelling Supersoul. The Päëòava looked with wonder at Kåñëa. If He desired
one’s protection, then how could one be killed? And if He wished for
someone’s death, then who could protect him?
Yudhiñöhira was sorrowful to witness Ghaöotkaca’s death. He sat down on the
terrace of his chariot and wept. Bhéma, his own heart rent with grief, tried to
comfort him. Kåñëa went over to Yudhiñöhira and said, “O son of Kunté, do not
give way to grief at such a critical time. In this dread hour of night, our roaring
foes are cheering and rushing at us again. Seeing you dispirited, our own men
will lose heart for the fight.”
Yudhiñöhira wiped his eyes with his hands. “You always see the excellent path
of duty, O Keçava. We must surely remain in battle, despite reverses. But
remembering the many services and kindnesses Bhéma’s son rendered us, my
heart aches. That mighty-armed hero was devoted to us and has laid down his
life in our service. The affection I bore for him was no less than the affection I
feel for Sahadeva. The suta’s son slew him before our eyes. The evil-minded
Karëa was also instrumental in Abhimanyu’s death.”
As he spoke to Kåñëa, Yudhiñöhira looked out into the night. The battle still
raged all around the fallen Ghaöotkaca. Karëa’s illuminated standard could be
seen moving among the Päëòava forces, with fire-tipped arrows speeding away
from him in all directions. Yudhiñöhira’s face set into firm lines. He got to his
feet and took hold of his bow, the hand-carved horn studded with glowing
712

gems.
The Päëòava king called out to Kåñëa as he moved off. “Karëa and Droëa are
destroying our army like a pair of infuriated elephants destroying a forest of
reeds. O Keçava, I think the time has come for them to die. I myself will
advance against Karëa. I cannot bear to see his prowess any longer. It seems
Arjuna does not wish to kill him, so I will do it myself.”
After ordering Bhéma to engage with Droëa and his supporters, Yudhiñöhira
instructed his charioteer to take him toward Karëa. As he left, blowing his
conch and twanging his bow, Kåñëa said to Arjuna, “Lo, under the influence of
anger your esteemed elder brother is advancing against Karëa. It is not right
that you should allow him to engage in a fight with the suta, whose death you
have sworn to accomplish.”
Arjuna told Kåñëa to urge his horses on and to quickly follow Yudhiñöhira, but
just at that moment, they saw Vyäsadeva appear on the battlefield near
Yudhiñöhira, who stopped his chariot next to the sage and got down to offer his
obeisances. Vyäsadeva touched his head in blessing and said, “O foremost of
the Bharatas, it is fortunate that Arjuna still lives, although he encountered
Karëa several times in battle. The Çakti with which Karëa slew Ghaöotkaca
was meant for Arjuna, and only by good fortune did he not use it on him. If a
serious duel had taken place between Karëa and Arjuna, he would surely have
employed the Çakti. A great calamity would then have overtaken you.
Ghaöotkaca has saved you from that today. The Räkñasa’s death was ordained
by destiny. Do not give way to wrath or sorrow. All beings in this world must
die.”
Pacifying Yudhiñöhira, the sage told him that the war was almost over. “On the
fifth day from now the earth will come under your sway. Meditate on virtue.
Set your mind on forbearance, charity, truth and asceticism. O son of Kunté,
victory always follows righteousness.”
After comforting Yudhiñöhira the sage vanished. The Päëòava king, his anger
abated, then called for Dåñöadyumna and said, “The time for which you were
born has now come. Go and check the mighty Droëa in battle. For this express
purpose did you spring from fire, armed with a bow and sword, and encased in
shining mail. Attack Droëa at once. Do not fear. Let Çikhaëòé, the twins, your
father Drupada, Virata, Sätyaki, and all the Païchälas and Kekayas go with
you. Throw down the preceptor and end this ghastly war.”
Arjuna came up to Yudhiñöhira, who said, “O Dhanaïjaya, I see now that you
713

have been saved from disaster. It is Kåñëa alone who is our protector. You
should now exert yourself to destroy Karëa. Dåñöadyumna is advancing against
the preceptor. Only four or five akshauhinis remain on the field. This war
cannot last much longer.”
The two brothers looked around the battlefield. It was just past midnight and
the troops were tired. Some of them had lain down to sleep wherever they had
been fighting, unable to continue any longer. Others fought on, blinded by
sleep and swinging out wildly with their weapons. Warriors were slain while
almost unconscious from fatigue, not even feeling the blows which ended their
lives.
Seeing the soldiers’ condition, Arjuna rode out into their midst and called out,
“You men are all oppressed by drowsiness. If you like you may desist from the
fight. Lay down your weapons and your bodies. When the sun rises we may
resume the battle.”
Praising Arjuna for his compassion, the troops stopped fighting and rested.
The entire battlefield gradually became silent as the men lay down to sleep on
the ground or on the backs of their slumbering elephants and horses. Others
lay on the terraces of their cars, their bows and swords lying next to them.
Stilled by sleep, the powerful warriors and their animals lay with their many
ornaments gleaming in the moonlight. The field appeared beautiful, like the
work of a skilled artist.
Gradually the sky glowed red and the sun rose from the eastern hills. As the
sun illuminated the field, the troops stirred and again rose for battle. The two
sides were still intermingled in the positions where they had last fought.
Stretching their bodies and rubbing their eyes, they bowed toward the east and
offered prayers to the sun-god. Then, mounting their chariots and taking up
their weapons, they regrouped into their respective divisions and waited for
the order to recommence the fight.
***
Duryodhana had not been happy with the decision to rest for the night, but
the other Kuru chiefs had disagreed with him. He had wanted to seize the
advantage gained by Ghaöotkaca’s death. The huge Räkñasa had killed
thousands of warriors as he fell, evening the odds between the two armies.
Duryodhana was infuriated that the Kauravas had not been able to gain the
upper hand when they had the chance. Going to Droëa he said harshly, “You
714

should have shown no quarter to our weakened enemy. You should not have
permitted our troops to follow Arjuna’s order. Again and again you have
spared the Päëòavas. This is my own ill luck.”
Droëa looked angrily at the prince. “Here I am, still clad in armor and striving
to kill your enemies, and I will do whatever can be done by the might of one’s
arms. Still, I do not see that we will defeat the Päëòavas, especially Arjuna. If
he comes at us in a wrathful mood, we will all be swiftly dispatched to
Yamaräja’s mansion. How is it that you fail to understand this truth, O King,
when you have seen it so many times with your own eyes?”
Enraged to hear Droëa praising Arjuna again, Duryodhana replied, barely able
to control his voice, “O teacher, today, assisted by Dushashana, Karëa and my
uncle Çakuni, I will slay Arjuna in battle.”
Droëa laughed. “May good befall you, O Bharata. Your words befit a fool. What
presumptuous kñatriya would venture to fight with Arjuna, who stands with
Kåñëa by his side and the Gäëòéva in his hand? Has any man ever returned
safely after challenging Arjuna? Surely you have no intelligence. Suspicious of
everyone, you are cruel and rebuke even those who work for your cause. Go
and fight, then, and prove your boastful words in battle. You have declared
many times that you will crush the Päëòavas. Today we will see you prove your
claim. Take your uncle, who prefers to fight with dice, and the vain Karëa, and
stand before Arjuna and his brothers. There they are, waiting for you. Go and
do what should be done by a brave kñatriya. You have enjoyed this life to the
full. By offering sacrifices and giving charity, you have no debts. There is
nothing to stop you. Go and fight without fear.”
Droëa turned away. Nothing gave him greater pain than fighting for this
arrogant prince. What sinful acts had he performed in previous lives that he
was now compelled to side with Duryodhana against the Päëòavas? Riding into
the remaining Kauravas, Droëa gave the order to fight. The warriors cheered,
blew on their conches, and beat their drums. Then they moved off in a body
toward the Päëòavas, determined to fight to the death.
On that fifteenth morning, Droëa fought with Drupada and Virata. The two
monarchs stood at the head of the Païchäla and Chedi armies. Disregarding
them both, Droëa began slaughtering their troops. He quickly caused a terrible
destruction among the warriors, annihilating five thousand chariot fighters in
less than half an hour. The Päëòavas looked at Droëa as if he were fire.
Whichever way he directed his weapons he routed the Päëòava army. None
715

could approach him as he let go his flaming arrows.
A group of three Païchäla princes, sons of Dåñöadyumna and Çikhaëòé,
valiantly charged at Droëa. They struck him with hundreds of fierce shafts,
but he did not waver. Licking his lips, Droëa cut down all three princes at once
with razor-headed arrows, and they fell headlong to the earth.
Drupada and Virata charged at Droëa from both sides. They afflicted him with
long shafts that made him rock on the terrace of his chariot. Drupada hurled
ten lances in swift succession, followed by ten steel shafts tipped with fire.
Droëa cut down all the missiles and struck Drupada on the chest with three
arrows. Drupada angrily threw a dart, decked with gold and gems, at his foe,
but Droëa cut it to pieces with his shafts.
Deciding to slay his opponents, who themselves had killed so many of the
Kauravas, Droëa took out a couple of crescent-headed arrows forged entirely of
steel. Uttering mantras, he released the arrows. Drupada and Virata’s heads
were severed. As the two old kings dropped lifeless from their chariots, Droëa
returned to slaughtering their armies.
Dåñöadyumna, witnessing the deaths of both his sons and his father, screamed
out to the troops, “Attack Droëa! May any man who turns away from Droëa
today lose the merits of all his pious acts.”
Cheered by Droëa’s killing of the two Päëòava generals, Duryodhana came to
his assistance with Karëa and Çakuni. Duryodhana’s remaining brothers also
surrounded Droëa to protect him from attack. The Kaurava warriors knew that
Dåñöadyumna would now try his utmost to fulfill the prophesy that said he
would kill Droëa.
In the meantime, Bhéma became senseless with rage upon seeing Droëa
destroying the Päëòava forces. He came up to Dåñöadyumna and spoke harshly.
“What man regarding himself a kñatriya would stand by and watch his sons and
father being slain? Having uttered a terrible oath in the assembly of kings, why
do you not act upon it? There stands your sworn enemy, like a sacred fire with
arrows and darts for its fuel and the bodies of men for its libations. If you will
not slay him, then I will do it myself. Stand aside. I will dispatch this old
Brahmin to Yamaräja’s abode at once.”
Bhéma broke away from Dåñöadyumna and rushed into the Kauravas’ midst. He
released torrents of shafts that swept away the fighters opposing him.
Dåñöadyumna, chastened by the rebuke, followed him, trying to fight his way
through to Droëa, who was now surrounded by a large number of Kauravas.
716

The Päëòava forces came up behind him and the two armies merged in a
frenzied melee. As the two armies clashed, the sky was screened with dust and
everyone thought night had again set in. The warriors climbed over dead
bodies to reach their foes, swinging their swords and thrusting forward with
sharp-tipped spears. Chariots could make no progress. Horses reared, unable to
move in any direction. Men screamed in pain and then fell, dying, calling out
to their loved ones. Many brave warriors lay mortally wounded and filled with
joy, awaiting their ascent to the celestial regions.
Arjuna, looking for his chance to confront Karëa, encountered Droëa first. As
Bhéma and Dåñöadyumna beat a path through the Kauravas toward the
preceptor, Arjuna came up behind them. While Bhéma was engaged with
Duryodhana and his brothers and Dåñöadyumna was held by Açvatthämä,
Arjuna sent his gold-winged arrows at Droëa by the thousands. A mighty
battle ensued between teacher and pupil that astonished the onlookers. They
appeared like two dancers on a stage, exhibiting their most wonderful motions.
Arrows flew through the sky like flocks of swans. Meeting in the heavens, the
shafts exploded in showers of sparks and fire.
Droëa invoked every celestial weapon he knew, but as soon as they issued from
his bow Arjuna destroyed them. Droëa smiled and applauded his prowess. In
the sky Siddhas and Gandharvas watched in wonder and praised both warriors.
They could not perceive any difference between them as they stood releasing
their weapons without pause. Neither could gain an advantage over the other.
The gods considered the fight to be as if Rudra had divided himself in two and
waged war against himself. “These two are neither humans nor celestials,” they
declared. “This is a battle of brahma energy which transcends all earthly
powers. If they desired, these warriors could destroy the universe.”
While Arjuna and Droëa fought, Dåñöadyumna advanced steadily toward
them, intent on killing Droëa. He was followed by the twins, who were met by
Kåtavarmä and Kåpa. The heroes contended while the armies fought savagely
around them.
Sätyaki, following Arjuna’s path, came upon Duryodhana. Long ago in
Hastinäpura, when Sätyaki had come to Droëa’s school, they had been friends.
Even though Sätyaki had become Arjuna’s disciple, he had maintained his
relationship with Duryodhana. The two men gazed at one another across the
field, remembering their youthful sports together. Duryodhana called out, “Ho
there, dear friend. How cursed is the duty of kñatriyas. Fie upon might and the
717

desire for wealth. O foremost of Sini’s race, in the days of our childhood you
were more dear to me than life itself. Alas, all those days of friendship become
nothing on a battlefield. Impelled by rage and covetousness we stand here bent
on each other’s death. Alas, where have the carefree days of our youth gone?”
Sätyaki lowered his bow and called back, “That he must fight even with his
preceptor has always been a kñatriya’s duty. O King, do not hesitate. If you love
me, then slay me without delay. By doing so, you will launch me into the
regions of the righteous. Display your full prowess. I no longer wish to witness
my friends’ slaughter.”
Tears fell from Sätyaki’s eyes as he spoke. He knew the days of friendship he
had enjoyed with the Päëòavas and Kauravas were gone. Their friendly fights
of the past were now in earnest. Bending his bow he shot a series of long shafts
at Duryodhana, who immediately replied with his own arrows. The two men
pierced one another repeatedly and roared in anger. A battle resembling that
between Arjuna and Droëa developed. The sky was filled with arrows as both
warriors invoked their celestial weapons. Gradually, Sätyaki prevailed over the
Kaurava and Karëa came to Duryodhana’s rescue. Assisted by Karëa, the king
pulled clear of Sätyaki, his body lacerated by arrows.
Droëa continued to destroy the Päëòava army as if appointed by Death for
their destruction. The oppressed troops’ screams filled the air as he assailed
them with countless blazing shafts. Witnessing Droëa’s power, Yudhiñöhira felt
he could never become victorious. He met Arjuna and Bhéma and revealed his
anxiety. “It seems that Droëa will consume us. No one can check that mighty
hero.”
Kåñëa replied, “What you say is true, O King. Droëa cannot be checked as long
as he stands with his weapons raised. But if he lowers them, he can be slain. I
think if he hears that his son has been killed, he will lose all heart for the fight.
Tell him that Açvatthämä is dead. Then he will lower his bow and we will kill
him.”
Arjuna was shocked. “I cannot accept this, O Mädhava.” But Bhéma, upon
hearing Kåñëa’s words, immediately broke away. He raced into a nearby
Kaurava elephant division. At its head rode Indravarma, the Malava ruler.
Bhéma knew his elephant was named Açvatthämä. Whirling his iron mace, the
Päëòava smashed the beast and slew it and its rider together. He then rushed
over to Droëa and bellowed out, “Açvatthämä is slain! Açvatthämä is slain!”
As he deceived Droëa, his voice was tremulous and his heart wavered, but he
718

knew it was Kåñëa’s instruction, so he called out again and again, telling Droëa
that Açvatthämä was dead.
Hearing Bhéma’s words, Droëa stopped fighting. His limbs seemed to dissolve
like sand in water. However, recalling his son’s prowess, he decided it could not
be true. Bhéma was known to be capricious. It would not be beyond him to
speak an untruth in anger or in jest. Droëa rallied himself and resumed his
assault on the Päëòavas. Dåñöadyumna had reached him and they had begun to
fight again. Holding off Dåñöadyumna’s attack, the Kuru general continued
annihilating the Päëòava forces. He invoked the terrible Brahmä weapon.
Warriors fell to the earth like trees uprooted in a tempest. Heads and arms flew
about as Droëa’s arrows fell on his enemies. In a short time, he had killed ten
thousand chariot fighters before Yudhiñöhira’s eyes, even while Dåñöadyumna
assailed him with all his strength. Droëa stood on the battlefield like a blazing
fire without a single curl of smoke.
As Droëa surveyed his ravaged foes, there suddenly appeared in the sky above
him a group of åñis headed by Agni. His own father, Bharadväja, along with
Vasiñöa, Viçvämitra, Gautama, Kaçyapa, and many other celestial sages stood in
the sky in subtle forms. They addressed Droëa in a single voice that only he
could hear. “You are fighting unfairly, O Droëa, using celestial weapons
against lesser warriors. It is now time for you to die. Cast away your weapons.
You are a learned Brahmin and such cruelty does not become you. By
employing the Brahmä weapon to kill ordinary men, you have earned
disrepute. Stop these sinful acts and stop fighting. Your days are now at an
end.”
Droëa looked around. Dåñöadyumna was still near him, roaring out his
challenge. Perhaps the time for the prophesy’s fulfillment had arrived. Droëa’s
arms fell to his side. He could not continue. Bhéma’s words still troubled him,
and the sages’ speech pained him even more. Could Açvatthämä actually be
dead? Who could he ask and be sure to receive the truth? Seeing Yudhiñöhira
not far away, the Kuru general went toward him. He was the one to ask––
Yudhiñöhira would speak no lie.
Kåñëa saw Droëa coming toward Yudhiñöhira and said, “Save us from Droëa, O
King. If he fights for even a half day more, your army will be finished. Under
the circumstances, falsehood is better than truth. Speaking falsehood in order
to preserve life is not a sin.”
Kåñëa cited a scriptural passage that sanctioned lying under certain
719

circumstances, including times when life was endangered. Yudhiñöhira
reflected on Kåñëa’s words. He could not ignore them. He had never in his life
spoken even an ambiguity. The thought of a lie was difficult to face. Yet if
Droëa was not checked, his forces would be defeated. The Päëòava
remembered Droëa’s own prophetic statement at the beginning of the war:
that he would be overpowered at a time when he heard something disagreeable
from a creditable source. Reluctantly, Yudhiñöhira agreed to Kåñëa’s suggestion.
As the Kuru preceptor approached him, he gave him the false news.
“Açvatthämä is dead,” he called out, adding inaudibly at the end, “the
elephant,” as he could not tell an utter untruth under any circumstances.
Until that time, Yudhiñöhira’s horses seemed to move across the field without
touching the earth. After he lied to Droëa, his horses descended to earth. The
sages looking on wondered why that was so. Some said that Yudhiñöhira’s lie
had been the cause, while others argued that his reluctance to obey Kåñëa’s
order was the reason.
As soon as Yudhiñöhira spoke, Droëa felt his heart sink into fathomless grief.
His agony was compounded by the sages’ words, which made him feel like he
had offended the Päëòavas. Distracted by sorrow, he moved away from
Yudhiñöhira with his weapons lowered. Dåñöadyumna attacked. Droëa was
struck all over, but he did not resist. He was plunged into despair.
Dåñöadyumna attacked him with even more force and the old Kuru chief,
incited to anger, finally raised his bow to fight back. Displaying his
incomparable lightness of hand, he cut down all of Dåñöadyumna’s arrows. He
chanted mantras, invoking celestial weapons to destroy Dåñöadyumna, but they
no longer appeared at his command. Marveling, he fired volleys of ordinary
arrows at his foe. Suddenly, he saw that his stock of shafts, inexhaustible for
the last fifteen days, was empty.
Despondent, Droëa decided to give up his life. He dropped his bow and
repeatedly cried out his son’s name. Looking over at the other Kurus, he called
out, “O Duryodhana, O Karëa, O Kåpa, fight with all your power. I will now
lay aside my weapons.”
Droëa sat down in his chariot and assumed a meditative posture. With his eyes
half-closed and arms outstretched, he fixed his mind on Viñëu. As he entered
into trance, he intoned the sacred syllable Om. The celestial sages, still
stationed in the heavens, saw Droëa leave his mortal frame and ascend toward
the higher regions. It seemed to them as if another sun was rising in the sky as
720

the Brahmin rose upwards.
Dåñöadyumna, unaware that Droëa had already departed, saw his chance.
Taking up a razor-edged saber he jumped down from his chariot and ran
toward the Kuru preceptor. All the warriors witnessing this called to him to
stop, but he was not deterred. Amid cries of “Alas!” and “Fie!” he jumped onto
Droëa’s chariot with the sword held high. Grabbing hold of Droëa’s knotted
hair, he dragged him and, with a great sweep of his saber, severed his head. He
then threw the head toward the Kauravas and roared in joy, whirling his
blood-soaked sword in the air.
Arjuna had been shouting at Dåñöadyumna to capture Droëa and bring him
alive to Yudhiñöhira. He was mortified by Dåñöadyumna’s viciousness. His heart
melted with sorrow at the cruel killing of his beloved teacher. Bhéma, however,
cheered and ran over to joyfully embrace Dåñöadyumna. Yudhiñöhira was
afflicted by different emotions. Overjoyed that the hostilities would soon end,
he was nevertheless full of misgivings that Droëa’s death had been brought
about by deceit. Like Arjuna, he was also saddened to see Dåñöadyumna
mercilessly butcher his preceptor.
The Kauravas were struck by grief and fear. Their all-conquering general was
dead. Unable to believe it, they fled. Duryodhana, Karëa, Çakuni, and the
Kuru chiefs were overwhelmed by sorrow, and they ran along with their troops.
As they rushed from the cheering Päëòava forces, they encountered
Açvatthämä moving in the opposite direction, like an alligator swimming
against a river’s current. Surprised to see the Kauravas retreating, he stopped
Duryodhana and asked, “Why do I see our army flying, O King? Why are you
and all of our other heroes running away? Surely some unthinkable calamity
has befallen us.”
Duryodhana could not tell Açvatthämä the news. He looked down and said
nothing. Kåpa came up to his side and Duryodhana said, “O son of Saradwata,
tell Açvatthämä why we are fleeing.”
With tears flowing down his face, Kåpa said, “With that foremost of men
Droëa at our head, we have waged a great battle with the Païchälas, during
which he has slain not less than fifty thousand of their number. Penetrating
into the Päëòava ranks, your father scorched our enemies like the Destroyer
himself. None could stand before him. Therefore, the Päëòavas decided upon
an unfair means to check your father. Informing him that you had been slain,
O child, they deprived him of his senses and power. Dåñöadyumna, when he
721

saw him anxious and desisting from the fight, flew at him with sword held
high. Even as the preceptor sat in mystic meditation, and as many warriors
shouted at him to stop, Drupada’s son lopped off his head. Thus did your father
suffer death at the hands of a heartless warrior. This is why our troops are
fleeing.” Açvatthämä cried out. His bow dropped from his hand and he fell to
his knees. Insensible with rage, he shook like a tree in a tempest. His body
burned and he knelt with his head between his knees for a few moments.
Gradually regaining his composure, he stood up and said, “O Duryodhana, how
have the so-called virtuous Päëòavas committed such an act? Today they will
reap the consequences. Disregarding me, Dåñöadyumna has committed a
heinous deed. I swear by truth that the earth will soon drink his blood, as well
as that of Dharma’s son. If I do not slay every last one of the Païchälas, I will
not drag on my burdensome existence any longer. By any means, fair or foul, I
will bring about the end of Dåñöadyumna and his followers.”
Açvatthämä’s face glowed as he spat out the words. “Turn, O heroes, and fight
our enemies. I will charge at your head and annihilate any who come before
me. Today you will see me discharging fearful weapons equal to those of Rudra
or Viñëu. I have in my possession the Näräyaëa weapon, which my father gave
me, and which was given to him by Çiva. He was told by that unfailing god that
the weapon will destroy any at whom it is directed. I will use it today to crush
the entire Päëòava army. It can only be discharged once, and I have saved it
for such a moment of desperation. Now the world shall see its power.”
Açvatthämä roared repeatedly, inspiring new life into the Kauravas. They
cheered him and rallied the retreating troops. To the beating of drums and the
blasts of thousands of conchshells, the Kaurava army turned back toward the
Päëòavas.

Chapter 22
The Näräyaëa Weapon
As the Kauravas fled, the Päëòavas came together to discuss their next move.
Arjuna was furious with Dåñöadyumna. He smoldered as he spoke to
Yudhiñöhira. “Drupada’s son has committed a barbaric act. You too, O King, are
722

stained by sin. The preceptor trusted you to speak truth, but you deceived him
by uttering a lie garbed as truth. You will bear the shame of this act forever,
like that borne by Räma for killing Vali. Alas, I too am guilty in that I stood by
and suffered my teacher to be cheated and killed by his own disciples. Longing
for sovereignty, we have killed our own guru by foul means. I think it better for
me to die than to live on after being a party to such sin.”
Arjuna lamented at length, but no one replied. Kåñëa looked at him with
compassion. Arjuna’s love for Droëa was legendary. Unmanned by grief, he fell
to his knees and wept.
Seeing his younger brother in the grip of sorrow, Bhéma reproached him. “It is
strange indeed that today you preach morality like a åñi living in the woods.
Have you forgotten why we entered this war in the first place? Impelled by
kñatriya duty, we have come to punish Duryodhana and his followers. Do you
not recall how they abused the sinless Draupadé in our preceptor’s presence?
Have you forgotten how we were exiled to the forest even as Droëa stood by
and watched? For years we kept alive the flame of animosity so that we could
mete out the proper consequences to our foes. Now that we are doing so, you
lament in the name of virtue. If Droëa’s killing lacked virtue, then why did you
swear you would hurl your blazing weapons upon the Kauravas, headed by
Droëa himself?”
Bhéma’s voice rose in anger. Arjuna looked at him in silence. He was never
offended by his older brother’s words. Controlling his emotions with difficulty,
he listened as Bhéma went on. “Dear brother, you are rending our hearts with
your piteous lamentations and reprovals. At a time when praise is in order, you
are issuing stern judgments. Surely it is fortunate for our enemies that you are
now bent upon forbearance. For myself, however, I see Droëa’s death as fitting
and just. Now we should waste no time in crushing the remaining Kauravas,
headed as they will be by the now vengeful Açvatthämä.”
Arjuna clenched his teeth and said nothing. Dåñöadyumna stood nearby,
unrepentant. Arjuna glanced at him with reddened eyes and the Païchäla
prince addressed him in conciliatory tones.
“O Bhibatsu, I do not feel I have committed any sin. Although a Brahmin,
Droëa transgressed the duties of his order and thus became punishable by all
virtuous kings. By using his brahma power, he slew countless ordinary soldiers
with celestial weapons. In this way, he acted deceitfully and as a result has
himself been slain by deceit. No other course was possible. You should not
723

censure me for killing him; it was for that purpose that I took my birth from
fire. I have slain the ruthless warrior by whatever means I could. Otherwise, he
would have destroyed us all.”
Bhéma made sounds of approval as Dåñöadyumna continued. “By killing Droëa I
am freed from my debt to my father and my kinsmen. It would have been sinful
of me to have spared him. O Pärtha, you felled your aged grandsire. If that was
not sinful, then why is my act condemned? Droëa was a sinful wretch, given to
serving sinful men. You should not censure me, Arjuna, but since you do, I
forgive you from the love I bear for you and because you are Draupadé’s
husband. Be peaceful. Yudhiñöhira acted rightly and so did I. Between us we
have slain one whose business was injuring his own disciples. Now fight and
victory will soon be yours.”
Arjuna fumed as Dåñöadyumna insulted his teacher, but seeing both
Yudhiñöhira and Kåñëa remaining silent, he controlled himself. He only
glanced at Dåñöadyumna, muttering, “Fie! Fie!” under his breath.
Sätyaki, who had been seated on his chariot near Arjuna, suddenly leapt to his
feet. Unable to tolerate Dåñöadyumna’s words he exclaimed, “Is there no one
who will dispatch this sinful, low, and cursed wretch? O mean-minded one,
how do you dare utter such words? It is a wonder that your head did not shatter
into fragments when you were on the point of slaying your preceptor. You
deserve the condemnation of all pious men. Having obtained you––the
disgrace of their race––seven generations before and seven after you have
sunk into hell, deprived of their glory. You accuse Arjuna of killing Bhéñma,
but was it not your own wicked brother Çikhaëòé who caused his death? Surely
there are no men more sinful than the Païchälas.”
Sätyaki raised his mace as he continued to censure Dåñöadyumna. “If you again
speak such words, I will knock off your head with my mace. Simply by looking
at you, O killer of a Brahmin, one has to look at the sun to purify himself. If
you have any prowess, then stand before me with your weapons raised. I cannot
stand to hear you abuse both my teacher and my teacher’s teacher.”
Dåñöadyumna laughed. “O son of Madhu’s race, I forgive you for these words,
although you are the most sinful of men. Really, no one should show
forgiveness toward someone as wicked as you because forgiveness only leads
people like you to think I have no power. Have you forgotten how you, O one
who loves justice, slew Bhurisrava, even after he had defeated you and desisted
from the fight? Hold your tongue. You should not say anything more to me. If
724

you insist on uttering such words, I will dispatch you to Death’s abode.”
Dåñöadyumna also reminded Sätyaki of all the deceitful acts committed by the
Kauravas. Even on the battlefield it had been Droëa who had arranged for
Abhimanyu to be slain by unfair means. In war it is inevitable that the rules
are sometimes broken. Still, righteousness ultimately decides the victory.
“Therefore, fight on against the Kauravas, O Våñëi hero. There is no doubt
that they should be vanquished and slain by any means at our disposal.”
Sätyaki trembled with fury. His eyes bloodshot, he seized his mace and leapt
down from his chariot. He rushed at Dåñöadyumna. “I will waste no more words
on you. You will now be crushed by my mace.”
At a signal from Kåñëa, Bhéma jumped from his chariot and stood between the
two maddened warriors. He grabbed hold of Sätyaki, who dragged him a few
steps, roaring in fury. Sahadeva also sprang from his chariot and said, “O
foremost of men, we have no better friends than you two. Your races are as
dear to us as our own. You are dear friends to each other. Remember the duties
of friends toward friends and exercise forgiveness. This is no time to quarrel
among ourselves.”
Dåñöadyumna laughed. “Bhéma, release Sini’s grandson. Let him encounter me
like the wind encounters the mountains. I will soon quell his desire for battle.
Then I will destroy the remaining Kauravas. Or Arjuna can perform this feat.
Let me cut off this one’s head with my arrows. He takes me to be Bhurisrava
with his arm lopped off. Leave him. Either I will slay him or he will slay me.”
Sätyaki swelled in Bhéma’s arms and bellowed. He struggled to break free, but
Bhéma held him fast. Like the moon spreading its cooling rays at night, Kåñëa
then spoke consoling words to the two antagonists. Yudhiñöhira also pacified
them, and he and Kåñëa managed at last to allay their anger. As they both
calmed down and remounted their chariots, the Päëòavas suddenly heard the
sound of joyous roaring from the Kauravas. They looked at each other in
surprise. How were their enemies so enthused? After Droëa’s death their entire
army had broken and fled.
Hearing the approaching sound, Arjuna smiled and said, “Doubtlessly,
Açvatthämä has rallied our foes. He who upon his birth neighed like the
celestial horse Ucchaishravas, and who has arms like elephant trunks and a
face like a tiger, will soon come upon us in a rage. He will not tolerate his
father’s heinous killing. Dåñöadyumna now faces great danger. Let us prepare
ourselves for the fight.”
725

The Päëòavas saw the billowing clouds of dust rising as the Kauravas charged
them once again. Forgetting their own disagreements, the warriors quickly
moved into position, ready to receive the attack. They could see Açvatthämä’s
golden standard with its lion’s-tail emblem waving at the head of the
advancing Kaurava forces. Bhéma and the twins deployed a large contingent of
chariot fighters to surround and attack him before he reached Dåñöadyumna.
***
As the Kauravas raced back to battle, intent on avenging Droëa’s death, the
sun fell toward the west. Açvatthämä, having sworn to Duryodhana that he
would annihilate both Dåñöadyumna and the Païchäla army, thought of the
Näräyaëa weapon. Coming to within a half mile of the Päëòavas, he placed the
celestial arrow on his bow and recited the sacred incantations to invoke the
missile. A deep roar came from the sky as Droëa’s son summoned the weapon.
Tens of thousands of fiery arrows appeared on the battlefield and flew toward
the Päëòava army like sun rays. Countless red-hot iron balls fell from the sky
like lustrous meteors. Razor-edged discuses, axes, flaming spears, and spiked
maces filled the air. The Kauravas could not perceive their foes as the hail of
missiles fell toward them.
The Päëòavas became anxious. It seemed that blazing missiles were springing
into existence on every part of the battlefield. Wherever their warriors were
stationed a shower of weapons fell from the sky. The Päëòava army was
enveloped in a mass of arrows and darts. The troops fell by the thousands, cut
to pieces by the relentless assault. The Päëòava heroes tried to resist the
attack, but the harder they tried, the worse it became. The more it was resisted,
the more force the Näräyaëa-astra seemed to have. Seeing his army being
scorched, Yudhiñöhira shouted the order to retreat. His panic-stricken voice
rose above the din of the falling missiles striking his soldiers’ armor and shields.
“Flee for your lives! Do not look back. This weapon cannot be repelled. Surely
this is the result of killing our sinless preceptor. I and my brothers will enter
blazing fire. O warriors, go back to your homes.”
Kåñëa told Yudhiñöhira to remain calm. He knew how to resist the weapon.
Standing on Arjuna’s chariot He called, “All you kñatriyas, quickly throw aside
your weapons and come down from your chariots and elephants. Lie flat on the
ground without weapons. Do not attempt to fight this weapon, for that will
only increase its power. If you even think of contending with the weapon, you
726

will be slain.”
Hearing Kåñëa’s words, the warriors cast aside their weapons and threw
themselves to the ground. The missiles generated by the Näräyaëa weapon
passed harmlessly over their heads.
Bhéma saw the soldiers dropping their weapons and he shouted, “No one should
lay aside his arms. Do not fear this weapon hurled by Açvatthämä. I will
personally check its power with my swift-flying arrows. Striking Droëa’s son
with countless shafts, I will send him along the path taken by his father. O
Arjuna, how can you lay aside the Gäëòéva and lose your fame and glory?
Stand and fight. I will bear the brunt of this weapon on my broad chest. Today
you will all behold my prowess.”
Arjuna called back, “Bhéma, my vow is that I will not use the Gäëòéva against
Brahmins, cows, and any weapon of the holy Lord Näräyaëa. Against all these
will I lay it aside. You too should stand down, O hero. This all-devouring
weapon cannot be checked by the force of arms.”
Bhéma paid no heed to Arjuna and rushed at the Kauravas. Oblivious to the
thick shower of missiles filling the air, he stood on his chariot releasing fierce
steel arrows at Açvatthämä. Droëa’s son smiled and resisted Bhéma’s attack,
cutting down all his shafts as they came toward him. As all the Päëòava
warriors lay down on the field, the Näräyaëa-astra concentrated its full force
on Bhéma. He became completely shrouded by blazing missiles, appearing like a
sacrificial fire suddenly sprung up on the field. No one could even look at him,
so brilliant was his glowing effulgence beneath the attack of the Näräyaëaastra. Seeing his brother’s plight, Arjuna invoked the Varuëa weapon. The
watery weapon covered Bhéma, affording him protection from the everincreasing power of the Näräyaëa weapon. But Arjuna knew it would not be
long before his impetuous brother was overpowered.
Kåñëa suddenly jumped down from His chariot and ran toward Bhéma, telling
Arjuna to come with Him. The two heroes plunged fearlessly into the mass of
fire surrounding Bhéma. They seized hold of him and dragged him from his
chariot. Bhéma roared in anger as Arjuna tore his weapons from his grasp. In
an urgent voice Kåñëa said, “O son of Päëòu, what do you think you are doing?
If it were possible to check this weapon, we would all be fighting. Be still and
do not act so foolishly.”
Reluctantly, Bhéma assented to Kåñëa’s instructions. He lay still with his
weapons put aside. The Näräyaëa-astra receded. Its numerous missiles went
727

into the sky and soon vanished. When the battlefield was again clear of the
missiles, the Päëòavas got to their feet and took up their weapons. Saved from
a grave danger by Kåñëa’s advice, they mounted their chariots and horses and
roared out their battle cries.
Duryodhana was annoyed to see that his foes had escaped. He approached
Açvatthämä and said, “Quickly send that weapon again, for the Päëòavas have
rallied and will attack with all their power.”
Açvatthämä shook his head. “The Näräyaëa weapon can be used only once by
any man. If invoked again, it will slay the person using it. Kåñëa knew the
secret of countering this weapon and it has thus been baffled.”
Duryodhana cursed. “Then use whatever weapons you possess. Your power is
equal to that of Mahadeva himself. O son of Droëa, slay these murderers of
their preceptor without delay.”
Açvatthämä rushed into battle, seeking out Dåñöadyumna. He assailed him with
thousands of barbed arrows. Enraged, he bore down on his adversary with
frightening force. He slew his charioteer and four horses and smashed his
chariot. Dåñöadyumna came down to the ground and warded off Açvatthämä’s
attack with his sword and shield.
Sätyaki was near at hand and saw Dåñöadyumna’s predicament. Remembering
his duty as a kñatriya, he came quickly to his comrade’s assistance. He
enveloped Açvatthämä in a network of arrows which killed his horses and
charioteer. Droëa’s son then leapt from his chariot, still afflicted by Sätyaki’s
shafts. Kåpa came to his aid and took him onto his own chariot. Kåpa and
Karëa then attacked Sätyaki and Dåñöadyumna, as many other Päëòava and
Kaurava heroes rushed into the fray.
Mounting a fresh chariot, Açvatthämä came again toward Dåñöadyumna. Once
again Sätyaki came before him and Açvatthämä called out to the Vrishni
warrior, “O grandson of Sini, I know the partiality you bear for this killer of his
own teacher, but you shall not save him today. I swear by my life that I will slay
all the Païchälas, headed by this sinful wretch. You too shall fall a victim to
my arrows if you try to protect him, as will all the Päëòavas and their entire
army. I will not be stopped.”
Açvatthämä pierced Sätyaki with a volley of barbed arrows. As Sätyaki reeled,
Açvatthämä took up a long shaft that glowed with a brilliant effulgence. In an
instant he released it with all his power. It penetrated Sätyaki’s armor and dug
deeply into his shoulder. Stunned, the Vrishni fighter squatted on the terrace
728

of his chariot, and his charioteer took him away from the battle to recover.
Açvatthämä turned his attention to Dåñöadyumna, launching a vicious attack
on the Païchäla prince. Releasing his mantra-inspired shafts with all his
power, he pierced every part of his body. Dåñöadyumna was overpowered by the
sheer ferocity of Açvatthämä’s attack, and he leaned on his standard pole for
support. A number of Päëòava heroes rushed to his rescue. Headed by Bhéma
and Arjuna, they surrounded Açvatthämä, shooting arrows at him from all
sides. Açvatthämä countered their arrows with astounding speed and skill. He
struck all of his assailants with his own shafts and roared out his dreadful war
cry.
Not caring for his own life, Açvatthämä fought in a frenzy. The thought of his
father’s death drove him on as he forced back his attackers. No one had ever
seen him fight so fiercely. While holding the principal Päëòava warriors in
check, he simultaneously slew a large number of Païchäla soldiers with his
celestial weapons. Kings and princes of various domains came against Droëa’s
son, but they were all quickly slain.
The Païchälas turned and fled as Açvatthämä wrought an awful carnage
among them. But he killed them even as they ran in fear, their weapons cast
aside. Arjuna shouted, “O son of Droëa, stop killing ordinary soldiers. Here I
am, ready to destroy your pride. Exhibit the full limit of your prowess,
manliness and knowledge, and also of your partiality for Dhåtaräñöra’s sons and
hatred for us. Dåñöadyumna and I will crush you. He has already slain your
father and now stands ready to kill you as well.”
Açvatthämä writhed at Arjuna’s harsh words. Their old friendship from the
days in Droëa’s school was obviously forgotten. Now they were fighting to the
death. Glaring at the Päëòava, Açvatthämä thought of the Ägneya weapon.
He placed a golden shaft upon his bow, muttered the incantations with
concentration, then let it go with a cry. At once a thick shower of arrows fell
from the sky. A dense gloom enveloped the battlefield, and fiery meteors
dropped down. Fierce winds blew in every direction, lashing the warriors with
stones. The terrifying cries of Räkñasas and Piçäcas resounded from the
darkness, and jackals howled from all sides.
Afflicted by the celestial weapon, the Päëòava forces shrieked in fear and pain.
They were struck by blazing arrows that came at them from all directions.
Açvatthämä’s skill at the secret mystical sciences endowed the Ägneya weapon
with menacing power. Men, horses and elephants were slaughtered and burned
729

to ashes as if caught in the final conflagration that burns the worlds. But Agni,
remembering the incident at Khäëòavaprastha, had his fiery weapon pass
harmlessly over Arjuna and Kåñëa.
Seeing the fire-god’s irresistible energy summoned for the Päëòavas’
destruction, Arjuna composed his mind and thought of the brahmästra.
Invoking the most powerful of all weapons, he at once dissipated the dense
darkness. As Brahmä’s weapon neutralized Agni’s, the sky cleared and a cool
breeze blew. Tens of thousands of warriors lay on the battlefield, their bodies
burned beyond recognition.
Açvatthämä was amazed to see his weapon checked and Arjuna emerging
unscathed. How had he survived the Ägneya weapon, which had killed tens of
thousands of other warriors? Both Arjuna and Kåñëa had been right in the
path of the weapon, but both were unharmed. Açvatthämä felt hopeless. First
the Näräyaëa-astra, and now the Ägneya weapon––both had been foiled by
Arjuna and Kåñëa. How could he contend with such foes? They were
invincible. Throwing down his bow in despair, Açvatthämä jumped from his
chariot and ran from the battlefield. He cried out, “Everything is illusion!” and
sped away from the fight, entering a copse of trees. His grief for his father
overwhelmed him. He felt as if he would never be able to avenge him. Even his
most powerful weapons were ineffectual against the Päëòavas. What was the
use of fighting them?
As Açvatthämä was running, he met Vyäsadeva, who was approaching the
battlefield. Droëa’s son stopped and bowed before the åñi. He asked him why
his weapons were useless against Arjuna. Vyäsadeva explained that Kåñëa was
the Supreme Lord. He was Näräyaëa, or Viñëu; indeed, the immortal Näräyaëa
was simply a part of Kåñëa. There was no living being anywhere who could
overpower Kåñëa or anyone He protected. Even Çiva considered himself
Kåñëa’s servant. He too had once been bested by Him in a fight.
Hearing Vyäsadeva’s descriptions, Açvatthämä thought better of Kåñëa. If
Vyäsadeva’s words were true, then it was no surprise that his weapons had been
baffled. As long as Arjuna had Kåñëa on his chariot, there would be little point
in further encounters with him. Dispirited and sorrowful, Açvatthämä realized
that all-powerful destiny was ultimately in control. In the face of fate, man
could do nothing except execute his duty and leave the results to destiny. From
Vyäsadeva’s words, it seemed as though the Kauravas would be defeated. But
who could know ahead of time what destiny would finally decree?
730

Bowing again to the sage, Açvatthämä turned back toward the battlefield. It
was still his duty to fight for Duryodhana and, especially, to honor his slain
father; his enemies had to be punished. He could not leave the battle now.
As Açvatthämä returned, the sun was setting. The two armies retreated,
exhausted after fighting for almost two days and a night. Despondent at
Droëa’s death, the Kauravas returned sorrowfully to their camp, while the
Päëòavas returned to the sounds of trumpets, drums and conchshells.
When they reached their encampment, the Päëòavas saw that Vyäsadeva had
arrived. Arjuna got down from his chariot and went over to the sage. Bowing
and touching his feet, he said, “O all-opulent one, I have seen something today
which inspired me with great wonder. As I released arrows toward my foes, I
saw before me a male being, shining like fire. He held a blazing trident and
whichever way he turned, my enemies were burned and destroyed. Although
he never hurled his trident, nor any other weapon, his energy alone seemed to
annihilate my foes. Who is this personality, O great sage?”
Placing his hand on Arjuna’s head, who still knelt before him, Vyäsadeva
replied, “O son of Kunté, you have seen Shankara, the great destroyer of the
worlds. Out of his love and respect for Kåñëa, he walks before your chariot,
scorching your enemies with his irresistible energy. Even the powerful
universal protectors could not stand before him. Go forth and fight with
confidence, O Dhanaïjaya. Defeat is not for one who has Janärdana by his
side.”
After assuring the Päëòavas that the war would soon be over, Vyäsadeva left.
Worn out from the fight, the warriors went straight to their tents to rest for
the night.

Chapter 23
Karëa in Command
In Duryodhana’s tent the monarchs and warriors sat in silence, gazing at
Droëa’s empty seat. Duryodhana himself was overcome by grief. He drew long
breaths and stared at the ground. Some of his friends comforted him, citing
Vedic verses about the eternality of the soul and the temporality of all things
731

material. They also consoled Kåpa, who was lamenting the death of his beloved
friend and brother-in-law. Açvatthämä had gone to his tent, wanting to be
alone.
After a while the kings departed, leaving Duryodhana alone with Karëa, and
Çakuni, and his brothers. They said little and sat remembering the miseries
they had inflicted on the Päëòavas, feeling deep regret. As the evening wore
on, they lay down on costly couches. Tossing in anxiety, they could not rest.
The night dragged on. Duryodhana thought again of the Dänavas. It seemed
they had kept their promise to assist him. Droëa had fought demonically, but
still he had been brought down. What power did the Päëòavas have on their
side? Could nothing stop them?
As the sun at last approached the eastern sky, the Kauravas rose listlessly and
went about their morning rituals. Coming together again with the other
monarchs, they decided to install Karëa as their commander. The installation
ceremony was performed, and after giving charity to the Brahmins, they moved
toward the battlefield for the sixteenth day.
Praised and blessed by the Brahmins, the Kuru army marched out, determined
to avenge Droëa. Karëa rode at their head, clad in brilliant armor and shining
like his celestial father on his resplendent chariot. As he left for the battle,
Karëa cheered the Kauravas with his roars and shouts, while bards and poets
sang his glories. By his side rode Duryodhana, his remaining brothers behind
him. They were flanked by Açvatthämä, Kåpa, Kåtavarmä and Çalya. Other
powerful kings followed those heroes, leading their armies and forming them
into an array shaped like a bird. All the warriors then put aside their previous
reverses. Hoping for victory, they charged into battle with loud cries.
Seeing their foes approaching in a heroic mood, the Päëòavas arranged their
troops into a half-moon formation. The two armies converged, yelling out war
cries and blowing their conches. Of the original six million warriors, less than
one million remained. They all knew that the war would be over only when all
of them were slain. Duryodhana would fight to the last and the Päëòavas
would not relinquish their claim to their kingdom. There were still invincible
heroes on both sides who stood unflinching in battle. Thus it was certain the
two armies would be annihilated, leaving the great heroes on either side to
contend for the final victory.
Karëa, fired by his position as the Kaurava commander-in-chief, began to
slaughter the remaining Päëòava forces. As he released his oil-soaked arrows in
732

all directions, he seemed to his enemies to be like the blazing sun with its fierce
rays. Indiscriminate about whom he attacked, he felled soldiers, horsemen,
elephants, and chariot fighters alike. Bhéma, Nakula and Sätyaki rushed to
check his progress. They rained weapons upon him and gradually forced him
back. Other Kauravas came to Karëa’s assistance and a fierce battle ensued
between the heroes of both sides.
A terrible encounter took place between Bhéma and Açvatthämä which even
the celestials watched with wonder. Finally, Bhéma overpowered Açvatthämä,
who was carried unconscious from the battlefield. Bhéma was also wounded. He
collapsed, exhausted, and was similarly borne away by his charioteer.
Karëa, fighting his way free from his antagonists, careered again into the
Päëòava army. With innumerable arrows he crushed the troops, cutting
through their ranks like fire through a dry forest. Pursued by a number of
Päëòava heroes, he ranged about causing carnage among their forces.
On another part of the field, Arjuna fought without mercy. Charging against
the remaining Näräyaëas and the few surviving Samshaptakas, he ruthlessly
cut them down with his unfailing shafts. The Kaurava forces under Arjuna’s
attack appeared like the ocean tossed by a raging storm. Longing for his chance
to encounter Karëa for their final fight, he wasted no time in slaying his
unretreating foes.
Karëa, as he slaughtered the Païchäla and Somaka warriors, was caught and
challenged by Nakula. That fearless Päëòava warrior hurled a number of
deadly darts at Karëa, who responded by cutting them to pieces with swift
arrows. He shot blazing shafts at Nakula, who in turn cut them down with his
own. After fighting intensely for some time, the two men stood back and
glared at each other.
Nakula called out, “By good fortune have I had this opportunity to fight you
today. You are the root of all the misery we have suffered, and you are also to
blame for this great war. By your fault, so many great warriors now lie slain and
the world is filled with widows and orphans. Take the consequences of your
wickedness, O wretch. I am here to punish you.”
Karëa sneered. “O brave one, first strike me and then speak. Only after
achieving great feats in battle do heroes utter bold words. Let us see your
prowess. I will surely destroy your vanity.”
Both warriors immediately pierced each other with winged arrows fired at
blinding speed. They roared and circled one another. Both released countless
733

arrows that the other countered. As they invoked celestial weapons, the sky
was filled with shafts, casting a dark shadow over the battlefield. Gradually,
Karëa gained the upper hand. He slew Nakula’s charioteer and four horses.
Nakula took up a sword and shield, but Karëa quickly cut them to pieces. The
Päëòava then grasped his spiked mace and jumped down. Karëa broke the
mace with straight-flying shafts. Laughing, he rode over to his disarmed foe
and struck him with his bow. Nakula burned with shame and grief as Karëa
rebuked him.
“O child, go to your elder brothers. You should not wage war with the
powerful. Your strength lies only in words.”
Karëa, remembering again his promise to Kunté, did not attempt to kill
Nakula, who then ran to Yudhiñöhira in humiliation. Climbing aboard his
brother’s chariot, he shed hot tears of anger and sighed heavily. He thought of
Arjuna and Kåñëa. Soon the cruel-minded Karëa would meet his end. He could
display his power only for as long as those two great souls did not charge at him
in anger.
Karëa continued to assail the Päëòava forces. Circling around the field with
his bow constantly sending forth flaming shafts, he appeared like a wheel of
fire. He came against the Såïjayas and slaughtered them by the tens of
thousands. As Karëa annihilated his foes, other battles took place. Kåpa
contended with Dåñöadyumna, Kåtavarmä with Sätyaki, and Bhéma battled
Dhåtaräñöra’s sons and slew another twenty. Yudhiñöhira met Çalya, and
numerous other powerful heroes came together in a furious trial of arms. The
celestials were awed by the encounters.
Arjuna single-handedly destroyed the Näräyaëa army, even though he was
simultaneously surrounded by many powerful ratha and maharatha warriors.
With crescent-tipped shafts he beheaded his foes and lopped off their limbs.
Ranging about freely, he crushed the Kauravas with an endless stream of
arrows from the Gäëòéva.
As the sun reached the western horizon, the battlefield presented a gruesome
scene. Half of the warriors who had gone out to fight lay dead. The earth was
strewn with carcasses and the wreckage of chariots and armor. Bodies lay burnt
beyond all recognition. Flocks of vultures circled the field and jackals bayed.
Seeing darkness enveloping the combatants, Karëa ordered the Kaurava army
to withdraw. He did not want another night battle. The soldiers pulled away
from each other, praising their enemies’ prowess, and headed back to their
734

camps.
***
Duryodhana sat in his tent sighing and squeezing his hands. Of his eleven
akshauhini divisions, only one remained. It was almost inconceivable. So many
supposedly invincible heroes had been slain. Warriors who had never before
tasted defeat now lay embracing the earth like men clasping their lovers. Most
of the damage had been done by Arjuna and Bhéma. How much longer could it
go on? Those two haughty Päëòavas had to be killed. He would take care of
Bhéma, but why had Karëa not yet killed Arjuna? Duryodhana looked at his
friend.
Understanding Duryodhana’s mind, Karëa said, “Arjuna is always alert,
persevering, skillful and intelligent. Even when an opportunity arises to
overpower him, Kåñëa intervenes and saves him. Still, I will not be thwarted.
Today he evaded me by various kinds of deceit, but tomorrow I will baffle all
his attempts and slay him for sure.”
Duryodhana was heartened by Karëa’s confidence. “So be it.” He dismissed the
assembly and told everyone to meet at dawn to decide their strategy for killing
Arjuna.
The next morning, Karëa came alone to Duryodhana. The Kaurava chief
waved him to a fine seat as his attendants put on his armor. Tying on his
leather finger guards, he said, “Well, dear friend, are you ready to face
Arjuna?”
Karëa replied somberly. “Today I will fight an unforgettable battle with that
famous hero. Either I will slay him or be slain by him. If I cannot kill him
today, I will not return from the field. Even though I have been deprived of my
Çakti weapon, I do not consider myself his inferior. I have received powerful
celestial weapons from Paraçuräma and can match Arjuna in speed and
lightness of hand. Today you will see me contend with Arjuna even as Indra
fought with the Daityas. This whole earth, with its thorns removed, will soon
be yours. There is no deed I cannot perform for you, O King, nor is there any
man who can withstand me when I am angry. But I need something from you.”
Karëa explained how the one area where Arjuna was superior was that he had
Kåñëa as his charioteer. “Kåñëa guides his chariot with superb skill. I need one
who can match Kåñëa’s ability at driving a chariot. I can only think of Çalya for
this task.”
735

Duryodhana looked up sharply. Çalya was one of the most powerful heroes still
remaining among the Kauravas. It would be a shame to lose him. Neither
would he take kindly to being asked to perform the lowly job of charioteer––
especially for Karëa. Moreover, Çalya was the Päëòavas’ relative. Could he be
trusted?
Seeing Duryodhana’s doubtful expression, Karëa said, “Assisted by Çalya I see
myself emerging victorious. He is famed throughout the world for his skill at
handling chariots. There are none better than he at assessing the strengths and
weaknesses of the enemy. He has pledged himself to your cause, O King,
because you satisfied him. As a man of unfailing virtue, he will do everything
in his power to help me. Therefore, go to him and convince him to become my
driver.”
Duryodhana looked thoughtful. This was perhaps his only chance to win the
war. Without overcoming Arjuna, defeat was certain. He nodded. “I will
convince the Madras monarch to accept the office of charioteer. Numerous
chariots will be placed at your disposal, each equipped with every weapon. I
will also make available hundreds of cartloads of arrows.”
Duryodhana knew that the battle with Arjuna would require a vast number of
shafts to match his inexhaustible supply. He issued orders to his servants, then
got up and left the tent. Seeing Çalya in his tent, he approached him in a
servile mood. “O mighty hero, best of men, O you of invincible prowess, I come
with a humble request. Karëa has asked that you become his charioteer for
today’s fight with Arjuna. There is no other who can match your abilities in
driving chariots. Indeed, you are Kåñëa’s equal. O best of chariot-warriors, I
therefore beg your assistance. Out of the affection you bear me, kindly accept
this post.”
Duryodhana continued to praise Çalya’s abilities, assuring him that there was
no other warrior in the world who could ensure, by expert chariot driving, that
Karëa overcame Arjuna. The whole army was depending on him. If Arjuna
was not checked soon, the Kauravas would shortly be annihilated.
Çalya looked at Duryodhana in horror. He stood up suddenly and paced the
floor of his tent. “O son of Gändhäré, you offend me with such a request. How
do you reckon me to be less than Karëa? Are you suspecting my loyalty and
endeavor in the battle? I am capable of performing any feat that the suta’s son
can do. Allot to me as my share any heroes you choose. After slaying them all, I
will return to my own kingdom. If you wish me to fight alone against the
736

Päëòavas, I will do so. But this request is an insult. I should leave this war at
once, having heard such words from you, but I will not abandon my duty out of
passion or anger.”
Çalya was furious. As a kñatriya, it was his duty to fight and not to drive
chariots. Driving chariots was the duty of çüdras. It was ordained in scripture
that çüdras should serve kñatriyas, but never vice versa. Karëa hailed from a
family of çüdras, and he, Çalya, was the crowned monarch of a great country.
Çalya glared at Duryodhana. “I do not know how I can continue fighting for
you now. After receiving this insult I feel more like returning home.”
Çalya stormed out of his tent and Duryodhana ran after him. The prince
stopped him and reached down to touch his feet. “Please do not misunderstand
me and take offense. I did not in any way mean to infer that you are less than
Karëa. Nor do I doubt your sincerity. Nor indeed do I desire the King of
Madras to degrade himself by performing some inferior duty. There is no
question of any of these. O lord of the earth, I see you as being in every way
Karëa’s equal and more. Please let me explain my intentions.”
Duryodhana told Çalya that among all the warriors on the field no one could
equal Kåñëa. He was far superior to all, yet he had accepted the role of Arjuna’s
charioteer. It was for this reason that Duryodhana had thought of Çalya, who
was like a second Väsudeva. Karëa could contend equally with Arjuna in a
trial of arms, but he needed a charioteer comparable to Kåñëa. The prince said
that both he and Karëa could not think of anyone better than Çalya.
Hearing Duryodhana praise Kåñëa, the Madras monarch was pacified. Like his
nephews, the Päëòavas, he loved Kåñëa. He remembered his promise to
Yudhiñöhira. It had surely been ordained by fate that he should drive Karëa’s
chariot for this battle. Making up his mind, Çalya said, “Your glorification of
Devaké’s son has softened my heart. I will consider taking this role, but only on
one condition: I must be allowed to speak whatever I please in Karëa’s
presence.”
Duryodhana breathed a sigh of relief. “So be it. Let us go to Karëa.”
Further encouraging Çalya, Duryodhana recited an old history of how
Mahadeva had once fought with the Dänavas and Daityas. At that time,
Brahmä had served as his charioteer. There was no shame in a powerful hero
taking the position when the need arose. When they reached Karëa’s tent,
Duryodhana said, “See here this mighty hero, O monarch. Can it be that he is
born of a suta? In my view he is the offspring of some great deity. Surely he was
737

begotten in a race of kñatriyas and abandoned at birth. Look at his immense
chest and his arms like tree trunks. See his handsome face, his regal stature and
bearing. He resembles the sun in splendor. I cannot accept that he was born of
a suta woman.”
Çalya greeted Karëa and said, “I will become your charioteer for the great
battle. However, I am doubtful about the outcome. Even if by some chance you
manage to slay Arjuna, you will then see Keçava enter the fight, weapons in
hand.”
Çalya turned to Duryodhana. “Without doubt Kåñëa will annihilate your race
with all its allies and followers. What, then, will be the use of killing Arjuna?”
Duryodhana seemed unconcerned. “O King, I am not afraid of Kåñëa when I
have both Karëa and you on my side. How will Keçava overcome you in battle?
Karëa will surely slay Arjuna. Then you and he will be more than a match for
Kåñëa, even if He is supported by His followers. And if Karëa should be slain,
then we will depend on you alone.”
Çalya looked at Karëa, who was carefully tying his armor. It was probably the
last time he would ever do that, the king of Madras thought. “So be it, O
Bharata ruler. I will drive Karëa’s chariot.”
Karëa thanked Çalya and they both embraced Duryodhana. Then they left the
tent together to meet with the other warriors. After agreeing on a strategy, the
Kauravas mounted their chariots and horses, roared and blew their
conchshells, and Çalya took up the reins of Karëa’s great chariot and drove it
out at the head of the army. Ten thousand drums and as many trumpets
sounded as the Kaurava forces moved off for battle. As they went toward the
battlefield, Karëa said, “Take me at once to the place where the Päëòavas
stand. If necessary, I will fight with all five brothers. Drive the horses quickly,
O great hero, so that I may kill Arjuna, Bhéma, Yudhiñöhira, and the twins.
Today the world will witness my incomparable prowess.”
Çalya laughed, “O son of a charioteer, why do you make light of the Päëòavas?
Those five heroes are unconquerable and have Kåñëa as guide and protector. O
Karëa, when you see them creating a canopy in the sky with innumerable
shafts, you will not speak such words. When you hear the twang of the
Gäëòéva, you will surely regret your proud utterances.”
Karëa, ignoring Çalya, exclaimed, “Drive on!” and his chariot thundered
forward toward the Päëòavas.
As the two armies closed, dreadful portents were seen. Cloudless thunder
738

resounded from the sky, and a shower of stones fell. Fierce winds blew in the
Kauravas’ faces. On their right they saw herds of animals moving past them,
and jackals howled. Their horses shed tears and their standards trembled.
Paying no heed to the omens, the Kauravas rushed into the fight, driven by
destiny. Seeing Karëa blazing like a brilliant fire at their head, they felt victory
to be theirs. They shouted out their war cries and waved their weapons in the
air as they charged into battle.
Karëa called out to the soldiers, “Any man who will show me the whereabouts
of Arjuna will be richly rewarded. I will give gold, gems, and fine horses to he
who points out the Päëòava. Show me where Arjuna and Kåñëa are fighting
and I will award you whatever wealth they leave after I slay them.”
Hearing those words, Duryodhana cheered his friend. Cymbals clashed and
thousands of drums were beaten.
Çalya laughed again. “O suta’s son, you are foolishly offering your wealth in
charity as if you are Kuvera. Do not worry, you will find Arjuna easily. There is
no need to give away your riches, especially to unworthy persons. Soon enough
you will find him yourself. Your bragging is of no use. Never have I seen a fox
overthrow a couple of lions. You are unable to see what should be done and
what should not be done, and that is why it is obvious to me that your life is at
its end. O Karëa, it appears that you have no real friends to prevent you from
hurling yourself into the fire. As your friend, I advise you to approach Arjuna
with caution, backed by a large division of men. Do not rush against him alone,
like a man trying to cross the ocean with only his two arms and a stone tied
around his neck.”
Karëa scowled at Çalya. “You are an enemy in the guise of a friend!” he barked.
“I have no fear of Arjuna. Depending only on the strength of my arms, I will
meet and overpower him. No man will shake me from this determination.”
Çalya again spoke derisively. “When keen-edged, kanka-feathered arrows strike
you all over, you will repent your vanity. Like a child on his mother’s lap
seeking to catch the sun, you wish to defeat Savyasäcin. You are challenging
Arjuna like a young deer challenging an angry lion. Do not, out of folly, strike
a black cobra with your bare hand. Do not shout at Arjuna like a frog croaking
at a great cloud pouring showers of rain. As a jackal living among hares
considers himself powerful until he meets a tiger, so you roar out your own
praises until you encounter Arjuna and Kåñëa. Say whatever you will. Soon
your mountain of pride will be broken by Arjuna’s thunderbolt-like shafts.”
739

Karëa’s breath came in short, heavy rasps. He burned under Çalya’s tirade.
Although the Madras monarch had come to Duryodhana’s side, it seemed his
actual allegiance lay with the Päëòavas.
Tightly clutching his bow, Karëa responded harshly. “O King, only the
meritorious can recognize the merits of others. Being bereft of all merits, you
cannot see what is good and what is bad. I am fully aware of Arjuna’s prowess,
and I know my own power as well. Thus I have challenged the Päëòava
knowing full well my ability to defeat him. His Gäëòéva, his ape banner, and
his charioteer Kåñëa may strike terror into the timid, but for me they are
sources of joy. Today you will see me strike down both Arjuna and Kåñëa with
a single shaft. They will look like two pearls on a string. Today, everyone will
see my birth, nobility and power. Do not mock me, O foolish one.”
Losing his temper, Karëa rounded on Çalya, his angry voice booming out as his
chariot moved across the field. “You are wicked-minded and of bad character.
Because you are afraid, you praise the enemy. Or perhaps you praise them for
some other reason. Whatever it is, after killing my foes, I will also kill you and
all your relatives. Born in a sinful land, you are a mean wretch among the
kñatriyas. Do not try to frighten me with your empty words. I could slay a
thousand Kåñëas and hundreds of Arjunas. Hold your tongue, O you born in a
sinful country.”
Karëa continued to insult Çalya. He described Madras as a country populated
by low-class and degraded people. Citing many popular sayings spoken by the
Madrakas’ enemies, he abused Çalya and his homeland. He was not surprised
that the Päëòavas’ uncle should have spoken to discourage him, but he was not
prepared to tolerate it. Raising his mace he said, “O king of Madras, if you
speak again in such strains I will crush your skull. Only out of regard for
Duryodhana have I not done so already. Drive on toward Arjuna. Either the
world will hear that I have slain Dhanaïjaya and Väsudeva, or they will hear
that the brave Karëa was killed by them.”
Unruffled, Çalya reminded Karëa of Arjuna’s feats of valor, including the
occasion when he had overpowered all the Kurus, including Karëa.
Karëa snorted. “I will not be affected by your words, O man of evil intent. You
cannot inspire me with fear. My only fear is the curse of the Brahmins.”
Karëa knew he faced great peril due to a long-past mistake he had once
committed. Realizing that it may well prove his undoing, he told Çalya how he
had accidentally slain a Brahmin’s cow when out hunting many years ago. The
740

Brahmin had cursed him, saying, “When you face your deadliest enemy, the
earth will swallow your chariot wheel. You will then become afraid.”
After describing the incident Karëa said, “Still, I will not turn back. Accepting
the Brahmin’s curse, I will stand against Arjuna and cut him down with my
arrows. Even the angry words of my own preceptor will not stop me today.”
Karëa was thinking of Paraçuräma’s curse. He would forget the mantras for the
brahmästra at the time when he needed it most. Careless of both imprecations,
Karëa commanded Çalya to drive on. Everything lay in destiny’s hands.
Victory or defeat were never certain for anyone. If fate decreed it, then despite
impediments he would emerge victorious. If not, then despite his greatest
endeavor and superior skills, he would lose the fight.
Karëa and Çalya continued to trade insults as they approached the battlefield.
Duryodhana heard their raised voices and went up to them, beseeching Çalya
with folded palms not to discourage Karëa and asking Karëa to forgive him.
Both men fell silent and sped on across the field, seeing the Päëòava forces
looming large in the distance.

Chapter 24
Karëa’s Prowess
Yudhiñöhira saw Karëa charging at the head of the Kauravas. Turning to
Arjuna He said, “Behold, O Dhanaïjaya, the enemy’s mighty formation which
Karëa has arranged. Take whatever steps are needed to check them. Today,
you must slay the suta’s son.”
Arjuna smiled. At last he would get the chance to slay his mortal foe. He had
been waiting for this moment since the day of the tournament in Hastinäpura.
He would have killed Karëa then, had he had the opportunity. Perhaps all this
death and destruction would have been avoided. Somehow, it had not been
sanctioned by fate at that time.
Arjuna saw Karëa’s banner billowing in the distance. “Everything will be done
as you say, my Lord. By killing Karëa I will bring about the Kauravas’
destruction.”
As Arjuna went forward to encounter Karëa, Yudhiñöhira ordered Bhéma to
741

confront Duryodhana and his brothers, Sahadeva to fight with Çakuni, Sätyaki
with Kåtavarmä, and Pandya, the king of southern Bharata, to fight with
Açvatthämä. Yudhiñöhira decided to fight with Kåpa.
The two armies converged. On Duryodhana’s order, Arjuna was surrounded by
thousands of troops. If possible, the Kaurava wanted to weaken him before he
met Karëa.
Karëa charged into the midst of the Païchälas and slew them on all sides.
Dåñöadyumna, Çikhaëòé and Draupadé’s sons challenged him and fired
thousands of shafts. Three of Karëa’s sons, Bhanusena, Sushena and
Vrishasena, came to his assistance. They were all maharathas and they
contended powerfully with the Päëòava warriors. Soon Bhéma entered the
fray, and Karëa was joined by Dushashana.
With a razor-headed shaft, Bhéma slew Bhanusena in front of Karëa. He then
attacked Sushena, piercing his chest with three iron arrows that made the
prince fall to his knees. Raging, Karëa struck Bhéma with hundreds of arrows.
Oblivious to the attack, Bhéma fired a razor-headed shaft to destroy Sushena,
but Karëa cut it down in mid-flight. Sushena recovered from Bhéma’s attack
and rushed angrily against Nakula, who was challenging him.
Other great heroes from both sides entered the fight with joyous roars. In the
melee, thousands of warriors were killed or mangled by the deadly shafts that
filled the air. Karëa cut through his opponents and met Yudhiñöhira.
Seeing Karëa before him, Yudhiñöhira called out, “O Karëa, son of a
charioteer, hear my words. Vain and arrogant, you always challenge Arjuna
and foolishly consider yourself his equal. Now your pride will be crushed. Stand
and fight with me. Display your prowess and your hatred for the Päëòavas. I
will soon destroy your desire for battle.”
Without replying, Karëa immediately fired a number of straight-flying arrows
that pierced Yudhiñöhira’s chest. Infuriated by Karëa’s contempt for him,
Yudhiñöhira took up a long golden shaft that was capable of splitting a
mountain. Charging it with mantras he released it from his fully drawn bow. It
penetrated Karëa’s side, and Karëa dropped to his knees and swooned.
The Kauravas cried out when they saw Karëa’s plight, but then he rose to his
feet and stared at Yudhiñöhira. Breathing heavily, he released arrows end-toend that completely covered the Päëòava king. He slew the two warriors
protecting Yudhiñöhira’s chariot wheels and struck his charioteer with a dozen
arrows.
742

Yudhiñöhira fought back valiantly and checked Karëa’s speeding arrows with
his own. Karëa laughed and stepped up his attack, sending volleys of barbed
shafts. Numerous Päëòava warriors surrounded him in order to protect
Yudhiñöhira. They rained down arrows, darts, lances and spears on Karëa, who
then invoked a celestial missile which filled the sky with blazing shafts.
Coming clear of his assailants, Karëa trained his attack on Yudhiñöhira. With
deadly accuracy he cut off the Päëòava’s bejewelled armor. It fell from his body
like a cloud decorated with lightning dropping from the sky.
Yudhiñöhira hurled a large iron dart at his antagonist, but Karëa cut it to pieces
before it could reach him. Yudhiñöhira followed it with four barbed lances that
pierced Karëa’s armor and made blood spurt from his body.
Karëa threw the lances aside and assailed Yudhiñöhira with countless shafts.
Without his armor and with his charioteer slain, Yudhiñöhira was unable to
stand before the attack. He jumped down from his chariot and fled from the
fight. Karëa pursued him and jeered, “In what family were you born, O hero? It
seems you do not know the duties of kñatriyas. I think you are better suited for
the life of a Brahmin in the forest. O son of Kunté, do not fight again with
powerful warriors and use harsh language. Go and give yourself to the practice
of asceticism.”
Humiliated and angered, Yudhiñöhira ran over to Dåñöadyumna’s chariot and
jumped aboard. Not knowing of Karëa’s promise to Kunté, he could not
understand why he had been spared. Dåñöadyumna bore him to safety in the
midst of the Päëòava forces, and other warriors attacked Karëa.
Bhéma, witnessing his elder brother’s defeat and humiliation, was seized with
an uncontrollable rage. He flew toward Karëa screaming out his battle cry.
Those warriors who came before him were instantly cut to pieces by his arrows
or pounded to a pulp by his whirling mace. Seeing him approach, Çalya said,
“Here comes the second son of Päëòu, raging out of control. I have never seen
him display such a terrible form. It appears that he will annihilate the three
worlds with all their mobile and immobile beings.”
Karëa smiled. “I will slay this one at once, and thus bring Arjuna to my
presence for our final encounter.”
Karëa released a cluster of crooked arrows that flew with a twisting motion
and had razor-sharp tips. Some of the shafts glanced off Bhéma’s armor, but
others pierced his shoulders and arms. The fuming Päëòava felt nothing. He
responded with dreadful arrows shot from his fully drawn bow. Rocked by the
743

power of Bhéma’s shafts, Karëa released a broad-headed arrow that sundered
his opponent’s bow. But Bhéma instantly took up another bow and again
attacked Karëa.
Karëa hit Bhéma with a hundred arrows as a hunter strikes a proud and
infuriated elephant in the forest. Senseless with rage, Bhéma took up a single
long shaft that resembled a lance. He discharged it from his bow and it hit
Karëa like a thunderbolt hitting a mountain. Stupefied, Karëa sat down on the
terrace of his chariot.
Seeing Karëa’s condition, Çalya, conscious of his duty as a charioteer, quickly
carried him from the fight.
Duryodhana became fearful for Karëa and he instructed his brothers to go to
his assistance. The princes rushed at Bhéma like a swarm of insects approaching
a fire. Over twenty of them surrounded Bhéma, backed by a large number of
chariot fighters. They covered the Päëòava with arrows, darts, lances and
heavy clubs.
Smiling to see himself encircled by Dhåtaräñöra’s sons, Bhéma set about killing
them one by one. He beheaded some with crescent-headed shafts, and with
long arrows he pierced the vital organs of others. Killing a dozen of the princes
in a matter of minutes, Bhéma sent up a roar that terrified the Kauravas. He
appeared like Yamaräja himself. Impervious to all weapons, the marauding
Päëòava hurtled about the field shooting arrows on all sides.
Dhåtaräñöra’s surviving sons fled in terror. Bhéma slaughtered their troops
without mercy. He ranged among the Kaurava warriors spreading death and
destruction wherever he went.
Regaining his senses, Karëa re-entered the fray. He rushed against Bhéma and
assailed him with countless arrows. Another fierce encounter ensued between
the two. Both men continued to slay the soldiers of the opposing army even as
they attacked one another.
Some way off from the fight, Arjuna’s great banner flew. He was surrounded by
thousands of Kaurava troops. In the midst of those warriors, Arjuna and Kåñëa
appeared like the sun and moon covered by dense clouds. The Gäëòéva’s twang
and Hanumän’s roars combined to create a sound so terrifying that it paralyzed
the Kauravas’ horses.
Assailed by innumerable burning arrows, the Kaurava warriors pressed forward
toward Arjuna like men advancing into a tempest. Hundreds of thousands
were cut down, but they continued to close on Arjuna with their swords and
744

maces held high. They began clambering up onto his chariot and dealing both
Arjuna and Kåñëa violent blows. Dozens of warriors took hold of Arjuna, but
he shook them off and fought back with his steel saber. Throwing the Kauravas
down from his chariot, Arjuna took up a golden arrow decked with gems and
invoked the Näga’s Paridava weapon. Suddenly, the Kauravas found
themselves bound by their legs and unable to move. Great snakes, brought into
being by the celestial missile, held them fast as they struggled to get free.
Arjuna remorselessly slew his immobilized foes even as Indra formerly
annihilated the demons with his Vajra weapon. Seeing his soldiers tied down,
Susharma invoked the Suparëa weapon. Suddenly, thousands of vultures
descended from the sky and devoured the snakes holding the warriors. The
serpents fled as the vultures came at them, their talons outstretched.
Freed from their bonds, the Kauravas again assailed Arjuna with all their
strength. The Päëòava withstood their attack and invoked the Aindrastra.
Waves of blazing shafts swept across the battlefield. Sorely afflicted, the
Kauravas cried out and fell in lines as the flaming arrows tore into them.
Seeing his enemies routed and fleeing, Arjuna said, “It seems that this army
has been overpowered, O Mädhava. They are running like deer at the sight of a
lion. Surely it is time I encountered the suta’s son. I see his banner moving
among Yudhiñöhira’s division with alacrity. Leaving aside these warriors, O
Govinda, take me to that mighty hero. I shall finish his battle career at once.”
“Let it be so.” Kåñëa then urged on the horses and the chariot moved off
toward Karëa, stationed two miles away. Many powerful Kauravas came before
Arjuna to check his progress, but he swept them ruthlessly aside with his
weapons. The Päëòava steadily approached Karëa, cutting down countless
charioteers, horsemen and elephants on the way. Twenty-five thousand
warriors soon lay slain by Arjuna. The fierce barbarian armies of the
Kambhojas, Yavanas and Sakas were pressed back and crushed as Arjuna made
his way across the field. Another twenty thousand of their number were cut to
pieces by his straight-flying arrows.
Karëa, having broken away from Bhéma, slew the Päëòava forces even as
Arjuna killed the Kauravas. His arrows, with a touch like poison, felled his
enemies by the thousands. Other Kaurava heroes supported him and rained
down arrows on the Päëòavas, who in turn sent an immeasurable volume of
shafts back at their foes.
The battlefield presented a ghastly scene, with mutilated bodies lying in heaps.
745

Headless torsos ran about with blood spurting from their necks. Their severed
heads lay with staring eyes and clenched teeth. Warriors slipped and fell as
they fought in the blood-soaked mire, pitilessly hacking at one another.
Karëa once again attacked Yudhiñöhira. Seeing this, Mädré’s two sons
challenged him and immediately covered him with arrows. Karëa smiled and
fearlessly fought against the three Päëòavas together. He cut apart both
Nakula and Sahadeva’s bows and struck Yudhiñöhira on the chest with a cluster
of powerful shafts that rendered him senseless. With another dozen arrows, he
killed Nakula’s horses and charioteer. Striking both Nakula and Sahadeva with
a relentless stream of shafts, Karëa placed them both in difficulty.
Seeing the plight of his maternal nephews, Çalya said, “Why are you wasting
your time? You are supposed to fight with Arjuna, now that you have vaunted
your prowess. It seems you are intent on avoiding him. Do you not see him
coming toward you? If you are powerful, then train your weapons upon him. Do
not tarry here with the others.”
Karëa looked across the field and saw Arjuna’s chariot not far away. He also
saw Bhéma, who had been waging a battle with Duryodhana. Kunté’s second
son had overpowered the Kaurava prince and placed him in a precarious
position.
Remembering again his promise to Kunté, and realizing that he could not kill
any other Päëòava than Arjuna, Karëa raced to Duryodhana’s assistance. At
the same time, Açvatthämä, Kåpa and Kåtavarmä came to support their king.
Bhéma, backed by Dåñöadyumna and Sätyaki, assailed the Kaurava heroes with
arrows resembling steel spears.
Yudhiñöhira, afflicted by Karëa’s attack, left the battlefield with the twins
protecting him. He made his way in shame back to his camp, unable to
continue the fight. His armor was smashed and his body covered with wounds.
As expert physicians tended him, he told the twins to return to the fight. They
charged back to the battle, where they found Karëa releasing the Bhärgava
missile. That celestial weapon caused thousands of arrows to shoot forth in
streams from his bow. Those kanka and peacock-feathered shafts mowed down
the Päëòava soldiers. Nothing was visible on the battlefield except the dense
sheet of arrows.
Under such a fierce attack, the Päëòava forces cried out and ran about in
terror. They repeatedly prayed to Arjuna and Kåñëa to save them. Hearing his
troops’ piteous cries, Arjuna said, “Behold the mighty Bhärgava weapon, O
746

Keçava. No one can withstand it in battle. See the charioteer’s son resembling
Death himself performing dreadful feats. The time for our final meeting has
come. Death or victory are now the only options left for us both.”
Kåñëa steered the chariot clear of Karëa’s hail of shafts and replied,
“Yudhiñöhira has left the field badly wounded. I think you should first see him
and ensure that all is well. After that, kill Karëa.”
Kåñëa suggested that while they were seeing Yudhiñöhira, Karëa would wear
himself out by fighting others. He also desired to reassure Yudhiñöhira, whom
He knew would be feeling anxiety after seeing the destruction caused by
Karëa. Agreeing to Kåñëa’s suggestion, he went over to Bhéma and asked him
to protect the army in his absence. Bhéma replied, “Go at once to see the king.
I do not know if he survives. Have no fear for us. I will check all the suta’s
weapons. When you return, you can easily slay him.”
Arjuna thanked his brother and went swiftly to Yudhiñöhira’s tent. Finding
him well and resting, he was relieved and bowed at his feet. As he rose,
Yudhiñöhira, thinking that Karëa must have been slain, said, “I am indeed glad
to see you, O Arjuna. Pleasing too is the sight of Keçava. That both of you are
hale and hearty even after standing before Karëa is a wonder. That suta was
like a deadly serpent with his fangs ever-exposed. Energetic and powerful, no
one could resist him in battle any more than one could resist the ocean. O
Achyuta, O Arjuna––Karëa and I fought, but he reduced me to this pitiable
condition. Addressing me in harsh words, he cut me to the quick. Now by good
fortune you have slain him.”
Arjuna was dumbfounded. He stepped back in surprise as Yudhiñöhira went on
addressing him in joy. “O Dhanaïjaya, for thirteen years I have lost sleep
thinking of Karëa’s prowess. Even while awake I would see an illusion of
Karëa. It appeared as if the whole universe was filled only with him. Surely I
rushed at him impelled by Death himself. Vanquished by him, I was released
and allowed to live. Alas, what use is my life after such humiliation? Only the
fact that you have killed him gives me relief.”
Yudhiñöhira smiled broadly at Arjuna. He forgot the pain of his wounds as he
went on eagerly questioning him. “Tell me how you overcame the wicked one. I
want to hear all the details. Tell me how he now lies besmeared in blood and
mangled by your shafts. Without doubt, the fool Duryodhana now laments and
sees his imminent defeat. That the dull-headed Karëa, who insulted Draupadé
so grievously, now lies killed gives me more pleasure than ascending to heaven.
747

O Dhanaïjaya, describe everything to me.”
Arjuna took a deep breath. “O King, you are not aware of the facts. I have been
under attack by hordes of Kaurava warriors. Numerous great heroes have
charged at me roaring out their battle cries. Dispatching all those fighters to
Yamaräja’s mansion, I pressed on toward Karëa. Finally reaching the
indomitable hero, I found him annihilating our troops with his weapons. I then
learned that you had been overpowered and made to retreat. Thus I came here
at once to be sure of your welfare before killing Karëa.”
Yudhiñöhira’s head fell to his chest. “Alas!” he cried.
Arjuna placed a hand on his elder brother’s shoulder. “O illustrious King, do
not despair. I will immediately carry out your heart’s desire. Even as Çakra
encountered Våtrasura, I will encounter Karëa and end his life. Do not doubt
it, for it is my solemn vow. Come and witness the fight. I beg your blessings, O
King. Only say to me, ‘May victory be thine’ and Karëa is as good as dead. Let
me return to the fight.”
Yudhiñöhira, still pained by his humiliation at Karëa’s hands, was suddenly
seized by anger. Shaking his head, he said, “Your birth in Kunté’s womb was in
vain, my brother. How could you leave the field without killing Karëa? Surely
it was out of fear that you have come here, seeking to avoid the suta’s son. How
has your promise proved false? If you had told me in the forest that you could
not kill Karëa, then I would never have left that place. All our hopes have
been frustrated, like a man expecting fruits from a tree and receiving flowers
instead. For thirteen years we have expected much of you, like men who have
sown seeds and await the rains to fall.”
Yudhiñöhira got to his feet. The Brahmins tending to his wounds stood back as
he raised his voice against his brother. “Why, O wretch, did you not make over
the Gäëòéva to Keçava? He would have slain Karëa without delay. If you are
unable to face him in battle, then give your famed bow to another warrior who
may be equal to the task. Due to your failure, the world will see us with all our
relatives sunk into the fathomless abyss of hell. It would have been better if
you had come out of Kunté in the fifth month as an abortion rather than being
born in a royal line and then showing your back on the battlefield. Fie on your
Gäëòéva! Fie on the strength of your arms and your numberless arrows. Fie on
your Hanumän emblem, and fie on Agni’s chariot.”
Yudhiñöhira slumped back onto his bed. He gazed up at his younger brother
with eyes red with anger. Arjuna said nothing. He breathed heavily and
748

clenched his fist around the hilt of his sword. Pulling out the long gleaming
blade, he raised it to kill his brother. Kåñëa quickly stepped in front of him and
grasped his arm. Preventing him from advancing toward Yudhiñöhira He
exclaimed, “Here, O Dhanaïjaya, I see no adversary to try the strength of your
steel. You have seen that Yudhiñöhira is well and should now be rejoicing. Why
then do you suddenly seize your sword? What makes you yearn for fight at this
time, or have you lost your mind? In a sullen mood you are drawing your sword
with no apparent cause.”
Arjuna stared past Kåñëa at his older brother. Breathing short and hot breaths,
he replied, “I have made a vow to behead anyone who tells me to give up my
Gäëòéva. In Your presence the king has uttered these words and I cannot
forgive him. I will run my sword through this pious king and redeem my vow.
What else can be done now, O Keçava? You know everything. I depend on
Your advice.”
Arjuna was now in a dilemma. His anger had abated when Kåñëa intervened,
but he could not break a vow under any circumstances. But how could he kill
Yudhiñöhira? Lowering his sword he waited for Kåñëa to speak.
“Fie on you, Arjuna! Now I can understand that you have never waited upon
venerable elders, since, O mightiest of men, you give way to anger at an
inappropriate time. Those versed in the subtleties of religion would never
contemplate what you are considering, O Pärtha. One who performs such a
heinous act is certainly the vilest of men. Surely you are a stranger to the
scriptures as you do not know what is right and what is wrong. How can you
rush upon your elder brother, intent on killing him, oblivious to the fact that
he is your worshipable lord? He is not an aggressor nor even an enemy; he is
not engaged in a fight and, as your superior, is seeking your shelter. For these
as well as other cogent reasons, you cannot slay him without incurring sin.”
Arjuna replaced his sword in its scabbard as Kåñëa continued. “O Pärtha, your
vow was made out of childishness. Now hear from me about the higher
principles of religion. Out of a desire to preserve truth, you are ready to kill
your brother, but you do not know that even truth should not be uttered where
it will produce an adverse result.”
Kåñëa cited a Vedic verse which described instances when speaking untruth
was not considered sinful. In those instances, truth was actually considered
untruth. Such times were when life was threatened, when a Brahmin was in
danger, or if one’s entire fortune was at stake. At those times, to lie was not
749

considered sinful.
Kåñëa added, “In all cases, O Pärtha, the highest virtue lies in not harming
other creatures. Killing in righteous battle and murdering another for one’s
own purposes are different and produce quite different results. Indeed, untruth
which protects against the latter may be considered truth. Your adherence to
so-called truth in this case simply shows your ignorance of true morality. Any
act free from the motive to injure any being is surely true morality. The moral
precepts exist for this purpose. Morality cannot be ascertained by logic, nor
even in every case by a study of the scripture. One must seek the guidance of
experienced and wise elders to learn its subtleties. All this I have heard from
the åñis, O Pärtha.”
Arjuna’s head fell. His anger had completely subsided. Kåñëa raised His hand
toward Yudhiñöhira and said, “Now tell e, O hero, if you feel this virtuous king
deserves to be killed by you.”
Tears fell from Arjuna’s eyes as he replied. “O Kåñëa, You have spoken as a
man of great wisdom and intelligence would speak. Who knows the subtleties
of truth better than You? Surely You are like our father and mother. You are
our only sanctuary and Your words are always beneficial. Again You have
saved us from a terrible calamity. I admit that the righteous Yudhiñöhira
cannot be killed, but, O Keçava, I am in a dilemma. Whether my vow was right
or wrong, it nevertheless stands. How will my words not prove false? All my
vows will be worthless if I find reason to evade even one of them. At the same
time, I cannot kill Yudhiñöhira and myself remain alive. How, then, can I
preserve my vow and also the king’s life?”
Kåñëa placed His arm around Arjuna’s shoulder. “O valiant one, Karëa has
harassed the king. Heavy at heart, he spoke angrily to you. He also hoped to
provoke you to slay the suta’s son without delay. Dharmaräja sees none other
capable of killing Karëa. Thus he used harsh words out of frustration and
disappointment. O Pärtha, you should fulfill his desire and slay the wickedminded Karëa in battle. As far as your promise is concerned, here is how you
may be saved.”
Kåñëa quoted a scriptural injunction that stated that an elder should never be
addressed disrespectfully. One so addressed by his inferior is said to die at
heart. Kåñëa told Arjuna to insult his brother. “Thus you will kill him without
taking his life. After this, you can gain his forgiveness by falling at his feet and
worshipping him.”
750

Realizing that this was his only recourse, Arjuna reluctantly agreed and
insulted Yudhiñöhira. He compared him unfavorably with Bhéma, deriding his
power and calling him a coward. Accusing him of being addicted to gambling
and of being the cause of the war, Arjuna suggested that he should not become
the sovereign. As he spoke words he had never before uttered, his heart sank.
He felt disconsolate and shameful, considering himself covered by sin. Sighing
heavily, he again unsheathed his sword.
Seeing Arjuna with sword in hand once more, Kåñëa said in surprise, “What is
this? Why do I again see your sword, lustrous like the blue skies, drawn? If you
still have doubts, then speak them out. I will settle them for you.”
Filled with remorse, Arjuna replied, “I will destroy my body, for it has sinned
grievously against the pious king.”
As Arjuna turned his sword toward his heart, Kåñëa said urgently, “Stop! O
slayer of foes, this is an act as condemned as the killing of Yudhiñöhira. You are
surely seized with some false religious zeal in that you were first ready to slay
the king and now yourself. Do not give way to sin in the name of virtue. O
Pärtha, if you loudly recount your own glories, that will be the same as selfdestruction, for no cultured man glorifies himself.”
Once more checked by Kåñëa, Arjuna sheathed his sword and did as Kåñëa
suggested, speaking his own praises. He then hung his head in shame and said
to Yudhiñöhira, “O King, be pleased with me. My life is devoted to you. Forgive
my foolishness and my unwarranted words. I will now go forth and kill Karëa.”
Dropping to his knees, Arjuna took hold of Yudhiñöhira’s feet. “Please bless me
with success,” he said, placing his head on his elder brother’s feet.
Yudhiñöhira got up from his bed and spoke without cheer. “O Arjuna, dear
brother, I am at fault. Because of me you have been put into danger. Only by
Keçava’s interference were you saved. I deserve to be killed. Who is more
wretched than I? A dull-headed sinner and coward, I’ll repair at once to the
forest and let Bhéma take the throne. Your harsh words rang true, O Pärtha. I
am unfit to rule the earth. Let me go to the forest.”
Yudhiñöhira stood to leave. He tightened his cloth and walked toward the door
of his tent. Kåñëa quickly stepped in front of him and bowed at his feet. As
Yudhiñöhira reached down to lift Him up, Kåñëa said, “O King, where are you
going in such a somber mood? You should not take Arjuna’s rebukes seriously.
He could never hold such thoughts in his heart, and he spoke them only to
avoid the unthinkable act of killing you. Both he and I have acted in an
751

unmannerly fashion, O best of men. I beg your forgiveness. Be peaceful. Today
the earth will drink Karëa’s blood. Do not doubt it.”
Pacified, Yudhiñöhira replied, “O Govinda, I accept what You say. Indeed, You
have saved me too. I was steeped in ignorance and You have rescued me, for
You never lose Your intelligence. You have carried Arjuna and I over the
ocean of grief and remorse.”
Turning to Arjuna, Yudhiñöhira said, “O hero, go and slay the suta’s son with
your infallible shafts. This will surely bring about our success and satisfy
Keçava.”
Arjuna was still consumed by shame for what he had said to Yudhiñöhira.
Seeing his elder brother so deeply affected made it even worse. He fell at his
feet weeping, begging his forgiveness in a choked voice. “O King, nothing of
what I said was true. It was spoken only to save me from falsehood. I have hurt
you most grievously. How can I ever be forgiven?”
Yudhiñöhira raised his brother and embraced him. He assured him that he had
taken no offense. Arjuna then set his face in determined lines. Assuming a
fearful expression, he said coldly, “The evil-minded one will reap the fruits of
insulting you, dear brother. I swear by truth that he will fall in battle today, cut
down by arrows released from the Gäëòéva.”
Yudhiñöhira held up his hand to bless Arjuna. “May you attain unfading fame
and eternal life. May victory attend you and may the gods grant you
continuous prosperity. Go forth, my child, and shatter Duryodhana’s hopes. I
too will soon return to the fight.”
Arjuna asked Kåñëa to prepare his chariot and then took his leave from
Yudhiñöhira. After receiving blessings from numerous Brahmins, he mounted
his chariot and set off for the battlefield. He blew a terrific blast on his conch
shell and repeatedly slapped his arms. Seeing the mighty archer heading out in
an angry mood, everyone felt that Karëa was already slain. Various auspicious
omens surrounded Arjuna as he rode out to the fight. Ahead of him flew a
number of vultures, hawks and ravens in anticipation of food. Arjuna,
impatient to meet Karëa, clasped his Gäëòéva and stared ahead as the chariot
picked up speed.

752

Chapter 25
Arjuna Encounters Karëa
While Arjuna was seeing Yudhiñöhira, Bhéma was locked in ardent battle with
the Kauravas. Not caring for his own safety, he went into their midst, releasing
blazing shafts in all directions. Sätyaki, Çikhaëòé and Uttamaujas followed him,
beating back their foes with a furious assault.
Dushashana, Çakuni and a force of mountain warriors charged Bhéma. The
Päëòava met them head on and struck them down on all sides. Uttamaujas
then joined Bhéma and was attacked by Sushena, Karëa’s eldest son. Using all
his strength, Uttamaujas released an arrow that tore off Sushena’s head. Seeing
this, Karëa was overwhelmed with grief and stood stunned for a few moments.
Then he looked for vengeance. He turned his attention to Uttamaujas and
quickly slew his horses and charioteer. With a volley of shafts he shattered his
chariot and cut his standard to pieces.
Uttamaujas, countering Karëa’s arrows with shafts of his own, leapt from his
broken chariot and ran over to Çikhaëòé’s chariot. Both men then contended
with Kåpa and Kåtavarmä. Rushing ahead of them, Bhéma fell upon the
Kaurava troops, spitting venom. They could hardly look at Bhéma as he flew
about like the mighty Rudra dealing destruction at the end of creation. A cry
of woe rose from the Kauravas. Torn asunder by the noble-minded Bhéma, they
rushed pell-mell. Mangled by his arrows and crushed by his mace, they
screamed and ran to Karëa for protection.
After dispersing his enemies like a gale scatters clouds, Bhéma said to his
charioteer, “O Vishoka, I am afraid for Yudhiñöhira’s life. Arjuna went to see
him and has not returned, even though Karëa is still releasing fearsome
celestial weapons. We are surrounded by numerous Kaurava warriors, who are
ready to tear out our lives at the first opportunity. All this weighs heavily on
my mind. When will Arjuna return?”
Bhéma had no time to find out. Dushashana and his brothers were coming at
him again, backed by thousands of chariot fighters. He asked, “O Vishoka, I
have hurled a huge number of arrows and other weapons at my foes today. Tell
me, how much stock still remains? Should I attack my foes with arrows and
753

darts, or simply grind them to a pulp with my mace?”
Vishoka replied, “O hero, you have sixty thousand arrows left, as well as twenty
thousand of both razor-headed and broad-pointed shafts. Therefore, attack
your enemies without any restraint.”
Bhéma took up his bow and sent a hundred steel shafts at Dushashana and
Çakuni, who charged toward him side by side, closely followed by Dhåtaräñöra’s
remaining sons. As Bhéma contended with the warriors, Vishoka said, “O hero,
do you hear that sound? I think it is the Devadatta filling the four quarters with
mighty blasts. Look south. The Kaurava forces are fleeing like animals who
have seen a lion. There in the distance is Arjuna’s ape banner. Surely the gods
have favored us today, for Dhanaïjaya has come again to the battle.”
Bhéma paused and gazed south. Sure enough, there was Arjuna’s celestial
banner. Relieved, he said, “For this most welcome news, O charioteer, I will
grant you a dozen villages, twenty of the finest chariots, and a hundred
servants. Surely Yudhiñöhira is well because Arjuna blows his victorious conch
again and again. This marks the end of Karëa’s career.”
With joy Bhéma resumed the fight with renewed power, spreading total
confusion among the Kauravas.
***
After leaving the camp, Arjuna’s chariot sped toward the fight. As it neared
the battlefield, he wondered how he might kill Karëa. It was already midafternoon. Karëa would not be slain without a battle. Arjuna knew he would
have to encounter him soon. He could not afford to be distracted by other
Kaurava heroes, but Duryodhana would surely try to place obstacles in his way.
Arjuna could hear the cries of the warriors and the clash of weapons ahead. No
doubt Karëa was ranging among the Päëòava troops like Mahadeva among the
demons.
Seeing his friend pensive, Kåñëa said, “O Pärtha, there is no man equal to you
in prowess and vigor. I have seen many a hero, valiant like Indra, sent off to
the highest regions after meeting you in battle. There is not a single warrior
anywhere who can survive after encountering you in a fight. The son of Rädhä
is not to be taken lightly, but I cannot see him emerging victorious from the
impending contest. O hero, cut short that arrogant fool’s days. He only
disdains the Päëòavas. Slay him and strike at the root of all evils. Frustrate the
desires of Dhåtaräñöra’s sons and end this war. How can Karëa live after
754

meeting you with the Gäëòéva in hand?” As he drove the chariot toward the
thick of battle, Kåñëa continued to reassure Arjuna. He reminded him about
the many all-but-invincible warriors who had already been defeated––Bhéñma,
Droëa, Bhagadatta, and others. Hearing Kåñëa’s assurances, Arjuna shook off
his apprehension. He took out his conch shell and blew a blast that filled the
four quarters. He then drew his bow to its full extent and twanged the string,
sending forth a thunderous crash. Looking around the field at the startled
soldiers he said, “My greatest assurance, O Govinda, is that I have You as my
guide. With Your assistance all things are possible. With You at my elbow, I
can defy the three worlds marshaled in a mighty array and launch them into
eternity––what to speak of Karëa? I will doubtlessly lead him to his life’s final
goal. Duryodhana has accepted him as his protection, but I will shatter that
hope; and he will recall his many wicked deeds toward us, especially his abuse
of Draupadé. He is about to reap the results of that unforgivable sin.”
Thinking back to the dice game and to Abhimanyu’s killing, Arjuna felt his
anger rise like a fire fed with oil. Just ahead of him he saw Bhéma completely
encircled by Kaurava warriors. He was waging a fearful battle, sending out fiery
shafts that tore into his foes.
Arjuna rode straight into the fight and beat back the Kauravas with waves of
arrows. Not far off, he could see Karëa’s tall standard and he made his way
toward him. At once he was met by Kåpa, Kåtavarmä, and a number of
Duryodhana’s brothers. Repelling their attacks, he moved steadily toward
Karëa. His long shafts flew from the Gäëòéva like lightning bolts, sending his
aggressors reeling. Arrows shot at Arjuna fell uselessly from his impenetrable
armor or were struck down mid-flight by Arjuna’s own shafts. Pursing his lips
and narrowing his eyes at Karëa in the distance, he relentlessly drove into the
Kaurava forces.
Arjuna struck down numerous elephants Duryodhana had directed against
him. Rows of charioteers rushed at the Päëòava only to be felled by thousands
of arrows shot in straight lines. He crushed his foes like a maddened elephant
trampling a lake full of lotuses.
After destroying four divisions of troops, each containing ten thousand brave
warriors, Arjuna looked across at Karëa and said, “O Keçava, I see Karëa not
far off. Duryodhana himself is protecting him, along with a number of other
maharathas. Drive my chariot straight at them, O Kåñëa. I am not going to
return today without slaying him. Go quickly, before he destroys our entire
755

host.”
Kåñëa urged on the horses and the great chariot thundered toward Karëa.
Seeing them approach, Çalya said, “Here at last comes Päëòu’s mighty son,
shooting snake-like arrows from the Gäëòéva with the force of a thunderbolt.
It appears that he is making straight for you, O hero. Save our troops by killing
him, if it lies in your power. You have badly hurt the virtuous king Yudhiñöhira
and have afflicted all of the other Päëòavas. Arjuna will be swelling with
wrath and vengeance. You are the only archer in the world who can face him.
It appears that a furious cobra is advancing toward you, its tongue quivering.
All the Kauravas are looking to you for protection. O Karëa, rescue them from
the Arjuna ocean into which they are fast sinking.”
Çalya knew the time for the final battle between the two heroes had arrived. It
was not time to discourage Karëa. Çalya gazed at the dark-complexioned Kåñëa
as He skillfully drove Arjuna’s chariot through the Kauravas. He resembled a
blackish cloud moving through the star-studded firmament. Behind Him
Arjuna looked like a second black cloud, sending out streaks of brilliant
lightning as he fired his arrows.
Karëa was cheered. “O strong-armed one, it seems you have shaken off your
fear of Arjuna. You are now speaking words that are agreeable to me. Today
you will witness what I have learned from my martial teachers. I will soon slay
these two warriors, along with the entire Päëòava force. But even if I fail––
and victory in battle is never certain––my fame will be preserved by my
achieving a hero’s death.”
Karëa roared and went over to Duryodhana. After saluting the Kaurava he
said, “O King, I will now encounter Dhanaïjaya. Close him in from all sides so
that he cannot escape. Have the best of our fighters assail him with numerous
weapons. A great task is upon me, and I will need whatever help you can
muster.”
Duryodhana detailed Kåpa, Açvatthämä, Dushashana, and his remaining
brothers to support Karëa. They rushed in a body at Arjuna, followed by
thousands of elephants, chariots and horsemen.
Arjuna met his assailants with volleys of whistling arrows. Bhéma, blowing his
conch and slapping his arms in joy, came to his side and targeted Duryodhana’s
brothers with his deadly shafts. Little more than twenty princes remained, and
they angrily attacked Bhéma with all their strength, desiring to avenge their
brothers’ killings.
756

Dushashana, worked up to a fury, exhibited great prowess in the fight. He
struck Bhéma with a dozen arrows with such force that the Päëòava was
stunned, momentarily losing his grip on his bow. Taking advantage of his lapse,
Dushashana sent at him a shaft as brilliant as the sun worked with diamonds
and other shining gems. As powerful as thunder, the arrow hit Bhéma on the
chest and made him lose his senses. He dropped to his knees and held onto his
standard pole for support.
Dushashana roared and blew his conch. His brothers all cheered and rained
down shafts on the stricken Bhéma. They considered their mortal enemy slain.
Within moments, however, Bhéma was again on his feet. He threw a dart at
Dushashana, but the Kaurava cut it to pieces in mid-flight. Dushashana then
struck Bhéma with another barbed arrow that cut him deeply.
Consumed by wrath, Bhéma thundered, “Strike me while you can, wretch. You
have wounded me in this fight, but you will soon lay down your life. I will drink
your life-blood. Feel now the force of my mace.”
Bhéma’s chariot hurtled toward Dushashana. He whirled his huge iron mace
over his head and roared furiously. Dushashana threw a blazing dart at him,
but Bhéma smashed it with his mace. In moments, he was upon Dushashana
and he struck him a dreadful blow on his forehead. The prince was thrown
twenty paces from his chariot. He thudded to the ground, his ornaments
strewn, and lay stunned for some moments. Blood flowed from his head and his
body shook.
Remembering his promise in the dice game, Bhéma leapt down from his chariot
and approached his fallen foe. As Dushashana struggled to his feet, Bhéma
struck him again and sent him flying. He dropped to the earth, gasping for
breath. Bhéma stood over him and unsheathed his sword. Looking down at the
semi-conscious prince, he remembered all the evils he had committed––in
particular his unforgivable treatment of Draupadé, and of the Päëòavas as they
had left for the forest.
Bhéma seized his terrified foe by the arm and dragged him across the field.
Dushashana tried to scramble free, kicking out frantically, but Bhéma twisted
his arm till he screamed. The Päëòava then brought his sword down in a
flashing arc and cut off Dushashana’s arm. His voice rang out across the
battlefield, “Here is the arm that seized Draupadé’s sanctified hair. Watch as I
drink his blood.”
Dushashana writhed in agony as blood pumped from his shoulder. Bhéma
757

kicked him onto his back and dropped onto him with his knees. The Päëòava’s
roars reverberated for miles, petrifying the warriors on both sides. He grasped
the ivory hilt of his sword with both hands. Dushashana’s blood-smeared
features contorted in terror. Bhéma smiled, relishing the long-awaited moment
of revenge, then suddenly plunged his sword into Dushashana’s chest. As the
Kaurava died screaming, Bhéma ripped him open and tore out his heart. He
leaned down and, with cupped hands, drank his foaming blood as it flowed
from his chest. Standing up again, he shouted, “The taste of this blood is
sweeter than my mother’s milk, sweeter than honey, sweeter than pure water.”
His face smeared with blood, Bhéma then looked down at Dushashana and said,
“You are now safe since you are dead. There is nothing more I can do to you.”
All the Kauravas who saw Bhéma drinking Dushashana’s blood were horrified.
Many of them fell to the earth out of fear. Others ran away, crying, “He is not
human! Save us from Bhéma!”
Bhéma laughed. “O Dushashana, you were the root of the evils we suffered.
Now let us hear you again joyfully defy us with the words, ‘O cow.’”
Turning toward Arjuna and Kåñëa, Bhéma said, “O heroes, I have redeemed my
pledge to kill Dushashana and drink his blood. Draupadé is avenged. Soon I will
fulfill my other vow and crush Duryodhana. Then only will I know peace.”
Ten of Dushashana’s surviving brothers, shocked, rushed at Bhéma hoping to
kill him. Bhéma quickly remounted his chariot and faced them with a smile.
They hemmed him in and fired hundreds of barbed shafts at him. In swift
succession Bhéma sent a gold-winged and razor-headed shaft at each prince,
severing his head.
Karëa’s mouth fell open. His weapons dropped to his side and he gazed at
Bhéma with undisguised fear. Covered in blood and roaring, the Päëòava
seemed like a monstrous Räkñasa. Surely he was possessed by an evil spirit of
inestimable power.
Çalya, seeing Karëa’s terrified expression, said, “Come, O hero, do not be
depressed. This is the way of war. Death and destruction are its ever- present
features. Do not be afraid. Duryodhana is grieving to see the death of
Dushashana and his other brothers, and the rest of the Kauravas are fleeing.
Duryodhana has given you the responsibility for this war. Exert yourself and
bear the burden to the best of your ability.”
Urged on by Çalya, Karëa caught hold of himself and shook off his confusion.
It was true. There was no alternative now but to finish this fight. Arjuna was
758

nearby. This was not the time to be confused.
Karëa’s son, Vrishasena, having seen his father shaken and holding back in
battle, blew his conch and confronted Arjuna. He fired a powerful volley of
barbed arrows that covered both him and Kåñëa. Fighting valiantly, he
overpowered Nakula, who had come to Arjuna’s support, smashing his chariot.
Bhéma shouted angrily to Arjuna, “I should kill this one immediately, but I will
leave him for you. Dispatch him at once.”
As Karëa looked on, Arjuna attacked Vrishasena. Blazing shafts sped toward
the prince like hissing snakes breathing fire. Four of them slew his horses,
while another dislodged his charioteer and threw him to the earth. As he tried
to jump clear from his immobilized chariot, Arjuna sped a crescent-headed
shaft at him that severed his head. The prince fell to the earth like a tree felled
by lightning.
Karëa cried out in agony. Grasping hold of his bow, he advanced toward
Arjuna, who turned to meet him. The lustrous golden chariots of the two
heroes, covered in tiger skins, looked like two suns meeting. Like Indra
encountering Bali, they approached one another for combat while both armies
looked on in awe. As they shot their arrows at one another, the other warriors
roared with excitement––some praising Arjuna and others Karëa. Both armies
struck up martial music from thousands of drums and trumpets. Conches
sounded and the battlefield was filled with a deafening din.
The celestials looked on from the canopy of the sky. Seeing the two god-like
heroes raising their weapons and roaring, they could not decide which of them
would emerge victorious. They were reminded of the ancient battle between
Paraçuräma and Kartivirya. The Siddhas and Cäraëas sounded their horns and
showered flowers on the combatants. Indra blessed his son for victory, while
Sürya shone down on Karëa, wishing him well.
As they closed on one another, the troops of both armies came to offer support.
Dåñöadyumna with all the Päëòava forces surrounded Arjuna, while
Duryodhana backed up Karëa with the Kauravas. A fierce battle raged
between the soldiers surrounding the two warriors, who circled one another,
firing their first salvos.
Hanumän suddenly leapt from Arjuna’s banner and flew across to Karëa’s
banner, which was emblazoned with a jeweled elephant’s rope resembling
Yamaräja’s noose. The enraged monkey tore at the rope with his nails and
teeth, screaming fearfully all the while. The horses of both fighters reared and
759

neighed angrily. Kåñëa threw wrathful glances at Çalya, who returned them in
a like manner.
Karëa said, “O Çalya, my friend, the moment has arrived. Tell me truthfully––
what will you do if I am slain by Pärtha?”
Çalya replied, “I will rush at Keçava and Dhanaïjaya. What greater end is there
for a kñatriya than death at the edge of weapons?”
Arjuna asked Kåñëa the same question and Kåñëa said, “O Dhanaïjaya, the sun
may fall from the sky, the earth may shatter into a thousand fragments, fire
may become cold, but Karëa will not slay you. But if it should happen that you
are slain, then know that the world’s end is near. Both Karëa and Çalya will be
sent to Yamaräja’s abode, along with the entire host of kñatriyas.”
Arjuna smiled, “O Keçava, have no fear. Karëa and Çalya are no match for me.
As an elephant in the forest rends a tree, so I will crush Karëa, his chariot,
banners, horses, armor, bows and arrows. O Mädhava, soon Karëa’s wives will
be widows. Surely they dreamt of coming evil last night. I cannot check my
rage when I think of the cruel acts Karëa has committed against us, especially
how he abused Draupadé and the harsh language he used at that time. Today I
will console Abhimanyu’s mother by repaying his enemies in their own coin.
Today You too will be able to comfort Draupadé, from whose eyes fall large
tears, remembering as she does the many woes she has suffered at the Kauravas’
hands.”
Both Arjuna and Karëa then released shafts in volume. The sky was covered
with flying arrows, creating a dark shadow over the battlefield. The two
warriors countered each other’s attacks, like the east and west wind struggling
with one another. As they struck down their opponent’s arrows, they seemed
like the sun and moon emerging from clouds. Surrounded by their troops, they
resembled Indra and Bali surrounded by the gods and Asuras. Their golden
bows, constantly drawn to a circle, looked like the sun’s coronas and their
arrows resembled sunbeams. Bent upon each other’s destruction, they stood
like two suns risen for the destruction of the universe at the end of a yuga.
As they fought they simultaneously slew thousands of troops, elephants and
horses. Other warriors contended together as the battle raged between the
foremost heroes on both sides. Duryodhana, Kåpa, Çakuni and Açvatthämä
rained down arrows on Arjuna, trying to distract him and to give Karëa the
advantage, but Arjuna dexterously cut all their shafts and beat them back with
his own. Forced to a distance by Arjuna’s searing arrows, Duryodhana and
760

Açvatthämä came together to discuss their strategy.
Açvatthämä was still deeply affected by his father’s death and Vyäsadeva’s
words. Climbing onto Duryodhana’s chariot he said, “O King, be pacified.
There is no need to prolong this war. Enough men have died. Bhéñma lies
prostrate on the field and your own preceptor has been slain. Make peace with
Yudhiñöhira, who always seeks the welfare of all beings. His brothers will accept
his order. With the Päëòavas as your allies, what can you not attain? How can
anyone overpower Arjuna? What use is there in fighting him?”
Açvatthämä watched Karëa and Arjuna fighting. Blazing arrows shot from the
Gäëòéva and lit up the late afternoon sky. Arjuna’s chariot moved swiftly from
side to side, baffling Karëa’s attacks. Kåñëa stood with the reins in His hands,
His face covered with perspiration, as He shouted out commands to the horses
and expertly maneuvered the chariot.
“In my view we should stop this war. Friendship with the Päëòavas will surely
be in your best interests. Stop this fight and let the remaining kings return
home. O Monarch, I speak only as your friend and well-wisher. If you want, I
can dissuade Karëa from battle. Simply order me.”
Duryodhana thought for a while without replying. Finally, he shook his head.
“O friend, you have had your say and I have considered your words. Now hear
my thoughts on the matter. Even as the might of a storm is checked by Mount
Meru, so will Arjuna’s prowess be checked by Karëa. Let the fight continue.
The Päëòavas will never place confidence in me after the ills I have done
them. You should not dissuade Karëa. Arjuna is tired from his long day of
fighting and will soon be overcome. O hero, go forward and fight our enemies.
I am depending upon you as much as I am depending on Karëa.”
Açvatthämä sighed. He slowly returned to his own chariot and rode back into
the battle. Duryodhana was grief-stricken over his brothers’ deaths. He could
hardly raise his weapons. He watched as Karëa and Arjuna waged a fearful
fight. It was so terrible that no other warriors would go near them. Anyone
coming within the range of their arrows was instantly slain. Both men were
lacerated by the other’s shafts, and blood flowed freely from their wounds.
Kåñëa and Çalya, with arrows protruding from their bodies, worked their horses
and wheeled the chariots back and forth.
The Päëòava troops shouted to Arjuna, “Kill Karëa at once and dash
Duryodhana’s hopes for the empire.” On the other side, the Kauravas
encouraged Karëa, “Quickly slay Arjuna and send the Päëòavas back to the
761

wilderness for good.”
Smiling and licking his lips, Arjuna sent hosts of arrows with various points––
some shaped like half-moons, some like boar’s ears, and some like calf’s teeth.
Karëa responded with similar numbers of crescent and razor-headed shafts that
cut down Arjuna’s arrows.
Suddenly invoking a powerful celestial weapon, Arjuna fired a shaft so
brilliant that it lit up the sky in all directions. The heat from the missile
ignited the dresses and chariots of the warriors nearby. It flew with a crackling
sound resembling a forest of bamboos on fire. Karëa, undaunted, at once
released the Varuëa weapon which immediately quenched Arjuna’s missile.
Huge clouds appeared in the sky, sending torrents of rain that extinguished the
fire Arjuna had created.
Arjuna applauded Karëa and sent another celestial weapon against him, this
one dispersing the clouds. He then disappeared from Karëa’s view and invoked
a weapon he had received from Indra. Thousands of glowing arrows adorned
with vulture feathers flew from the Gäëòéva. They fell upon Karëa’s chariot,
covering him, Çalya, and his horses. Rolling his eyes in anger, Karëa invoked
the Bhärgava weapon, which cut off all the missiles emanating from the
Gäëòéva. The power of the Bhärgava-astra spread out on the battlefield and
afflicted the Päëòava forces. Thousands fell dead, their bodies hacked to
pieces.
Seeing Karëa’s prowess, the Kauravas cheered and waved their weapons.
Bhéma, infuriated, called out to Arjuna, “How have you allowed this irreligious
scoundrel to kill so many of our men even before your eyes? The gods
themselves were not able to vanquish you before now. How has Karëa been
able to show such power? O Savyasäcin, think deeply on the ills meted out by
this sinful man. Remember Draupadé’s suffering and Abhimanyu’s death. Do
not be mild with this wretch. Slay him at once by any means possible.”
Kåñëa also spoke urgently. “O brave warrior, you appear like one confounded.
How are your weapons being baffled by Karëa? Display the fierce energy which
has been displayed yuga after yuga when you slew Räkñasas and boon-proud
Asuras. Take my razor-edged Sudarçana chakra and cut off Karëa’s head
without delay. You will thus restore to Yudhiñöhira this earth with all her
towns, villages and wealth, and you will earn undying fame.”
Stirred to action, Arjuna gritted his teeth and glared at Karëa. Taking out a
shining golden shaft, he said, “Now, for the good of the world and with your
762

permission, I will invoke the mighty Brahmä weapon.”
Kåñëa replied, “So be it,” and Arjuna placed the arrow on his bow.
Concentrating his mind, he invoked the brahmästra and shot the arrow with
all his strength. As the shaft blazed into the sky, thousands of other arrows
came into being and launched themselves from the Gäëòéva. Resembling
ferocious snakes with bared fangs, they soared across the battlefield toward
Karëa. Thousands upon thousands of gold-winged shafts spread out from
Arjuna’s chariot and tore into the Kauravas. Darts, lances and battle-axes of
frightening size and shape dropped onto Duryodhana’s troops.
Karëa replied with another celestial weapon, which sent innumerable arrows
back at Arjuna. They came down on him, hissing, like a downpour of rain. The
shafts also flew out at the Päëòava troops, killing them in large numbers.
Arjuna lost all patience. He struck Karëa on the chest with a group of six
powerful steel shafts, then twelve, then twenty, then fifty. At the same time,
he slew four hundred elephants with their riders and one thousand horsemen
and their horses. Then he slew eight thousand infantry.
The Kauravas called out to Karëa, “O hero, save us! Check Päëòu’s son! He is
annihilating us.”
Exerting his utmost, Karëa sent bloodsucking shafts in showers, completely
covering Arjuna and simultaneously killing many Païchälas and Päëòava
troops. Arjuna, invisible beneath the assault, whirled on the terrace of his
chariot, striking down Karëa’s shafts and shooting back another volley of fiery
arrows.
As Arjuna and Karëa attacked and counterattacked, exchanging all kinds of
celestial weapons, Yudhiñöhira returned to the battlefield. His wounds tended
and healed by mantras and herbs, he appeared again in brilliant golden armor
like the full moon emerging from an eclipse. The Päëòava forces cheered to see
him as he stood by to witness the battle between Arjuna and Karëa.
Arjuna fought in a frenzy, sending his shafts in immeasurable volumes. The
Kauravas were unable to bear the force of his weapons and they fled in fear.
Karëa stood undaunted, resisting Arjuna’s attack with supreme skill. He
pressed back all the troops supporting Arjuna, and the two men soon faced
each other alone.
The Päëòavas and Kauravas watched with astonishment from a distance as
every kind of celestial missile was released and countered. Sometimes it seemed
that Karëa had the advantage; at other times Arjuna appeared to gain the
763

upper hand. The warriors of both sides cheered and blew their conches, and
from the sky the celestials applauded both warriors and beat their drums.
While that awful fight was raging, and the earth seemed to be oppressed by the
weight of the weapons being fired, a Näga named Açvasena came to the
battlefield. The celestial snake, son of Takñakaù, bore Arjuna enmity for
having slain his mother and brother in the Khandhava forest. Seeing his
opportunity to gain revenge, he assumed the shape of an arrow and entered
Karëa’s quiver. With his mind fixed on Arjuna’s destruction, Açvasena used
his mystic power to inspire Karëa with the thought of using the Nägastra.
Karëa saw that he could not overpower Arjuna by force of arms. It would take
an inspired shot with a powerful celestial weapon. He then thought of the
Nägastra. If he could catch Arjuna off guard by cutting his bowstring and
striking him at the same time with a cluster of shafts, he might just have time
to kill him with the snake weapon before he recovered.
Following his plan, Karëa fired shafts with blinding speed and temporarily
stunned Arjuna, sundering his bowstring with a razor-headed arrow. He then
took out a golden arrow from his quiver of celestial weapons. It seemed to jump
into his hand and almost place itself on his bowstring. Karëa took careful aim
at Arjuna’s neck and drew his bow to its full. Unaware that Açvasena had
entered the arrow by yogic power, he shot it before Arjuna had a chance to
restring his bow, calling out, “You are killed, O Pärtha.”
As the arrow was released the celestials cried out in sorrow. The shaft sped
toward Arjuna with a terrible sound, seeming to divide the sky as a woman
parts her hair in the middle. Kåñëa saw the weapon approach and, leaning
forward, pressed down the chariot with His foot. The horses were thrown to
the ground and the chariot sank a cubit into the earth.
The snake arrow soared over Arjuna’s head and struck his diadem, sending it
spinning off his head like the sun falling from the heavens. It fell to the earth
smoking and shattered by the force of the Näga weapon, which was enhanced
by Açvasena’s personal power. Its brilliant celestial gems lay scattered about
the ground, resembling stars shining in the night sky.
Seeing that Kåñëa had saved Arjuna from certain death, the gods cheered and
showered Him with flowers. Arjuna, standing like a mountain bereft of its
snowy summit, thanked and praised Kåñëa, who told him what had happened.
Arjuna quickly bound his loose hair with a white cloth and restrung the
Gäëòéva to attack Karëa.
764

Açvasena, thwarted in his efforts to slay the Päëòava, returned to Karëa and
said, “You did not know that I had entered your arrow. Know me to be Pärtha’s
enemy. He killed my mother. Shoot me again and I will avenge her and achieve
your desired end.”
Karëa looked in surprise at that Näga. With a shake of his head he replied, “I
will never seek victory depending upon another’s strength, nor will I shoot the
same arrow twice. I will slay Arjuna with my other weapons. Go now wherever
you please.”
Açvasena turned back toward Arjuna. Launching himself into the air, he again
assumed the shape of an arrow. Arjuna was ready for him. He swiftly fired six
crescent-headed shafts that cut Açvasena to pieces and the Näga fell to earth
like a number of burning firebrands.
Kåñëa jumped to the ground and with His own hands lifted Arjuna’s chariot
out of the earth. He quickly remounted and urged on the horses, circling Karëa
as Arjuna aimed deadly shafts at his vital organs. Completely furious, Arjuna
relentlessly assailed his foe from all sides as Kåñëa drove the chariot. His arrows
pierced Karëa’s armor and broke it to pieces. Arjuna struck off his helmet and
headdress, leaving the wounded Karëa standing like a mountain sending forth
streams of red lava.
Seeing his foe stupefied and inactive, his bow falling from his grasp, Arjuna
honored the codes of warfare and stopped his attack. Kåñëa said in surprise,
“Why, O Pärtha, are you making such a mistake? The wise never spare their
enemies no matter how weak they are. Learned men gain great merit by
destroying wicked foes, even when those foes are distressed. Lose no time in
killing him. When he recovers, he will again present you a difficult task.”
Responding to Kåñëa’s urging, Arjuna fired arrows fitted with calf’s-tooth
heads. They thudded into Karëa’s powerful frame. With blood running from
his numerous wounds, he resembled a blossoming ashoka tree. Quickly
recovering his senses, Karëa took up his bow and discharged volumes of shafts
at Arjuna and Kåñëa. Arjuna countered his arrows in mid-flight and continued
to attack his unprotected enemy.
In his plight, Karëa thought of again using the Bhärgava weapon, inspired with
Brahmä’s power. No one could resist such a mighty weapon, and it had already
destroyed numberless Päëòava troops. Karëa thought it would be the only way
he could hope to distract Arjuna and gain the space he needed to deal with his
wounds and put on new armor. He began to chant the sacred incantations to
765

invoke the weapon but found he could not remember them. He tried
repeatedly to recite the mantras he knew so well, but they would not come to
his mind. Sadly, Karëa recalled his teacher’s curse: “When your life depends on
your most powerful weapon, you will not be able to summon it.”
Unable to invoke the Bhärgava-astra, Karëa turned to repelling Arjuna’s
shafts with ordinary arrows. As he stood releasing shafts by the hundreds, he
saw a black shadowy figure appear near his chariot. Karëa recognized it as
Kala, Time personified, who said, “The earth is devouring your chariot wheel.”
Karëa looked down and saw that his chariot was sinking into the earth.
Despite Çalya’s strenuous efforts, it could not be pulled out. Karëa lamented,
rebuking virtue. “It is said that you, O virtue, always protect the virtuous. I
have always carefully observed my duties. How am I now being destroyed? Why
are all my efforts in this battle thwarted?”
As he gave vent to his anguish, Arjuna attacked him more vigorously. Cursing
virtue again and again, Karëa fought back desperately. Arjuna’s arrows pierced
him deeply and he shook like a tall tree in a storm. Worked up to a frenzy,
Karëa released his arrows in a continuous stream. They flew off his bow like
streaks of fire and struck down Arjuna’s shafts. Some of them penterated
Arjuna’s defenses and pierced both him and Kåñëa.
Seeing Karëa still fighting furiously even though disadvantaged and badly
wounded, Kåñëa said, “Discharge more powerful weapons, Arjuna. See how
Karëa remains bent on victory, rendering your arrows useless and striking us
with all his power.”
Arjuna recited mantras to invoke the Brahmä weapon, but as he did so Karëa
sent an arrow that cut apart his bowstring. In a moment, Arjuna restrung his
bow, but Karëa immediately cut it again. Arjuna strung it for a second time,
and Karëa again cut it. They repeated this twelve more times, Arjuna stringing
his bow quickly and Karëa cutting the string.
Marveling at Arjuna’s lightness of hand, Karëa kept up his fierce assault. By
the sheer force of his attack he temporarily stunned his opponent. Taking the
opportunity, he leapt from his chariot and seized hold of the sunken wheel. He
heaved at it with all his might. With his massive shoulders and heavily muscled
arms, he resembled a sal tree with two huge trunks. Pulling with all his power,
Karëa shook the earth; it seemed to rise up with all its lands, mountains and
seas. But the wheel would not come out.
Karëa wept in frustration. Seeing Arjuna near him he called, “O Pärtha, wait
766

for a moment while I extract my wheel. Do not cherish thoughts entertained
only by cowards. Brave and pious persons never aim their arrows at those who
are without weapons. You are the bravest and most pious of all warriors. Excuse
me for a moment, standing helpless as I am. I will soon stand again for battle.
Remembering virtue and the codes of warfare, hold off your attack until then.”
Hearing his agonized plea, Kåñëa smiled and replied, “It is fortunate indeed
that you remember virtue, O Karëa. Men in distress almost always censure
Providence, forgetting their own evil deeds. Where, O Karëa, was your virtue
when Draupadé was brought weeping into the Kuru assembly? Where was it
when Yudhiñöhira was robbed of his kingdom? When he asked for it to be
returned, after spending his promised thirteen years in exile, did your virtue
suggest that it be returned? Was it virtue that conspired to set fire to the wax
house in Väraëävata? Did virtue urge you to laughingly say to Draupadé, “O
lady, choose another husband”? Was it that same virtue that ordered
Dushashana to strip her naked? When you and six other brave heroes
surrounded the boy Abhimanyu, did virtue then enter your mind?”
Karëa’s head fell and he made no reply. He struggled frantically to pull up his
wheel, as Kåñëa continued. “If it was virtue acting on all these occasions, then
do not waste your time summoning it now. You wish us to practice piety today,
but you will not escape with your life. After vanquishing you and all their
other enemies, the virtuous Päëòavas will regain their kingdom.”
Karëa could not respond. He trembled with anger. His face was covered with
perspiration as he wrestled with his wheel. Kåñëa moved the chariot away and
said, “O Arjuna, strike Karëa down at once with a celestial weapon.”
Arjuna, reminded of Karëa’s many sins, was furious. Heat seemed to emanate
from his pores. He raised the Gäëòéva and invoked the Ägneyastra. Karëa,
unable to lift the chariot wheel, leapt back onto his chariot. Grasping his bow,
he countered Arjuna’s weapon with the Varuëastra. In desperation he
continued fighting, firing his powerful arrows by the hundreds. He took up a
huge steel arrow worked with gold and fitted with a long, barbed point. As he
discharged it from his drawn bow, uttering mantras all the while, the four
quarters were suddenly shrouded with darkness. Violent winds blew and the
celestials uttered cries of lamentation. The Päëòavas were gripped with
apprehension and they prayed to Kåñëa.
Karëa’s arrow flew off his bow like a thunderbolt. It struck Arjuna full on the
chest and he reeled. Pierced even through his impenetrable armor, he shook
767

violently and dropped the Gäëòéva.
Karëa again jumped down from his chariot and seized hold of the sunken
wheel. He struggled furiously, but to no avail. As Karëa roared in anger,
Arjuna regained his senses and took out an anjalika arrow. Placing it upon his
bow, he invested it with the celestial power of Indra’s Vajra weapon. Kåñëa
moved closer to Karëa and said, “Arjuna, release this arrow at once and cut off
your enemy’s head before he remounts his chariot.”
Arjuna drew the Gäëòéva back to his ear and took careful aim. All the warriors
on the battlefield froze. The skies seemed to shake and the åñis watching from
the skies cried out, “All peace to the universe!”
As he aimed the arrow Arjuna said, “If I have ever practiced penance, if I have
ever respected my elders and listened to their wise counsel, then let this arrow
kill Karëa.”
Arjuna let the arrow go and it flew from his bow shining like the sun. It lit up
the field as it streaked toward Karëa. The terrific shaft struck him as he still
grappled with his chariot wheel. Catching him on his broad and powerful neck,
it severed his head and threw it to the earth. As the handsome head fell to the
ground, like the crimson setting sun going behind the western hills, his trunk
collapsed, gushing streams of blood. Then, before everyone’s eyes, a bright light
came out of Karëa’s body and rose upward, entering the sun.
The Päëòavas cheered, beat drums and sounded trumpets. Arjuna and Kåñëa,
filled with joy, blew their conches. They were surrounded by warriors who
praised them and danced on the field in happiness. They gazed in wonder at
Karëa’s fallen body, which resembled an extinguished fire or a mountain
struck down by the bolt of heaven.
Çalya slowly drove Karëa’s chariot, bereft of its hero, away from the field.
Seeing that sorrowful sight, the Kauravas fell about in grief, their hopes
dashed. They fled in fear, looking back repeatedly at Arjuna’s blazing standard.
Duryodhana was overwhelmed with grief. Tears flowed from his eyes and he
sighed again and again. He and the other Kuru chiefs went over to Karëa and
stood around him. The Päëòavas joined them to offer their last respects to the
fallen hero.
Bhéma roared like a thundercloud. He danced about slapping his arms in joy.
Leaping high and circling in the air, he laughed and shouted out his battle cry.
The Päëòava troops embraced one another with tears in their eyes. Now the
war was over. Duryodhana’s greatest hope had just been shattered.
768

Chapter 26
Çalya Leads the Kauravas
Less than two hours remained until sunset. Yudhiñöhira decided to press home
his advantage. Seeing his enemies disarrayed, he ordered his troops to attack.
Inspired by Karëa’s death, they fell upon the remaining Kauravas with loud
shouts. The Kuru army lost all heart for the fight and ran in all directions like
bulls with broken horns. They looked around in fear, expecting Arjuna or
Bhéma to pursue them at any moment. It seemed to them that those two
Päëòavas were everywhere today.
Then Duryodhana pulled himself together and came forward for battle.
Breathing hard, his face covered in tears, he said to his charioteer, “Take me
into the fight. I will avenge my friend’s death. Kunté’s son will no more be able
to resist me than the ocean can go beyond its shore. Killing Arjuna and
Govinda, the haughty Våkodara, and my other enemies, I will repay my debt to
Karëa.”
The Kauravas were rallied when they saw their leader riding into battle.
Twenty-five thousand warriors came together to face the Päëòava forces.
Bhéma, observing the rules of fair combat, got down from his chariot to
contend with the foot soldiers. Roaring out their battle cries and not fearing
for their lives, they rushed upon Kunté’s son with raised swords and maces.
Bhéma laughed. Whirling his great iron mace, Shaikya, he moved among the
Kauravas like a hawk. Heads, arms and legs flew about as he destroyed the
troops. Soon, almost all of the twenty-five thousand were slain and the
remainder had fled. Encountering the remnant of Duryodhana’s brothers, he
quickly dispatched all of them to Death’s abode, either by smashing them with
his mace or severing their heads with razor-faced shafts.
In a rage Duryodhana rushed against the Päëòavas, discharging fiery arrows on
all sides. He was immediately surrounded by thousands of chariot fighters who
sent great showers of arrows at him. Countering the attack, the Kaurava prince
slew the chariot-warriors in large numbers. He quickly struck down hundreds
of fighters and sent up a great roar. Seeing his troops fleeing in fear of Bhéma,
he called out, “Where are you going, brave warriors? I see no place on earth,
769

nor indeed the three worlds, where the Päëòavas will not find and kill you if
you flee. Their army is now quite small. If we stand together we will win.
Follow your duties and fight. Death or glory are your only choices now. Slay
your enemies, or be slain by them and thus attain heaven.”
Despite Duryodhana’s exhortations, his troops continued to flee. Çalya came up
to the king and said, “O King, look at this dreadful scene. The earth is covered
with the carcasses and mutilated limbs of slain warriors. Your warriors are
falling over each other in fear. They can hardly move across the blood-soaked
ground and are crying out for a protector. Retreat now, O Bharata hero. The
sun is setting. Remember that you are the root of all these evils. Go back to
your camp and give your men some respite.”
Duryodhana looked across at Çalya seated on Karëa’s empty chariot. He was
seized again with grief and he cried out, “O Karëa! O my friend!”
The sun-god, shedding his dying rays on his fallen son’s body, went in grief to
the western hills. Both armies withdrew from the fight, and the gods and åñis
returned to their abodes. As the warriors moved through the twilight, they
looked upon Karëa, who seemed to light up the field even in death. He looked
like a mass of pure gold or like a fire quenched by the shower of Arjuna’s
arrows. The earth seemed to send forth cries of ‘Alas!’ and ‘Oh!’
But Yudhiñöhira was happy. At last Karëa had been slain. The Päëòava king
felt as if a great weight had been lifted from him. As he stood on the field
surrounded by his brothers, Kåñëa came before him and said, “By good fortune
the suta’s son lies dead, while you and your heroic brothers are all well. Arjuna
has fulfilled his promise and the earth has drunk Karëa’s blood. That wretch of
a man who laughed at Draupadé has received his reward. Surely your chaste
queen will rejoice upon hearing this news. Soon she will sit by your side as you
assume rulership over this prosperous earth.”
Yudhiñöhira tearfully embraced Kåñëa. “O Keçava, it is no wonder that we have
been successful with You as our support. O almighty one, the wise Åñi Närada
has informed me of Your true identity, as well as that of my brother Arjuna.
You two heroes are always engaged in maintaining virtue in the world.”
Yudhiñöhira climbed onto his chariot and rode back to camp. He saw Karëa’s
body lying on the field, lit up by a thousand oil lamps and surrounded by
despondent Kaurava troops. The next morning they would perform his funeral
rites, having left him for his final night on a hero’s bed. Yudhiñöhira looked at
him again and again. He could hardly believe his eyes. He said, “By Your favor,
770

dear Kåñëa, we have achieved our object. Surely Duryodhana will now give up
all hopes for victory and even life itself. For thirteen long years we have
suffered and known only anxiety. Tonight we will sleep peacefully, freed of our
burden.”
Arjuna and Kåñëa went away from the battlefield like the sun and moon going
down in the sky. They blew their conches, filling the four quarters with the
tremendous blasts. Gandharvas, Cäraëas and Siddhas offered them praise and
worship as they headed back to their camp, following in Yudhiñöhira’s track
like the gods follow Indra into Amarävaté.
***
All the Kauravas left the field in despair. Kåpa, Kåtavarmä and Açvatthämä
headed the troops as they returned to camp. Duryodhana was crying. No one
could console him and he fell to the ground weeping. The other Kuru leaders
entered the royal tent and sat silently around him. All of them shed tears as
they watched the king give vent to his sorrow. He rolled about on the ground
repeatedly crying out, “O Karëa, my friend!”
Gradually, Duryodhana’s anger overcame his grief and he rose to his feet, his
eyes coppery with rage. Taking his place on the throne, he wiped his face with
his hands and said in a cold voice, “We cannot let this atrocity go unavenged.
Karëa, the best of warriors, was slain mercilessly by Arjuna as he stood helpless
on the ground. How can we tolerate it? Selecting another commander for our
forces, we will rush against the sinful Päëòavas and wreak revenge. We have
already almost destroyed their army, and they are weak from days of fighting.
They have abandoned virtue and will thus lose all their power. Surely we will
soon crush them. We owe it to Karëa to either slay them to a man or to lay
down our own lives, joining Karëa in a hero’s unending sleep.”
Duryodhana trailed off as he thought of Karëa laying on the battlefield. His
head fell and he covered his face with his hands. He wept silently for some
time. The anguished prince could not come to terms with his friend’s death. He
had never dared think that Arjuna might one day slay Karëa. From the day he
had first seen him, he had lived with the expectation that Karëa would be
Arjuna’s destruction. That hope was now in ruins. Duryodhana gazed vacantly
upwards, tears streaking down his dark face. Was Arjuna truly invincible?
Perhaps. But the war could not be stopped now. Karëa had to be avenged. It
was that or death. No other choice was possible.
771

As Duryodhana gained control of himself, Kåpa said gently, “O great king,
consider carefully your best course now. Seventeen days of battle have passed
and so many men have been killed. All your brothers are dead. We have still to
see signs of weakness or laxity in Arjuna. He ranges about the field like a
massive four-tusked elephant crushing our forces at will. Now he has killed
Karëa and, before that, Jayadratha, even though our whole army tried to
protect him. Who is there among your troops who could face him, O Bharata?
Who also could face the enraged Bhéma? He and Sätyaki are causing a carnage
among our troops that makes our hairs stand on end.”
Kåpa looked earnestly at the Kaurava prince, who sat looking straight ahead
and saying nothing. Kåpa began to cry, but he continued. “You have committed
so many sins against the Päëòavas for which we are all now reaping the fruits.
You mustered this huge army just to achieve your ends. Now it has been
destroyed. We are actually in danger. We are weaker than the Päëòavas. Policy
dictates that peace be sought by diplomacy. Yudhiñöhira is ever-merciful and
will surely accept peace on mutually agreeable terms. You will not lose your
position as king, for neither Yudhiñöhira nor Arjuna nor indeed Kåñëa will
disobey your father’s orders.”
Kåpa implored Duryodhana to make peace. He wept to think of all the kings
and warriors who had lost their lives for Duryodhana’s cause. His voice
trembled as he concluded, “I counsel that we stop the hostilities, O hero. This
is in your best interests. I do not say it out of fear or with any malicious motive.
Do not disregard my words. If you act otherwise, you will recall what I have
said when you yourself are on the verge of death.”
Duryodhana remained silent. Pale with grief, he screwed up his eyes and shook
violently. He sobbed, unable to reply for some minutes. Finally he composed
himself with difficulty and said, “You have doubtlessly spoken as a friend.
Indeed, you have done for me everything a friend could do––going against my
enemies and risking your life for my good. I know that your counsel is wellmeant and beneficial, but it does not please me. Like medicine to a man on the
brink of death, your words are quite unpalatable. In my opinion, Yudhiñöhira
will not trust me even if I go to him and sue for peace. I have cheated him and
inflicted him with all kinds of evil. So too have I pained Arjuna and Kåñëa.
Since hearing of Abhimanyu’s death, Keçava has passed His nights in sorrow.
We have offended Him. How can He forgive us now? Peace is out of the
question. The war will end only when the Kauravas or the Päëòavas are dead.
772

Things have already gone too far. The enmity is irreversible.”
Thinking of Draupadé, he continued, “The Païchäla princess, I have heard, is
practicing austere vows to bring about my destruction. She sleeps on the bare
ground and accepts only one meal a day. Subhadrä, casting away all pride,
serves her like a waiting maid. O Kåpa, everything is on fire. It cannot be
extinguished. How can I, having shone rays like the sun on the heads of all
kings, walk behind Yudhiñöhira? I could never accept his sovereignty. After
ruling this earth as its undisputed emperor, I cannot possibly face a miserable
life of servitude.”
The Kaurava made it clear that battle was the only choice. If he was slain, then
he would at least retain his fame and go to the higher regions. Withdrawing
now would mark him a coward and lead to ignominy and degradation.
Duryodhana looked at Karëa’s seat. Fighting back his grief, he concluded his
speech in resolute tones. “No kñatriya desires a death at home in bed. It must
come in battle, or his fame diminishes and dies. I have performed many a
sacrifice and followed my duties faithfully. I do not fear death. Let me fight
and win glory or ascend the path trodden by heroes who never retreat in
battle. That path has become crowded with joyful kings, hurrying along after
throwing down their bodies in this war. How can I give up the fight after
seeing such noble fighters give their all on my behalf? I could not enjoy the
kingdom with their blood on my hands unless I had exerted myself fully to
avenge them. I will attain victory or heaven. It cannot be otherwise.”
The warriors applauded Duryodhana’s valorous speech. Shaking off their
despair, they resolved to fight to the finish. They decided to select a new
commander in the morning, then rose from their seats and retired to their beds
for the night.
***
After hearing of Bhéma’s systematic slaughter of her sons, and especially of his
brutal killing of Dushashana, Gändhäré was distraught. Since the war began
she had absorbed herself in the practice of penance, praying that the hostilities
might come to a quick end. Perhaps Duryodhana would come to his senses as
he saw the futility of his cause. How was it possible for him to overpower the
virtuous Päëòavas aided by Kåñëa? But Gändhäré knew of his obstinacy. It was
improbable that he would end the war until every man in his army lay dead.
Although the Kuru queen understood that her sons were dying due to their
773

own sinfulness, as a mother she could not tolerate it. Each evening she would
receive news of the day’s events and her heart would be wracked with pain. All
the great Kuru heroes were being slaughtered one after another. When she
heard that Bhéma had slain almost all of her sons, she felt she could take no
more. She had to do something. Her long practice of asceticism had given her
great mystic power. If she went to the battlefield, she could use that power to
make her last surviving sons invincible. Simply by glancing at them she could
make their bodies invulnerable. Deciding to leave at once, she ordered her
servants to prepare a chariot.
Travelling swiftly during the seventeenth day of the war, she finally arrived on
the field at sunset. When she entered the ladies tent she received the terrible
news that all her sons were now dead, with the exception of Duryodhana
alone. The old queen dropped to the ground in a swoon. Her servants quickly
raised her and sat her upon a large couch, sprinkling her face with cool water.
Coming back to her senses she wept for some time. Finally she composed
herself and asked that Duryodhana be brought before her. At least she could
save him. Maybe destiny would allow her to keep one son. Surely he was the
cause of the war, but now that Karëa was dead perhaps he would change. No
doubt Çakuni would also soon be slain. It had been in their company that
Duryodhana had hatched out all his evil schemes. Alone he might be a
different person.
Within a short while the prince entered his mother’s tent and bowed before
her, his face drawn and darkened by grief. She blessed him and spoke
consolingly for some time. Then she said, “Dear son, I had hoped that this war
might end before all my sons were killed. Alas, it seems that that hope will be
thwarted. But still you live. Dear son, I wish to help you. By my ascetic power I
can make your body invincible. Come before me tomorrow morning naked. I
will then bestow my power upon you.”
Duryodhana went out of the tent feeling encouraged. It was surely providential
that his mother had come. Perhaps he would at last be able to overpower his
rampant foes. He headed quickly through the darkness back towards his
quarters.
The following morning before sunrise, Duryodhana took his bath and went
back to his mother’s tent. As he entered the outer section of the large tent, he
took off his clothes and was about to go in when he saw Kåñëa coming out. The
Yädava had heard that Gändhäré had arrived, and He had gone to pay His
774

respects. Seeing Duryodhana standing naked before Him, He opened His eyes
wide in surprise. “What is this, O hero? Why do I see you standing here
without any clothes?”
Duryodhana explained that he was about to see his mother, and Kåñëa replied,
“Have you not learned any culture from your elders, O Bharata? How can any
civilized man go naked before his own mother? I am surprised. At least cover
your loins.”
Duryodhana looked down at his naked body in embarrassment. Kåñëa was
right. He could not stand naked before his mother. As Kåñëa left the tent he
wrapped a cloth around his loins and went in to see the queen. When she
heard him enter, she asked him to stand immediately before her. Then she
lifted the cloth that covered her eyes and looked straight at him. Duryodhana
felt an energy suffusing him as his mother glanced over his body, but when
Gändhäré saw his cloth she was shocked. “Why, dear child, did you not follow
my directions? I asked you to come naked. You have covered your loins and,
although the rest of your body will be hard like iron, your loins and thighs will
remain vulnerable to attack, for I did not see those parts.”
Gändhäré had summoned all her power before glancing over her son. She felt
unable to do it a second time. When Duryodhana told her what had
happened––how he had met Kåñëa as he came into the tent––the queen
sighed. She slowly replaced the cloth over her eyes. Her last hope had been
destroyed. Surely her son would die at Bhéma’s hands, as that Päëòava had
vowed so long ago in the Kuru assembly. Realizing that she could do nothing
against all-powerful destiny, Gändhäré finally smiled. It was Kåñëa again. As
long as He was protecting the Päëòavas, the Kauravas’ cause was hopeless. The
queen dismissed her son. She had best return to Hastinäpura to be with her
grief-stricken husband. The war would soon be over without a doubt.
***
As the sun rose on the eighteenth morning, the Kauravas, after cremating
Karëa and the other slain warriors, mounted their chariots and came together.
Their grief had given way to the numbness born from seeing so much death
and destruction. Almost mechanically they prepared for battle. Duryodhana
looked around at the remaining fighters. Which of them should be the
commander-in-chief for what would likely be the final day of the war? Kåpa
was the obvious choice, but he was clearly reluctant to continue the fight. The
775

prince thought of Açvatthämä. As the preceptor’s son, he was another
possibility. But when Duryodhana asked him, he replied, “I think you should
choose Çalya. In birth, prowess, energy, fame, and every other accomplishment
he is superior to us all. Renouncing his attachment for his kinsmen he has
joined our side and fought relentlessly. Let him lead our troops, like Skanda
leading the celestials.”
Applauding Açvatthämä’s words, the other warriors surrounded Çalya and
shouted, “Victory! Victory!” Duryodhana got down from his chariot and
approached him with folded hands, saying, “O hero, once again I come to seek
your favor. Become our commander. With you at our head we will strike terror
into our foes. There are none among us as brave or powerful as you. O foremost
of kings, take command of these forces, even as Kärttikeya commands the
armies of the gods.”
Çalya, having abandoned any hope of coming out of the battle alive, accepted
Duryodhana’s proposal. Folding his palms he replied, “O mighty-armed king, I
will face the Päëòavas without fear. Forming a mighty array, I shall defeat their
assembled armies. Let us lose no time in going forth again for battle.”
Duryodhana cheered Çalya and had him installed as commander, personally
pouring the sanctified water over his head. The Kauravas sent up lion-like
roars and beat thousands of drums. Inspired with new hope, they moved toward
the battlefield, spreading out into an eagle-shaped formation at Çalya’s
command. Ten thousand elephants, eleven thousand charioteers, the same
number of horsemen, and five hundred thousand infantry remained of the
original four million Kaurava warriors. They fanned out and marched
resolutely toward the battlefield, all of them determined to fight to the death.
Yudhiñöhira heard the Kauravas’ joyous cries. Receiving the news that Çalya
had been appointed commander, he said, “O Keçava, what do You think should
be done? I depend fully on Your advice.”
Kåñëa appeared thoughtful. “I know Çalya as the foremost fighter. O King, he
should not be underestimated. Empowered by the post of commander, he will
be no less powerful than Bhéñma, Droëa, or even Karëa. Still, I think you can
kill him. I do not see another who will be able to kill him. Go forth, O hero,
and slay him like Çakra slew the demon Shambara. Now that you have crossed
the fathomless Kaurava ocean, do not sink into the small pond of Çalya.
Display in battle all your kñatriya strength and your ascetic power. Çalya’s time
has surely come.”
776

Yudhiñöhira mounted his chariot, thinking on Kåñëa’s words. It must be as He
had said. Yudhiñöhira recalled his promise to kill Çalya. It was fitting that the
Madras monarch should meet his end at the hands of his dear friend and
nephew. It would be a hard fight. Both were past masters at spear fighting, and
they had already met for several fierce encounters. The next one would be
their last.
With Dåñöadyumna at their head, the Päëòava troops marched out for battle.
Soon the fight began. Seeing Yudhiñöhira’s white umbrella in the distance,
Çalya urged his charioteer to make straight for him. He was soon confronted by
a large body of chariot fighters, who showered him with arrows and lances. The
Madras king stood his ground and responded with volleys of gold-winged shafts
that struck down dozens of those warriors.
Karëa’s two remaining sons, Satyasena and Citrasena, charged at Nakula like a
pair of tigers attacking an elephant in the forest. They covered him with keen
arrows and sundered his bow, but the Päëòava quickly strung another bow and
returned the attack. Laughing all the while, he killed Satyasena’s four horses
and struck Citrasena on the chest with three whetted shafts.
Satyasena jumped aboard his brother’s chariot and the two princes stood side
by side, shooting their arrows at Nakula. Unshaken, Nakula hurled a bright
dart, steeped in oil and resembling a dreadful snake. It hit Satyasena and
penetrated his heart. His brother roared in anger and increased his attack on
Nakula, killing his horses and smashing his chariot.
Seeing his father careless and under attack, Nakula’s son Sutasoma came to his
aid. He took him onto his own chariot and Nakula carried on fighting. After
releasing a large number of shafts that baffled his opponent, the Päëòava let go
an arrow with a razor-sharp head shaped like a half moon. It struck Citrasena
in the neck and severed his head, sending it flying to the ground. The prince
dropped forward from his chariot and fell to the earth like a hewn tree.
Witnessing Nakula killing Karëa’s two sons, the Kaurava soldiers retreated.
Çalya rallied them. He stood fearlessly in battle, faced by numbers of Päëòava
warriors. Headed by Kåpa and Kåtavarmä, the Kauravas rushed at the Päëòavas
with loud cries. They were met by solid lines of troops led by Dåñöadyumna and
Sätyaki. The two armies clashed with a deafening clamor. The air was filled
with smoke from fiery weapons released by powerful chariot-warriors, as well as
with the stench of blood.
Fighting his way through the dense Päëòava ranks, Çalya approached
777

Yudhiñöhira. He assailed him with a downpour of arrows, but Yudhiñöhira
checked them all with his own. As the leading warriors on both sides
contended with one another, Yudhiñöhira and Çalya fought a violent duel.
They exchanged arrows that collided in mid-air with showers of sparks.
Appearing like Indra and Bali fighting for the sovereignty of the universe, the
two mighty heroes shot blazing shafts off their bows that resembled
thunderbolts.
Showing his intention to slay Çalya, Yudhiñöhira suddenly released a broadheaded arrow that cut down his enemy’s standard. Çalya, raging, replied with
thousands of straight shafts that struck Yudhiñöhira on every part of his body.
The arrows completely covered the Päëòava king as well as his horses, chariot
and driver. Yudhiñöhira’s brothers came to his assistance and rained down long,
barbed arrows on Çalya. Backed by Kåpa and Açvatthämä, the Madras king put
up a savage fight. The Päëòavas had never before seen him so ferocious. His
arrows found the weak points of his assailants, who fell back from his chariot,
stunned by the force of his attack.
Çalya resisted the combined assault of Yudhiñöhira, Sätyaki, Bhéma, and the
two sons of his sister Mädré. Duryodhana came to his support, with Kåtavarmä
by his side. For a long time an awful battle raged between the mighty heroes,
who angrily sought each other’s destruction.
In the meantime, Arjuna had been surrounded by the remaining warriors of
the Trigarta army. The Päëòava slew them mercilessly, and they cried out in
distress. Hearing their cries, Açvatthämä raced over to support them. After
failing in his attempt to make Duryodhana stop the war, he had resolved to
fight to the end. His father and almost all his friends had been slain. Even if
peace were made, what was there left to live for anyway? Careless of
Vyäsadeva’s cautionary words, Droëa’s son attacked Arjuna with all his power.
The two godbrothers, forgetting their former friendship, attacked one another
like a couple of maddened bulls attempting to gore the other with their horns.
The sky was filled with their arrows, and the battle between them was
wonderful even to the celestials.
Gaining the upper hand, Arjuna slew his opponent’s four horses and
charioteer. Açvatthämä stood fearlessly on his immobile chariot, continuing to
resist Arjuna’s attack. Even as he fought with the Päëòava, he rained his shafts
on other Päëòava soldiers and slew hundreds.
Suddenly Suratha, a powerful Päëòava chariot-fighter, bore down upon
778

Açvatthämä with a great shout. Açvatthämä jumped to the ground with his
bow in hand. He placed a keen shaft on its string and drew it back to his ear.
Shot with all his strength, the arrow went right through Suratha’s chest. It
split his heart and emerged from his back, entering the earth.
Açvatthämä quickly ran over and got up onto his slain foe’s chariot. Many
other Kaurava fighters, led by Çakuni and Uluka, raced to his assistance. A
fierce battle then ensued between Arjuna and the Kaurava warriors, who were
backed by thousands of troops.
Not far from Açvatthämä, Çalya continued to fight with frightful force.
Inspired by thoughts of a glorious victory, or death and elevation to the
celestial regions, he encountered all the great Päëòava heroes. No one could
shake him as he stood on his chariot blazing like the sun-god. His arrows went
out in endless lines in all directions. Thousands of brave Päëòava fighters lost
their lives as they tried to approach him in battle.
Remembering his vow and Kåñëa’s words, Yudhiñöhira pressed forward toward
Çalya. The Madras monarch, standing near Yudhiñöhira, looked like the planet
Saturn near the moon. Both men blew their conches, creating a roaring sound
that shook the atmosphere. Gazing at each other with burning eyes, they yelled
out their challenges and counter- challenges. They shrouded each other with
waves of arrows. Wounded all over, they appeared like a kinshuka and a
shalmali tree in full bloom.
The soldiers watching the battle could not decide who would win––whether
Yudhiñöhira would gain the earth after slaying Çalya; or if Çalya, after killing
the Päëòava, would bestow the earth upon Duryodhana.
Çalya sent steel shafts that tore into Yudhiñöhira’s leather hand protectors and
cut his bow in two. Yudhiñöhira spun round in his chariot and took up another
bow, stringing it as he turned again to face his antagonist. He sent a number of
swift arrows that killed Çalya’s four horses and his charioteer. The Päëòava
king then covered Çalya with hundreds of searing shafts that rocked him as he
stood on his stationary chariot. Açvatthämä sped over to rescue the afflicted
Madras king, taking him onto his own chariot.
In moments, Duryodhana, observing the fight, had another great chariot
brought for Çalya. Mounting that chariot, Çalya charged at Yudhiñöhira, his
chariot’s huge iron wheels resounding like thunder. Flanked by other warriors,
he rushed forward into the flights of gold-winged arrows Yudhiñöhira was
shooting. Bhéma, Sätyaki and the twins also challenged him and the Kaurava
779

heroes backing him.
The fight between Yudhiñöhira and Çalya was like a contest between young
tigers in the jungle fighting for a piece of meat. They circled and feinted with
speed and grace. Elated with the pride of prowess, they wounded each other
with their arrows. Çalya simultaneously attacked Yudhiñöhira and Bhéma,
cutting off the armor of both men. With well-aimed arrows, he slew
Yudhiñöhira’s four horses and killed his charioteer. Having stunned the king
and his brother, he then began slaughtering the Päëòava forces.
Bhéma, beside himself with rage, shot long shafts that killed Çalya’s horses and
stopped him in his tracks. He sent another hundred razor-faced arrows that cut
apart his armor. Çalya took up a burnished steel sword and a shield adorned
with a thousand stars. Leaping down from his chariot, he rushed across the
field toward Yudhiñöhira like a hawk swooping on its prey. Bhéma took careful
aim and, with a broad-headed shaft, cut Çalya’s sword in two. With another
twenty arrows he broke apart his shield. Overjoyed, he roared out his battle
cry. The other Päëòavas laughed and blew their milk-white conches.
Seeing Çalya without armor and on foot, deprived of his weapons, the Kauravas
were filled with apprehension. Yudhiñöhira, remaining on his horseless chariot,
took up a large golden dart. It had a handle worked with coral and was set with
gems. The Päëòava raised the effulgent dart and gazed angrily at Çalya,
seeming to burn him with his glance. Uttering mantras and hurling the
weapon with all his force, he cried out, “You are killed!”
The dart flew toward Çalya like a meteor dropping from the sky. Çalya cried
out and tried to catch the dart as it fell upon him, but it slipped through his
hands and struck him on the chest. It passed through him without obstruction
and entered the earth. Blood shot out from Çalya’s mouth, nose and ears. His
arms flew up and he fell to the earth like a mountain summit smashed by a
thunderbolt. Like a dear wife rising to embrace her beloved spouse, the earth
seemed to rise to meet him as he fell. That king, having enjoyed the earth for
so long, finally fell into her embrace and died.
Yudhiñöhira and his brothers sent up triumphant shouts, while the Kauravas
cried out in anguish. Dispirited, they fled from the fight. The Päëòava troops,
seizing their advantage, rushed with raised weapons at their despondent foes.
Çalya’s younger brother charged Yudhiñöhira. He struck the Päëòava with a
cluster of barbed arrows that pierced him. Not minding the attack, Yudhiñöhira
quickly raised his bow and responded with razor-faced shafts that cut apart his
780

attacker’s bow. With one shaft he cut down his standard and with another
arrow he severed his head from his body. Following the path taken by his elder
brother, the handsome prince fell headlong from his chariot.
Duryodhana looked on in despair. All around him his troops were running in
terror, leaving him alone to fight the Päëòavas. Gripped by a wild rage, he
fought in a frenzy to the limit of his power. His arrows flew like blazing comets
in all directions. No one could approach him, and he single-handedly resisted
all the great Päëòava heroes.
Kåtavarmä, Kåpa and Açvatthämä, seeing now Duryodhana’s brave stand
against their foes, came quickly to his support. The four Kaurava warriors
checked the Päëòava army like the shore resisting the ocean. In a last
desperate attempt to win the day, they pressed toward Yudhiñöhira, who still
stood upon his immobilized chariot. Seeing this, Bhéma, Sätyaki, Dåñöadyumna,
and Draupadé’s five sons surrounded the Päëòava king. An exchange then took
place between those warriors and the four Kauravas that filled the heavens
with fiery arrows.
Çalya’s army, the Madrakas, rushed back into the fight with loud shouts. They
cried out, “Where is Yudhiñöhira? Where are Dåñöadyumna and Bhéma? We will
slay them at once!” As those warriors charged into the fray, they were met by
volleys of shafts discharged by the Päëòavas. Cut to pieces, their chariots
smashed and horses slain, they fell by the hundreds. As rows of brave fighters
dropped to the ground, those following them stumbled and fell over their
chariots. Horses screamed as their drivers pulled hard, trying to swerve clear of
the melee. Fiery shafts rained relentlessly down. Well-muscled arms and heads
graced with golden helmets dropped to the ground by the thousands.
Arjuna, having annihilated the remnants of the Trigarta army along with
Çakuni’s mountain warriors, turned his arrows on the Madrakas. With his
unfailing and irresistible shafts he soon slew two thousand elephants with their
riders. The Madrakas uttered cries of terror as Arjuna rode into their midst.
Ruthlessly cut down by the Päëòava and his brothers, they took to their heels,
only to find other Päëòava heroes standing in front of them. They cried out to
Duryodhana for protection.
Çakuni, hearing their piteous cries, came up to Duryodhana’s side and said,
“Arjuna has killed my entire force of warriors. Now he is slaughtering the
brave Madrakas. O King, rally our forces and go to their assistance at once.”
Duryodhana looked vacantly at his old uncle. His mind was sunk in dejection.
781

Few of his forces remained. Those not slain were fleeing. He had shouted
himself hoarse trying to bring them back to the fight. The war could surely not
last much longer. Duryodhana looked around at the desolate scene. The
Päëòava troops were chasing his fleeing soldiers with shouts of joy. Only a
handful of his bravest fighters––Kåpa, Açvatthämä, Kåtavarmä, about a dozen
of his brothers––still survived, with less than twenty thousand troops to
support them.
The prince said in a tearful voice, “O Uncle, I repeatedly hear Vidura’s words
in my mind. Only out of ignorance did I ignore his wise counsel. Just see the
course of destiny. Our once proud army has practically been annihilated.
Bhéma and Arjuna have wrought havoc among our men. What should be done?
I cannot return from this war defeated. Victory or death are my only choices.
Keeping the duties of a kñatriya uppermost in our minds, let us go forward into
the fight one final time. Put forth all your power, O son of Suvala. Maybe we
will yet gain the day.”
Ordering their charioteers to urge on their horses, the two Kauravas charged
into the fray, roaring out their battle cries. But the Päëòavas were ready. With
victory in sight they stood firm against their desperate foes, releasing waves of
deadly shafts that cut them down. Duryodhana looked on in horror as almost
all of his remaining warriors were slaughtered.
Seeing the Kauravas practically defeated, Kåñëa said, “O Dhanaïjaya, this war
is virtually over. Millions of warriors on both sides have been slain. Our forces
are now superior to the Kauravas. All that is needed to secure our victory is
Duryodhana’s death. Without killing him, there will be no end to these
hostilities, for he will never admit defeat. O Pärtha, exert yourself to kill
Duryodhana and end this ghastly conflict.”
Arjuna looked at Kåñëa who, although wounded, shone with splendor as he
held the horses’ reins. “O Mädhava, you have spoken the truth. The evilminded son of Dhåtaräñöra will fight to the last man. It seems that none will
escape death. Bhéma has slain all of Duryodhana’s brothers. Surely, in keeping
with his promise, he will also kill Duryodhana himself. There stands Susharma,
my old antagonist. His time has come. O Keçava, take my chariot toward that
king.”
Arjuna pointed to Susharma, who stood releasing flaming shafts at the
Päëòava troops. Kåñëa urged on his horses and in moments Arjuna stood
before Susharma, who was supported by four Trigarta princes. They
782

immediately attacked Arjuna in a body, striking him with hundreds of arrows.
Moving with grace and skill, Arjuna assailed the princes like a hungry lion
attacking deer. With razor-headed shafts he slew all four, then turned on
Susharma. He struck the monarch on the chest with three powerful shafts,
then killed his horses with four more. With another broad-faced arrow he cut
down his standard. Then, with a long golden shaft inspired by mantras, he
pierced Susharma through the heart.
As Susharma toppled from his chariot, Arjuna charged into the troops backing
him. Nearby Bhéma was roaring and whirling his mace as he rushed against
Duryodhana. The Kaurava resisted him valiantly, shooting thousands of arrows
and holding him at bay. A short distance away, Sätyaki fought Kåtavarmä
while Dåñöadyumna and the twins fought Kåpa and Açvatthämä.
While those heroes engaged in combat, Sahadeva saw Çakuni assailing the
Päëòava army. Remembering his vow, the Päëòava broke away from his fight
with Kåpa. He rushed toward Çakuni, shouting out a challenge. As Çakuni
turned to face him, Sahadeva discharged fearful arrows that flew at the speed
of the wind. He immediately cut Çakuni’s bow apart and broke his standard.
Undaunted, Çakuni took up another bow and fought back with great energy,
striking his antagonist with a volley of powerful shafts.
Sahadeva expertly warded off Çakuni’s attack and replied with sixty keen
arrows that hit Çakuni on every part of his body. Sahadeva followed that with
another eighty shafts that sent Çakuni spinning on the terrace of his chariot,
his bow flying from his hand.
Uluka, seeing his father’s plight, rushed at Sahadeva, releasing dozens of
barbed arrows. In a moment, Sahadeva spun round to face Uluka. He
discharged a crescent-headed shaft that screamed through the air and
beheaded Uluka. The huge-bodied warrior fell from his chariot, his head
rolling away with staring eyes and earrings that gleamed from the dusty
ground.
Çakuni cried out and tears sprung to his eyes. He remembered Vidura’s wise
words. It had always been folly to nurture enmity with the Päëòavas. The
Suvala monarch, still under Sahadeva’s attack, reflected sorrowfully on his life
as he fought back. His original anger with Bhéñma for giving his sister to the
blind Dhåtaräñöra was long forgotten. After befriending Duryodhana, he had
become implicated in more and more treachery, even though in his heart he
knew it would one day have fearful consequences. Yet he had been driven by
783

anger and attachment, always ignoring the truth, and hoping that by his
cunning he could somehow destroy the Päëòavas. Now he would face the
results. The fire of the Päëòavas’ anger had blazed up into a conflagration. His
entire army––his own son––had been killed before his eyes.
Remembering his duty as a warrior, Çakuni gazed wrathfully at Sahadeva.
Perhaps he could at least avenge his son’s death before dying himself. Çakuni
raised his bow and placed a formidable looking shaft on its string but, before he
could release it, Sahadeva cut apart his bow with three razor-faced arrows.
Roaring in anger, Çakuni picked up a scimitar and hurled it at his foe.
Sahadeva immediately cut the spinning sword to pieces before it reached him.
As Sahadeva countered the scimitar, Çakuni let go a dreadful mace that flew at
him with a loud, rushing sound. Sahadeva struck the mace with a cluster of
shafts that smashed it to pieces. Çakuni then hurled a dart at him, which the
Päëòava also checked.
Seeing his weapons falling uselessly to earth like the hopes of an impious man,
Çakuni became afraid. Dispirited, he fled from the fight. Sahadeva,
remembering his vow to slay Çakuni, gave chase. He shouted at him to turn
back and fight, but Çakuni did not listen.
Racing up to Çakuni’s side, Sahadeva called, “Why are you abandoning your
duty, O fool? Do you recall how you rejoiced in the Kuru assembly, O wicked
man? You and the wretched Duryodhana are the only survivors of those who
ridiculed us and insulted our queen. But not for long. Receive now the fruits of
your evil acts. Stand and face me in battle. I will cut off your head like a man
plucking a ripe fruit.”
Goaded by Sahadeva, Çakuni pulled up his chariot and turned to fight. He took
up a lance adorned with gold and jewels, but it was cut to pieces even as he
raised it over his shoulder. Sahadeva sent searing, razor-faced arrows that tore
off Çakuni’s arms. Then, with an arrow as bright as fire, he cut off his head.
As Çakuni fell, blood spurting from his trunk, the Kauravas wailed.
Duryodhana cried out and dropped his bow. All the other warriors around him
threw down their weapons and ran. Only a handful of Kaurava soldiers
survived, and they found themselves surrounded by the Päëòava forces.
Unable to escape, they stood to fight but were soon killed.
Seeing himself alone, Duryodhana turned and fled from the battlefield.
Jumping from his chariot, he dashed into the surrounding woods and ran until
he reached a large lake. Bewildered, and with a desire to save his life, he
784

entered the water. As he sank into the lake, keeping his life airs circulating
within himself by yoga practice, the Kaurava prince used his mystic power to
solidify the water around his body.
After Duryodhana’s departure, only Kåpa, Açvatthämä and Kåtavarmä
remained. With their leader gone, they too decided to flee. They raced from
the battlefield. As they fled, they met Vyäsadeva. The åñi told them where to
find Duryodhana and then disappeared. The three warriors went to the lake
and saw Duryodhana’s upper garment nearby. Realizing he had entered the
lake, they fell to the ground wailing. “Alas, the king did not know that we
survived. He has entered this lake in despair without knowing that all was not
yet lost.”
They got to their feet slowly and returned to their chariots, deciding to make
their way to the Kuru camp. Reaching the outpost they found the guards
grieving. The three men carried on into the camp where they saw similar
scenes. They heard the loud wails of the royal ladies in their tents, which
sounded like the crying of flocks of ospreys. The ladies were being led out by
their guards and placed on chariots, ready to return to the city. With their
clothes and hair in disarray, their ornaments cast aside, they were a piteous
sight. Many men were setting out for Hastinäpura, unable to stay any longer in
the desolate encampment. They rushed here and there in their haste to leave,
fearful that the Päëòavas might arrive at any moment to finish them off.
Unable to tolerate the mournful atmosphere, the three warriors returned to
Duryodhana’s hiding place. Kåpa stood by the edge of the lake and called aloud,
“O King, rise up and face your enemies. Just see how your men have given way
to grief in your absence. The Päëòavas are ranging about the field looking for
you. Their armies have been destroyed. Fight with them and gain control of
the earth or, slain by them, rise to heaven. Why do you tarry here?
Açvatthämä, Kåtavarmä and I are here to help you. Surely you will win if you
continue the fight.”
Duryodhana heard Kåpa as he sat at the bottom of the lake. He called out, “By
good fortune have you three heroes survived, O foremost of men. Just let me
rest here for awhile and then I will surely wage war again. You are also tired
and should rest. Refreshed and renewed, we may proceed toward the battle. O
mighty-armed ones, you are all noble and your devotion to me is great, but it is
not now the proper time to display your power. Let us rest tonight. In the
morning I will join you for the fight. Do not doubt it.”
785

Açvatthämä replied, “Rise up, O King; may you fare well. We shall yet defeat
the enemy. I swear by all my holy acts, by all my gifts, and by truth itself, that I
will slay the remaining Päëòavas. Indeed, if this night passes without my
killing them, I will not again enjoy the pleasure of performing sacrifices, a
pleasure enjoyed by all pious men. O King, I will not loosen my armor until
they are killed. This is certain.”
As Açvatthämä called out to Duryodhana, a number of hunters arrived at the
lake. Worn out with the day’s hunting, they wanted to slake their thirst.
Seeing the three powerful kñatriyas, they hid in the bushes and listened. They
then understood that Duryodhana was hidden in the lake. Undetected by the
three Kauravas, they listened as the warriors tried without success to convince
Duryodhana to come out and resume the fight.
The hunters had observed the battle fought between the world’s kñatriyas.
They knew that the Päëòavas would reward them richly if they told them of
Duryodhana’s whereabouts. Getting up quietly, they slipped away and went
toward the Päëòavas’ camp to see Yudhiñöhira.

Chapter 27
Bhéma Fights Duryodhana
The Päëòavas returned to their camp after their unsuccessful search for
Duryodhana. After entering Yudhiñöhira’s tent, they dispatched soldiers to
search every part of the battlefield. As they sat awaiting news, guards ushered
the hunters in. Falling at Yudhiñöhira’s feet the hunters told him everything
they had seen and heard. Yudhiñöhira rose with a smile. He immediately gave
the hunters much wealth. After dismissing them, he went with his brothers to
the lake, which was called Dwaipayana. All the Päëòava warriors went with
them, roaring out, “We have found Duryodhana. Let us finish him once and
for all.”
The three surviving Kauravas, still trying to convince Duryodhana to come
out, heard the approaching Päëòavas and called to Duryodhana, “Proud and
victorious, the Päëòavas are coming this way. We must leave.”
The three men mounted their horses and rode into the forest just before the
786

Päëòavas reached the lake. They saw that the lake’s waters were perfectly still,
charmed by Duryodhana’s mystical powers. Seeing that unusual sight, they
realized Duryodhana was hiding like a coward within the lake. Yudhiñöhira said
to Kåñëa, “Just see how this deceitful man has used his powers of deception to
avoid defeat, but he will not escape me now. Even if Indra himself comes to his
side, he will die today.”
Kåñëa agreed. “With your own mystic powers, O King, destroy Duryodhana’s
illusion. One conversant with illusion should be destroyed by illusion. This is
truth. So many Daityas and Dänavas, all masters of mystic power, have been
killed by the gods by means of illusion. Therefore, act swiftly so that this
wicked man meets his just end.”
Yudhiñöhira called to Duryodhana. “Why, O best of men, have you charmed
this lake and hidden beneath its waters? How is that you now desire to save
your own life, having brought about the destruction of your family and friends
and, indeed, millions of kñatriyas? Arise and fight! Where is your honor? You
have been described as a hero in all assemblies, but I think those descriptions
have been false. You are nothing but a coward. Just see how you now hide from
us to protect your life. O wicked fool, come out and face the consequences of
all your evil acts. Do not cower here like a eunuch. Heroes never fly from
battle. Rather, they prefer death to dishonor. Do not destroy your honor.
Stand for battle. Either govern this earth after gaining victory or sleep on the
naked earth, killed by us.”
Standing at the edge of the lake with his brothers and Kåñëa, with all the other
Päëòava warriors standing behind him, Yudhiñöhira waited for Duryodhana’s
reply. He looked around at his surroundings. The large lake gave respite from
the heat and dust of the battlefield. Situated in a cool glade, it was shaded by
tall trees with many colored blossoms hanging down to its surface. Varieties of
water fowl sat in the trees, mystified by the lake’s sudden transformation. A
gentle breeze fanned the leaves, filling the air with a soothing rustle that was
punctuated by the melodic cries of birds. The Päëòavas felt refreshed simply by
seeing the picturesque region, which was the resort of numerous yogés and
ascetics.
After a wait of some moments, Duryodhana called out, “O King, it is no
wonder that fear seizes all living beings, but I have not entered this lake out of
fear. Bereft of my army and standing alone in the fight, I am tired. Therefore, I
sought refuge in this lake to rest. O son of Kunté, you should also rest. In due
787

course, I will surely fight with you all.”
Yudhiñöhira laughed. “O Duryodhana, we have rested sufficiently. The time
has arrived for our final battle. Come out and conclude the war either by
slaying us or by dying a hero’s death.”
Duryodhana, still saddened by the deaths of Karëa, Çakuni and all his brothers,
spoke with anguish in his voice. “O scion of Kuru’s race, I no longer desire to
rule this world, deprived as I am of my kinsmen and friends. All those for
whose sake I desired sovereignty now lie dead. I give you this empty earth.
Although I wish to defeat you and humble your pride, even my desire for battle
is gone when I think of Droëa and Karëa and our grandsire, Bhéñma. I think I
will enter the forest, clad in deerskin and bent on a life of asceticism. Go, O
King, and rule the earth destitute of monarchs, warriors and wealth. I will
remain here.”
Duryodhana’s words held a note of sarcasm that was not lost on Yudhiñöhira.
Becoming impatient, Yudhiñöhira replied, “Do not rave so, O Duryodhana. I
feel no pity for you. It was by your greed that everyone has died. I will not
accept this earth as a gift, for that is not my duty as a kñatriya. Nor are you in a
position to make such a gift. You have already lost everything.”
Yudhiñöhira smiled at his brothers as he continued. “Why, O hero, did you not
make the offer when Kåñëa requested you to? How is it that you, who once
denied me even as much land as could be pierced by a needle, now wish to give
me the earth? It is not yours to give. Nor was it ever yours. Come out and win
the world or go to the celestial regions after we kill you. For all your sins
against us and against the chaste Draupadé, you deserve to die at our hands. I
shall not spare you.”
The other Päëòavas then shouted at Duryodhana to come out of the lake.
Angry, they rebuked him again and again. All the other warriors roared out
their battle cries and waved their weapons.
Hearing the tumult and reflecting on Yudhiñöhira’s words, Duryodhana became
enraged. He decided to fight but was apprehensive. “O Päëòavas, you have
friends, chariots and animals. I am alone and without a chariot. How can I
stand against all of you? I do not feel this to be fair or in keeping with kñatriya
codes. Allow me to fight with you one at a time and I will come out. I am not
afraid of any of you. Like the rising sun destroying starlight, I will rise up and
destroy you all. Today I will release myself from the debt I owe to all the slain
warriors.”
788

The Päëòavas cheered when they heard his valorous words. Yudhiñöhira
replied, “By good fortune you have remembered your duty, O mighty-armed
one. By good fortune have you inclined your mind toward battle. Choose any
one of us and any weapon. I grant you that if you gain victory with any of us,
you may become king. Otherwise, killed by us, go to heaven.”
Duryodhana smiled within the lake. He fingered the mace by his side and said,
“Brave as you are, O mighty ones, if you allow me the option of choosing my
weapon, then I select the mace I have in my hands. Let any one of you who
feels he is a match for me stand against me in battle. I will fight alone and on
foot, armed only with a mace. Without doubt I will slay you all, one at a time.
Not even Indra can face me when I stand armed with my mace.”
“We will see. Come out and be a man. Death awaits you. Fight in any way you
like. You will not escape.”
Unable to tolerate Yudhiñöhira’s goading, Duryodhana rose up from the waters.
The Päëòavas saw the surface ripple as he came up from the bottom. Emerging
from the waters with his mace on his shoulders, he appeared like a mountain
crest rising out of the ocean.
The Päëòavas and their followers embraced one other and shouted joyously to
see Duryodhana emerge. Now the war could be concluded. The warriors waved
their weapons and blew their conches.
Duryodhana glowered at his enemies, insulted by their exclamations of
happiness. He bit his lips and breathed heavily. Standing on the shore of the
lake with water running from his body, he looked around and thundered, “You
will have to bear the consequences of all these insults. I will kill you all and
send you to Yamaräja’s abode.”
As he spoke he brought his mace down from his shoulder and struck the earth,
making the ground tremble. He stared angrily at Yudhiñöhira and said, “Here I
am, O descendant of Kuru. Abide by your word and let me fight any one of
you. I have only my mace. Send forward my opponent to fight on equal terms.
You should referee our contest, because you are well qualified to judge what is
right and what is wrong.”
Duryodhana glanced at Bhéma, who stared back at him with unbridled hatred.
Both men knew the final contest would be between them. Bhéma stood with
his mace by his side, thinking of his vow to kill the Kaurava. He longed to leap
forward at once, bringing his death-dealing mace down upon Duryodhana’s
head with all his power, but he checked himself, awaiting Yudhiñöhira’s order.
789

Yudhiñöhira smiled wryly upon hearing Duryodhana’s request that he judge the
fight. The intelligent Päëòava knew what he meant. Bhéma’s promise had been
that he would smash his thighs, and in mace fighting blows beneath the belt
were forbidden. Well, the Kaurava had been given ample warning. Bhéma had
made his intentions clear. He wanted to punish Duryodhana for his long-past
crime against Draupadé––he would smash the thigh the prince had shamelessly
exposed before her in the assembly hall. There would be no sin in meting out
such a punishment.
Yudhiñöhira, moved to anger by his recollection of the dice game, replied
sternly, “How is it, O Duryodhana, that you did not consider right or wrong
when you and your followers killed Abhimanyu? Without doubt the duties of a
kñatriya are harsh and merciless. Otherwise, how could you have slaughtered
that child in such an unfair way? Why do you now ask that we fight you one by
one? In difficulties, men are ever prone to forget virtue, caring nothing for the
consequences of their deeds. However, O hero, I will give you a fair chance.
Select any of us as your opponent. If you can defeat any one of us, then you
will be king. Otherwise, proceed to heaven.”
Kåñëa looked questioningly at Yudhiñöhira. What had come over him?
Duryodhana was famous throughout the world for his skill with a mace.
Balaräma himself, the unrivalled master of the mace, had said that
Duryodhana was his best student. Perhaps Bhéma could defeat him, but it
would be a close contest. And if Duryodhana selected another opponent, then
who knew what the outcome would be? It seemed that Yudhiñöhira had once
again staked everything on a single throw.
Duryodhana laughed and stepped forward. The Päëòava soldiers fetched him a
suit of armor, which he quickly donned. Resplendent, he said, “O Yudhiñöhira,
I will fight with any one of you brothers. What difference does it make? Who
can match my strength? I will kill you one after another. There are none
among you who can face me in a fair fight. It is not right for me to vaunt my
own prowess, but I speak the truth. Within an hour you will see my words
proven true. Let he among you who will fight me take up his mace.”
Duryodhana’s pride prevented him from selecting an easy opponent. He felt
sure he would not be defeated, no matter who fought with him. He was not
even afraid of Bhéma, and his intense hatred for that particular Päëòava made
him hope Bhéma would be selected to fight. It was likely. Who else could the
Päëòavas choose? Anticipating this day even while still in Hastinäpura,
790

Duryodhana had spent countless hours practicing beating an iron image of
Bhéma. Now he could exercise his skills against Bhéma himself.
As Duryodhana spoke, Kåñëa went over to Yudhiñöhira and said quietly, “O
King, you have made a rash promise. What will happen if Duryodhana decides
to fight with you, Arjuna, or the twins? Only Bhéma can face him with the
mace, but even then the outcome is not certain. Although Bhéma’s strength is
greater, Duryodhana’s skills are better, and skill usually wins over strength. I
think you have made a grave mistake. Who but you would relinquish a
kingdom after winning such a great war and having only a single enemy left? It
seems, O King, that Kunté’s sons are not meant to enjoy sovereignty.”
Bhéma, standing by Yudhiñöhira’s side, heard Kåñëa’s words and said, “O
Mädhava, do not grieve. I will end this war. Yudhiñöhira’s victory is certain
because the wretched Duryodhana stands before me for battle. Allow me to
fight with him. My mace is more powerful than his, and my skills are not
lacking. What to speak of Duryodhana, armed with my mace I could fight with
the celestials headed by Indra.”
Kåñëa applauded Bhéma and said, “Depending on you, O mighty-armed one,
surely Yudhiñöhira will regain his prosperity. You have slain all of
Duryodhana’s brothers and uncountable numbers of his troops. Go forward
and slay this wretch himself. Fulfill your promise, but fight with care. He is a
formidable opponent with the mace.”
Bhéma laughed in derision and stepped toward Duryodhana with his mace
resting on his shoulder. His brothers cheered him, and he thundered, “I dare to
fight with this most arrogant and sinful one. He will not be able to defeat me.
Today I will vomit forth the anger which has rankled in my bosom for many
years. Today, dear brother, I will pluck out the dart which has long stuck in
your heart. O virtuous one, today I will recover your garland of glory. Today
Duryodhana will renounce his life, prosperity and kingdom. Today, hearing of
his son’s death, Dhåtaräñöra will remember all his sins against us.”
Bhéma roared and whirled his mace, bringing it down with such force that the
earth shook. Duryodhana could not brook the challenge and he stepped toward
Bhéma raising his fist. He glared at Bhéma, who returned his venomous look.
They appeared like a lion and a king of elephants facing one another in the
forest.
Staring into Duryodhana’s smoldering eyes, Bhéma went on, “Do you recall
how you insulted Draupadé, O sinful man, and how you deceived the pious king
791

Yudhiñöhira. Receive now the consequences of those acts and of the other
wrongs you inflicted upon us. It is by your fault that Bhéñma now lies prostrate
on the field, that Droëa has been killed, and that so many other valiant heroes
are slain. All your brothers are dead, including the despicable one who seized
Draupadé’s sanctified hair. Now you will follow them. Today your pride will be
crushed along with your hope for sovereignty. Prepare to pay for your
misdeeds.”
Duryodhana sneered. “What is the use of your bold words? I will quell your
desire for battle. Why do you disregard me? See my mace, like the summit of
Mount Himavat. Not even Purandara, lord of the heavens, could defeat me in
a fair fight. Who cares for all my so-called misdeeds? What can you or anyone
else do about them? By my might you have already had to suffer so much, even
becoming a cook in Virata’s house while Arjuna became a eunuch. I have killed
most of your allies and you will be the next to die.”
Bhéma was ready. He seemed to be on fire as he glared at Duryodhana. The
Kaurava, remembering Bhéma’s vow, said, “Do not gain victory by unfair
means, O Våkodara, for that will deprive you of your reputation. Fight honestly
with all your strength. Then, defeated by me, you will gain everlasting fame.”
Kåñëa suggested that the fight to death take place near Lake
Samantapanchaka, a sacred place created by Paraçuräma. The warriors agreed
and made their way to that site. As they moved across the battlefield, Balaräma
arrived, just returned from His pilgrimage to the holy places. He was greeted
with affection by Yudhiñöhira and his brothers. Kåñëa bowed before Him and
touched His feet, saying, “Witness the skill of Your two disciples, O Räma. Just
now they are proceeding to Samantapanchaka for battle.”
The white-complexioned Balaräma looked like the full moon risen on the
battlefield. Clad in blue silks and adorned with gold ornaments, a garland of
red lotuses on His chest, He shone as He embraced both Bhéma and
Duryodhana, who each offered Him their obeisances.
After inquiring about the welfare of all the kings and kñatriyas, and hearing
how almost all of them had been slain, Balaräma said, “I have already received
news of the war from Närada, who told Me that the fight between these two
heroes was about to take place. Thus I have come. Some weeks ago I left for My
tour, deciding to side with neither party. I have not changed My decision. I will
watch the fight with a neutral heart.”
Balaräma joined the warriors as they went on foot the short distance to
792

Samantapanchaka. Bhéma and Duryodhana, both breathing heavily, strode
angrily next to each other, staring ahead with their maces resting on their
shoulders.
Reaching Samantapanchaka, where Paraçuräma had excavated a lake and
filled it with the blood of slain warriors, they formed a circle around a large
expanse of flat, sandy ground. Bhéma and Duryodhana stood facing each other
in the center. They challenged one another in harsh tones and roared in anger.
Both were joyful at the prospect of the fight, each expecting a quick victory.
They looked like an eastern and western cloud, coming together in the
heavens and thundering terribly. They hurled insults at each other, circling
with maces held at the ready.
As the fight was about to commence, awful omens were seen. Fierce winds blew
up and a shower of dust fell from the sky. Claps of thunder resounded in the
cloudless sky. Meteors fell and a dark circle surrounded the sun. Jackals howled
and the vultures and crows cried. Loud voices seemed to boom out, suddenly
rising and falling in a fearful cacophony.
Disregarding the omens, the two enraged fighters rushed at one another with
their maces raised high. They met like two furious bulls fighting with their
horns. The two maces collided with a deafening crash, sending up a shower of
sparks. Cheered by the watching warriors, they exhibited graceful maneuvers,
whirling their weapons and spinning around as they fought.
The gods, Gandharvas and åñis came to witness the battle. The celestial beings
marveled at the speed and skill of the two fighters as they sought out each
other’s weaknesses. For some time, neither could penetrate the other’s defenses
and their maces clashed again and again, sounding like thunderclaps.
As the fight wore on, however, they began to strike each other great blows on
the arms and shoulders. Hit hard by his opponent, each would reel back, then
quickly recover, returning swift blows to his unguarded foe. Both knew every
move and displayed the full range of their skills, to the onlookers’ wonder.
Everyone who watched the fight gasped and cheered as the two warriors
fought.
Bhéma’s flying mace resembled Yamaräja’s rod of death raised for the
destruction of all creatures. It fell upon Duryodhana with a sound like the
rushing wind. The Kaurava moved about with astonishing dexterity, evading
Bhéma’s strokes and countering with terrific speed. His own mace moved with
such velocity that it created flames of fire in the air. By his superior skill,
793

Duryodhana began to prevail over Bhéma, repeatedly smashing him with
forceful blows.
Although struck again and again, Bhéma stood his ground and appeared
unshaken. Brought to the pitch of wrath, he tried to strike back at his
opponent with his iron mace, swinging it around with such speed that it could
hardly be seen. But Duryodhana expertly baffled Bhéma by leaping high and
dodging those blows. He spun around in the air and turned in somersaults as he
eluded Bhéma’s wheeling mace. Laughing as he dropped back to the earth, he
brought his own mace down on Bhéma’s head with great force. Although struck
with such violence, Bhéma did not move, making all the spectators cry out in
amazement.
Duryodhana seemed to dance on the field, his mace continuously circling
around him and protecting him on every side. Bhéma found all his attacks
thwarted and immediately answered by heavy counter-blows from
Duryodhana. Balaräma applauded his skill, but the Päëòavas and their
followers felt dispirited. They watched in apprehension as Bhéma took a
beating from the Kaurava prince.
Bhéma was infuriated by Duryodhana’s evasive tactics. After being struck again
by the Kaurava’s mace, he took several steps backwards and then suddenly
spun round whirling his mace at waist height. Letting go of the mace, he swung
it by its long sling and it rushed through the air with a roaring sound.
Duryodhana was caught on his side and he dropped to his knees in pain. A
great cheer went up from the Päëòavas, but Duryodhana, unable to tolerate
the shouting and empowered by his mother’s glance, immediately got to his
feet, shaking off his pain. Screaming in fury he ran at Bhéma and, with a
sudden maneuver, struck the Päëòava on the forehead.
Bhéma stood unmoved. Blood flowed from his forehead like temporal fluid
trickling from the head of an elephant. Duryodhana was stunned to see his
opponent still standing. He took a step backward and Bhéma, seizing his
opportunity, struck him powerfully on the shoulder. Duryodhana fell to the
earth like an uprooted oak tree. He lay there for a moment in a swoon as the
Päëòavas cheered and waved their weapons.
Bhéma waited for his dazed foe to regain his senses. He was amazed that his
blow, which could have smashed down a mountain peak, had not killed him
outright. Within a minute, Duryodhana leapt to his feet. He was uninjured.
His eyes gloated as he saw Bhéma’s astonishment. The queen’s ascetic power
794

was something indeed. Duryodhana laughed loudly, then suddenly darted
forward. Dodging Bhéma’s whirling mace, the Kaurava spun around in a
complete circle and struck him full on the chest. Bhéma’s armor burst open and
he flew backwards, falling to the earth with a thud. Awed, the celestials
shouted and rained fragrant flowers on the fighters.
Fear possessed the Päëòavas’ hearts as they saw Bhéma lying on the ground, but
in a few moments he sprang to his feet. Wiping the blood from his face, he
gazed at Duryodhana with bloodshot eyes. The two men paced, regarding each
other with cautious respect and looking for an opportunity to strike.
As they circled, Arjuna said quietly to Kåñëa, “Who do You think is superior in
this contest, O Janärdana? What is their respective merit?”
Arjuna, himself an accomplished mace fighter, felt anxious for Bhéma. He had
also noticed Duryodhana’s apparent invulnerability and could not see how
Bhéma would overpower him. It seemed as if the Kaurava had the upper hand.
But Kåñëa, who had saved Arjuna from many such situations, would surely
know what to do.
Kåñëa replied with a slight smile, “These two have received equal training.
Bhéma is stronger, but Duryodhana’s skill is greater and he has practiced much
more. He has also been blessed by his mother’s ascetic power, making the
contest uneven. Bhéma will not win a fair fight; but if he resorts to unfair
tactics, he will be victorious. Deceit in battle is acceptable against a deceitful
foe. Even Indra used deceit to overcome the mighty asuras Virocanä and
Våtra.”
Watching as the two combatants rushed again at one another, Kåñëa reminded
Arjuna of Bhéma’s promise to break Duryodhana’s thigh, a promise which was
later reinforced by Maitreya’s curse. He made it clear that this was the only
way Bhéma could gain victory.
“The Päëòavas have again been placed in a perilous position due to
Yudhiñöhira’s fault,” Kåñëa continued. “The learned Shukra has stated that the
remnant of a defeated army, rallied and returned to the fight, are always to be
feared, being desperate and fixed in their determination. Duryodhana had lost
everything and was ready to enter the forest. Yudhiñöhira should not have
challenged him. Now Bhéma must surely use unfair means to end this fight,
otherwise the kingdom will again be lost, O hero.”
Kåñëa knew that Bhéma was endeavoring to defeat Duryodhana by fair means
before fulfilling his vow of breaking the prince’s thigh. Arjuna understood his
795

meaning and, catching Bhéma’s eye, he slapped his thigh. Bhéma nodded
slightly in understanding. This must be a message from Kåñëa. He had not
wanted to strike Duryodhana below the belt until he was overpowered, but
perhaps there was no alternative. The Kaurava was fighting with demonic fury,
exhibiting every skill and showing no sign of fatigue. Nor did it seem possible
to make any impression on him no matter how hard he was struck. Kåñëa’s
advice was his only chance.
Bhéma moved about rapidly in front of Duryodhana, displaying his maneuvers
and baffling his foe. Duryodhana in turn showed the full range of moves
described in the ancient martial scriptures. The two men met savagely, their
maces colliding with showers of sparks and huge cracks that momentarily
deafened the observers. They fought like a pair of maddened tigers, sweat
pouring from their faces and blood running down their bodies.
Again separating, they stood for some moments to lean on their maces and
regain their breath. Then they flew at one another with great yells. Both had
smashed the other’s armor and now fought only in their loin cloths. Their wellmuscled frames gleamed in the late afternoon sun as they swung and lunged
and parried.
Taking a step backwards as if to avoid Duryodhana’s mace, Bhéma suddenly
hurled his weapon at the Kaurava, keeping hold of its sling. Duryodhana
anticipated the blow and sidestepped it. Catching Bhéma with his arms
outstretched, he struck him a powerful blow on his side. Bhéma was winded but
showed no sign, summoning his patience as he pulled back his mace.
Duryodhana did not realize that his opponent was disadvantaged. Exercising
caution, he did not aim a second stroke at him.
Bhéma, recovering, narrowed his eyes and rushed forward. He swung his mace
and, as he expected, Duryodhana leapt upwards in the maneuver known as
avasthana. Bhéma suddenly stopped in front of Duryodhana and swung his
mace chest-high in a rapid arc. As the Kaurava dropped back to the ground he
was struck across the thighs. The blow carried the momentum of Bhéma’s
forward dash, as well as the full power of his two arms. Bhéma’s mace, which
could only be lifted by three strong men, smashed Duryodhana’s thighs like a
thunderbolt breaking a pair of huge trees.
The ground shook as Duryodhana fell flat, screaming. He lay there writhing in
pain. It was obvious that the fight was over. All the Päëòava forces roared in
joy. Yudhiñöhira embraced his brothers and Kåñëa applauded Bhéma.
796

The air was again filled with strange omens. Showers of dust and bones fell
from the sky. Fierce winds gusted, and a terrific noise issued from the bowels of
the earth. The sky was filled with the frightful roaring of Räkñasas, Yakñas and
Dänavas. Darkness enveloped the four quarters and fierce beasts yelled on all
sides.
Bhéma, still seething, approached his fallen foe. “O wretch, recall now how you
insulted Draupadé and how you committed so many sins against the sinless
Yudhiñöhira. Accept the fruits of your actions.”
Bhéma lifted his left foot and kicked Duryodhana. With his foot placed on the
Kaurava’s head, he continued, his voice harsh. “By the ascetic penance of
Drupada’s daughter you lie here and your army is crushed. Let all those who
saw her dragged into the assembly hall witness your defeat. All those who
insulted and disregarded the Päëòavas are slain.”
Seeing Bhéma standing with his foot on Duryodhana’s head, many of the
Päëòava warriors were shocked and cried out, “Shame!”
Balaräma, witnessing Bhéma’s abuse, was filled with rage. Already aghast at the
way Bhéma had struck the Kaurava down, He called out, “Fie on Bhéma! How
has he struck such a blow in a fair fight? No stroke should ever be aimed
beneath the belt. This is the ancient rule, but this wretch has broken it. Such
an act cannot go unpunished.”
Balaräma raised His plow weapon and ran at Bhéma, appearing like Mount
Kailäsa rushing toward the Himavat. Kåñëa quickly pursued Him and caught
hold of Him. Encircling His elder brother with His powerful arms, Kåñëa
stopped Him before He could reach Bhéma. The two Yadu heroes shone
beautifully and looked like the sun and moon conjoining in the evening sky.
As Balaräma struggled against His brother’s grasp, Kåñëa said, “O hero, You
should not act in this way. Bhéma has served even Our interests. The Päëòavas
are Our friends. Indeed, they are the children of Our father’s sister.
Duryodhana was their sworn enemy and thus Our enemy as well. His death was
to be sought by Us by any means. Furthermore, it was Bhéma’s solemn vow that
he would break Duryodhana’s thighs and slay him. The keeping of vows is
always a sacred duty, and Bhéma’s vow was confirmed by the words of the
infallible Åñi Maitreya. For all this, O slayer of Pralamba, I do not see any fault
in Bhéma. Give up Your anger and be peaceful, O foremost of men.”
Balaräma laughed dryly. Kåñëa was always expert in providing arguments. But
He was not convinced. Still held by Kåñëa He replied, “In my view, Bhéma has
797

sacrificed religion for the sake of material gain. This can never lead to success
and happiness.”
“Surely You are famous for Your devotion to righteousness,” Kåñëa answered,
“but there is no unrighteousness in Bhéma. He has carried out his promise and
requited the debt he owed his enemy. Know, O powerful brother, that the
terrible age of Kali is at hand, marked by fierce acts and the loss of religion.”
Balaräma slackened and Kåñëa released His grip on Him. Still angry, He said in
a resounding voice, “For this dishonest act, Bhéma will henceforward be known
as a cunning warrior. The righteous Duryodhana, on the other hand, will be
known as a fair fighter. The Kaurava king has performed sacrifice and given
much charity to the Brahmins. Having at last offered his life as a libation into
the fire of his foes, he will attain the regions of lasting happiness.”
With that, Balaräma strode away from Kåñëa and mounted His chariot. His
charioteer urged on His horses and He sped away, like a white cloud speeding
through the heavens.
Bhéma folded his palms and bowed his head as his martial teacher left. He had
stood passively as Balaräma had rushed toward him. Death at His hands would
have been glorious. After watching Him ride swiftly away, Bhéma turned again
to Duryodhana, who was almost fainting from the pain. He raised his foot to
kick him one more time. But Yudhiñöhira caught hold of Bhéma and said,
“Desist, O mighty hero. You have wreaked your vengeance and gained your
ends either by fair or foul means. Let him be. Do not act sinfully. Duryodhana
is a king, he is your kinsman, and lord of the Kurus. He is ruined––his brothers
are slain, his kingdom is lost, his troops are destroyed, and he is reduced to a
pitiable condition. How can you offer him more insult? People always say that
Bhéma is righteous. Do not act in a way that is not becoming, dear brother.”
Restraining Bhéma and kneeling by Duryodhana’s side, Yudhiñöhira said to the
Kaurava, “O brother, you should not grieve. Truly you are suffering now the
terrible consequences of your own deeds. This, O King, is the universal law.
None can avoid the results of their acts, either in this life or the next. Surely
everything has been ordained by the Creator, responding to our own desires.
Through your avarice, pride and folly, you have suffered this calamity. Having
caused the death of all your brothers, sons, companions and followers, you must
now meet death yourself. Millions of heroes have gone to death’s abode. You
must follow them, O hero. Such is the course of destiny.”
Yudhiñöhira felt genuine compassion for Duryodhana, seeing him as a foolish
798

younger brother. Wanting to comfort and console him, he went on, “You are
not to be pitied, O Kaurava, for you have met an enviable death in righteous
battle. It is we who should be pitied. We will have to drag on a miserable
existence devoid of our friends and kinsmen. Alas, how will I see my relatives’
widows overwhelmed with grief? You, O King, are departing from this world
and going to regions of bliss. On the other hand, we will have to remain in this
world of pain and suffering.”
Yudhiñöhira sighed and tears rolled down his cheeks. He stood up and walked
away from Duryodhana, who said nothing. Yudhiñöhira’s sentiments were
noble, but they only gave the Kaurava more pain. He did not want to be pitied.
Screwing up his eyes, he lay gasping.
Kåñëa, who had also disapproved of Bhéma’s abuse of the fallen Duryodhana,
went to Yudhiñöhira’s side and spoke consolingly. Placing His arm round his
shoulder, he said, “O King, you have won a great victory. Do not grieve. All
this has come about ordained by Time. Duryodhana has been consumed by the
fire of Bhéma’s anger. The war is over.”
Bhéma, his anger subsiding, moved away from Duryodhana and stood before
Yudhiñöhira, addressing him with folded hands. “O King, the earth is now yours
with all its thorns removed. He who was the root of these hostilities, that
wretched and deceitful being, now lies on the bare ground. All those sinful
men who supported him and uttered cruel words toward us are slain. The
earth, filled with riches, today approaches you as her lord.”
Yudhiñöhira embraced his brother and replied, “The war is now over.
Duryodhana is overcome and we have conquered the entire earth through
Kåñëa’s instructions. By good luck you have paid off your debt to your mother
and to your anger. By good luck you are victorious and your enemy is killed.”
All the Päëòava warriors roared and waved their upper garments. Some
twanged their bowstrings and others blew their conches. Others beat drums
and laughed loudly. Jumping about and sporting, they praised Bhéma,
applauding him for striking down Duryodhana and even for placing his foot on
his head.
Kåñëa held up His hand disapprovingly. “O kings, it is not right to kill an
already slain enemy with such words. This sinful, shameless and covetous
wretch has received the results of his own folly. Now he is no more. He has
become like a piece of wood. We should regard him as neither friend nor foe.
No further energy or thought should be expended on him. Let us leave this
799

place at once. By good luck the wicked and cruel-hearted Duryodhana is killed,
with all his ministers and counselors.”
Duryodhana heard Kåñëa’s words from where he lay and hauled himself onto
his elbows. Supporting himself with difficulty, he contracted his eyebrows and
looked angrily at Kåñëa. Like a snake spitting out venom, he said, “O son of
Kaàsa’s slave, it seems You have no shame. Have You forgotten the sinful way
by which I was defeated? How could You? It was on Your instigation that
Bhéma struck his sinful blow. Do You think I did not notice? It has been by
Your deceitful machinations that so many heroes have been unfairly killed.
Bhéñma, Droëa, Karëa and Bhurisrava were all killed thanks to Your cunning.
Without Your wily advice, the Päëòavas would have stood no chance in the
war.”
Duryodhana gasped in pain and dropped back to the ground, his face covered
in perspiration. As he lay there panting, Kåñëa replied, “You, O son of
Gändhäré, have been killed with your brothers, sons and kinsmen only because
of your own sinful deeds. O fool, it was I who requested you to return the
Päëòavas’ share of the kingdom, but out of sheer avarice you refused. You have
committed so many wicked acts against your cousins. When you insulted the
sinless Draupadé in the assembly hall, you should have been slain then and
there. For that crime you are now killed. O sinful wretch, for the crime of
assailing Abhimanyu in an unfair encounter you are slain. You have never
respected your elders and heeded their advice. Thus do you now lie here on the
bare earth. Do not rail uselessly. You are suffering nothing but the
consequences of your own evil acts.”
Duryodhana’s voice, wracked with pain, croaked in response. “What do I care
for Your words? Having studied the Vedas, performed sacrifice, given charity
and governed the earth, I am now dying a glorious death. That end which is
always sought by virtuous kñatriyas is mine. I have enjoyed pleasures worthy of
the gods and attained the highest prosperity. Who is as fortunate as me? With
all my brothers I will ascend to heaven, while you Päëòavas will remain here,
torn by grief and continuing to suffer.”
As Duryodhana spoke, a shower of fragrant blossoms dropped from the sky.
The Gandharvas and Apsaräs played musical instruments and sang, while the
Siddhas cried out, “Praise be to King Duryodhana.”
The celestials looked with wonder at the scene below. Duryodhana’s fall before
Kåñëa was all-auspicious. Although the Kaurava remained envious toward
800

Kåñëa, the mere fact of his contact with that eternal Supreme Deity conferred
upon him the greatest possible blessing. Everyone killed in Kåñëa’s presence
doubtlessly reached regions of everlasting happiness.
As celestial music filled the sky, a disembodied voice called out that
Duryodhana had been unfairly killed, as had Bhéñma, Droëa, Karëa and
Bhurisrava. Hearing the invisible voice, the Päëòavas felt ashamed.
Remorseful for the way the five heroes had been slain, they looked at Kåñëa.
Seeing their affliction, Kåñëa reassured them, speaking in a grave voice as deep
as the rumbling of clouds. “Do not grieve, O best of men. There was no other
way these men could have been slain. For doing you good, as well as for lifting
the burden of the earth, I applied My illusory powers so that victory would be
yours. In a fair fight it would have been impossible to slay those atirathas. Even
the guardians of the universe would not have succeeded. Do not feel guilty for
the deceitful way they were killed. Such means are acceptable when one faces a
powerful enemy, and especially when that enemy is himself deceitful.
Ultimately, all the Kauravas were Duryodhana’s followers and thus were as
sinful as he was. For this reason they have been defeated and you, O virtuous
men, have been crowned with success.”
Kåñëa’s heartening words were met with roars of approval from the Päëòava
warriors. All five brothers, who were ever acquiescent to Kåñëa, felt consoled
by His arguments. Seeing that the sun had set, Kåñëa suggested that they
return to camp. Headed by Yudhiñöhira and Kåñëa, the Päëòavas slowly
departed, leaving Duryodhana where he lay. With both thighs shattered, he
would not live much longer. Awaiting death, the prince lay back, moaning in
pain.

Chapter 28
Massacre by Night
After leaving the battlefield the Päëòavas went to Duryodhana’s camp, as was
the custom, to seek the spoils of war; but they found it deserted, except for a
few servants. They rode in their chariots up to Duryodhana’s royal tent and
dismounted. As Arjuna was about to climb down from his chariot, Kåñëa said,
801

“Take the Gäëòéva and your two quivers, O Pärtha. I will get down after you.”
Arjuna looked curiously at Kåñëa, but he did as he was requested. After he had
got down, Kåñëa jumped clear of the chariot. At that moment, Hanumän left
the banner and vanished. As he did so, the chariot suddenly caught fire
without any apparent cause. In moments it was a pile of ashes.
The Päëòavas gazed in amazement at the charred and smoldering remains.
Arjuna asked Kåñëa what had happened and He replied, “The chariot was
struck by the most powerful celestial weapons. Only because of My presence
was it not previously incinerated.”
Kåñëa went over to Yudhiñöhira and embraced him with a smile. “O King, by
good fortune you have gained victory. By good fortune you and all your
brothers are well. Now do what should be done to rule the earth.”
Placing an arm around Arjuna’s shoulder, Kåñëa continued, “Previously, this
Dhanaïjaya greeted Me when I came to Virata, offering Me worship and love.
He said, ‘O Keçava, You are my brother and friend. Indeed, You are the Lord of
my life. Therefore, You should always protect me.’ I responded, ‘So be it!’ and
have kept My word.”
Tears fell from the Päëòavas’ eyes as Kåñëa spoke. In a choked voice
Yudhiñöhira replied, “Surely we owe our lives, wealth and kingdom to You, O
Janärdana. Everything is due only to Your favor. Who but You could have
withstood the weapons of Bhéñma, Droëa and Karëa. Only because of Your
protection was Arjuna able to defeat so many invincible heroes. The great Åñi
Vyäsadeva told me that wherever You are, there will always be righteousness
and victory.”
Kåñëa smiled. With an arm around both Yudhiñöhira and Arjuna He entered
Duryodhana’s tent, followed by the other Päëòavas. The empty tent resembled
a city devoid of festivities. Duryodhana’s golden throne looked desolate. It was
surrounded by his counselors’ seats. Those fine seats had formerly been
occupied by the Kuru chiefs in their silk robes and golden ornaments. Now
they looked like abandoned mansions. As the Päëòavas moved through the
tent they came upon Yuyutsu. He was Dhåtaräñöra’s only surviving son. Filled
with sorrow and realizing that the responsibility of leadership had fallen to
him, he sat pondering what he should do.
Seeing that the Päëòavas had arrived, he stood and offered them respects.
Yudhiñöhira embraced him and spoke gentle words of consolation. He told him
to return to Hastinäpura and to comfort his father and Gändhäré, who would
802

surely be overpowered by unbearable grief. Yuyutsu bowed to Yudhiñöhira and
left the tent. Mounting his chariot he left at once, making his way to
Hastinäpura along the moonlit forest paths.
In one huge section of the royal tent the Päëòavas found the immense wealth
Duryodhana had brought from Hastinäpura. Gold, silver, jewels, pearls, rich
ornaments, blankets and skins lay in heaps on the rugged floor. After loading
the wealth onto their chariots, the Päëòavas rested for a while on the many
silk-covered couches in the tent.
As the evening wore on, Kåñëa said to Yudhiñöhira, “O King, in accord with
sacred tradition, you and your brothers should remain here for the first night
of victory. The rest of the army may return to our camp.”
Agreeing, Yudhiñöhira told his men to return to camp and take rest, while he
and his brothers remained. After the warriors had left, the Päëòava spoke
again with Kåñëa. He wanted Kåñëa to be the first among his party to meet
Gändhäré in Hastinäpura. Yudhiñöhira feared her ascetic powers. Revealing his
anxiety, he said, “When the pious queen hears how Bhéma slew her son, she
will surely release the fire of her anger. She could destroy the three worlds with
her accumulated ascetic powers. That blessed lady is always engaged in severe
austerities. I fear she will reduce us to ashes when she learns what has
happened. O Keçava, I think only You will be capable of pacifying her. Eternal
and possessed of unfading glories, You are the creator and destroyer of
everything. With reasonable arguments, O Mädhava, You should remove her
anger.”
Hearing his anxious request, Kåñëa turned to Däruka and said, “Prepare My
chariot.” Then He left for the city. Arriving at sunrise, Kåñëa went straight to
Dhåtaräñöra’s palace, where He first saw Vyäsadeva. He immediately offered
His prostrated obeisances, clasping the åñi’s feet, and then went with him into
Dhåtaräñöra’s chamber. The blind king sat silent with Gändhäré by his side.
Having been announced by Vyäsadeva, Kåñëa went over and took
Dhåtaräñöra’s hand. Kåñëa wept openly for some time without saying anything.
Then Kåñëa washed His eyes and face with cool water fetched by a servant.
Still holding onto Dhåtaräñöra’s hand, He said gently, “O Bharata monarch,
you know everything past and future. You are well aware of the course of time.
All that is brought into being will again be destroyed in due course. This no
man can change. O King, out of respect for you the Päëòavas tried repeatedly
to make peace in order to prevent this destruction. The virtuous Yudhiñöhira
803

tolerated all kinds of suffering, even going into exile and living in
concealment. He and his brothers endured all kinds of miseries, as if helpless,
hoping that peace would be maintained.”
Kåñëa looked around Dhåtaräñöra’s chamber. The first rays of the sun were
shining through the lattices, picking out the numerous empty seats around the
hall. Curls of frankincense smoke were caught in the bright beams of light.
From outside in the palace gardens the sounds of various birds could be heard.
The sweet sounds contrasted with the rising and falling cries of women in the
palace’s inner apartments, wailing for their slain husbands and sons.
Seated at the king’s side, Kåñëa continued. “Remembering all this and how you
caused it, O mighty one, do not harbor ill feelings toward the Päëòavas. You
know of Yudhiñöhira’s devotion for you. He is consumed by grief, feeling
himself responsible for the death of all his kinsmen. Out of shame he does not
want to appear before you now, although he shares your sorrow.”
Kåñëa looked across at the blindfolded Gändhäré, addressing her softly. “O
daughter of Suvala, O lady of excellent vows, hear what I say. There is no
woman like you in the world. Do you recall how you reprimanded your sinful
son when you told him that victory follows righteousness? He did not heed you.
Now it has come to pass, exactly as you said. Knowing all this, O auspicious
queen, you should not grieve. Do not curse the Päëòavas. Let not your heart be
bent toward their destruction. Surely with your angry eyes you could
annihilate the entire world, if you so desired.”
Tears flowed from under the silk wrapper around Gändhäré’s eyes. She
remained silent, unable to find her voice. Finally, she said, “What You have
said is true, O Keçava. My mind is unhinged by grief, but on hearing Your
words I am pacified. O Janärdana, this old monarch has no more sons. You and
the sons of Päëòu are now his only refuge.”
Gändhäré buried her face in a cloth and wept aloud. Kåñëa consoled her and
her husband, speaking wisdom from the Vedas. After spending some time with
them, He rose and said, “I will come to see you again. Pray grant Me leave now
to return to the Päëòavas.”
Both Dhåtaräñöra and the queen offered Him their respects and gave Him
permission to leave. Kåñëa then left the chamber and met Däruka, ordering
him to carry Him back to the Päëòavas’ camp. Watched by thousands of
cheering citizens who had heard of His arrival, Kåñëa went swiftly out of the
northern gate and back to Kurukñetra.
804

***
After the Päëòavas had left Duryodhana, the three surviving Kauravas came
out of hiding and went to see the fallen prince. He looked like a gigantic sal
tree felled by a storm. Covered in blood and breathing heavily, he was
obviously in pain. All around him carnivorous beasts ranged like men seeking
wealth from a king. His brow was contracted by furrows of rage, and his eyes
were red with anger.
Finding their king in that condition, the three warriors got down quickly from
their chariots and ran over to him. They cried out and fell to the ground by his
side. Leaning on his elbows, Duryodhana half raised a hand in greeting.
Açvatthämä knelt in front of him with tears streaming down his face. “Truly
there is nothing permanent in this world, O King, since we see you lying here
on the cold earth, covered with dust. You who issued commands to all the
earth’s rulers are now reduced to this pitiable plight. Alas, where are
Dushashana, Çakuni and Karëa? What has happened? Surely it is difficult to
know the ways of Yamaräja, the lord of karma, since you, O mighty emperor,
have been brought to such a state.”
All three men cried and rolled on the ground. The war had taken a terrible toll
on the world’s kñatriyas. Now the great Kuru leader was himself destroyed.
Clearly he was close to death. The war was over. As the detachment and
callousness born of battle left them, the awful consequences of the long
conflict struck home. They were the only survivors of the Kuru army. Most of
their relatives and friends had been slain. How could they continue to live?
What would they say to their women?
Açvatthämä continued. “Alas, this great king who would trample on the heads
of all other kings now eats dust. Witness the reverses time brings. Where is
your pure white umbrella, O King? Where are the yak-tail whisks and the
countless servants? Where is your immense army? Without doubt the
prosperity of all mortals is unstable, since you, who were equal to Indra, are
now in this miserable condition.”
Grimacing in pain, Duryodhana rolled onto his side. Lifting his head from the
ground he replied in a strained voice, “All living beings are subject to death.
The Creator has ordained it. Death has now come to me, before all of you. By
good fortune I have been killed in battle while I fought without showing my
back. Struck down by a low blow from Bhéma’s mace, I was finally killed by
805

deceit. By good luck you three have survived. Do not grieve for me. If the
Vedas are at all authoritative, then I have attained the blissful regions. Destiny
is all-powerful. In accordance with my fate I lie here, deprived of opulence.
Leave me be. Soon I will embrace death and rise up to the heavens.”
Duryodhana’s head fell back and he sighed heavily. He thought of Kåñëa.
There could be no doubt that He was a powerful personality of some sort. Only
by His power and contrivances had the Päëòavas been successful. Duryodhana
wondered again if He might actually be the Supreme Lord. If that were true,
then His partiality toward the Päëòavas surely seemed unbecoming. It was
hard to understand.
A spasm of pain wracked his body and he cried out. Tears flowed down his face
as he slumped to the ground.
Açvatthämä ground his teeth and stared into the distance. Still furious about
the way his father had been killed, he was even further incensed to hear that
Bhéma had slain Duryodhana with an unfair blow. Breathing heavily, his eyes
red with anger, he declared, “Listen to my words, O King, which I swear by
truth itself and by all my acts of religion. Today, in Kåñëa’s presence, I will
dispatch the Päëòavas to Yamaräja’s abode. Grant me your permission, O
lord.”
Smiling through his pain, Duryodhana said, “O Kåpa, quickly fetch me a pot of
water. O preceptor, appoint Droëa’s son commander-in-chief of our army. Let
the hostilities end with the death of our enemies.”
Saying, “So be it,” Kåpa went to the lake and brought a pot of water. After a
short ceremony, Duryodhana installed Açvatthämä as the Kaurava
commander. He roared and mounted his chariot.
Kåpa and Kåtavarmä blew their conches and climbed onto their chariots. They
knew that victory against the Päëòavas was unlikely, but death at their hands
would be preferable to living after the annihilation of the other warriors.
Leaving the dying Duryodhana where he lay, the three warriors rode south
through the darkness, their hearts aching with sorrow. They soon reached a
spot close to the Päëòavas’ camp. Entering a copse of trees, they dismounted
and discussed their strategy. All three were exhausted and they slumped
beneath the spreading boughs of a banyan tree. They could hear the sounds of
the Päëòava army’s celebrations. Deciding to challenge the warriors after
sunrise, they said their evening prayers and lay down to sleep under the tree.
Kåpa and Kåtavarmä soon feel asleep, but Açvatthämä was too angry to sleep.
806

He stared up at the branches of the banyan silhouetted against the moon. The
sounds of bats and owls filled the air. Açvatthämä tossed and turned, his mind
filled with thoughts of revenge. As he looked up he could see the dark bodies of
thousands of crows sleeping on the tree. Suddenly, a great owl swooped down
from the sky, its green eyes flashing and its talons extended. It descended onto
the branches of the tree and began silently killing the crows. In minutes it had
slain many of the birds, which fell to the earth near Açvatthämä. In fear the
other crows rose up, squawking and beating their wings as they fled.
Açvatthämä began to reflect. Surely this was a sign from destiny. What better
way to deal with a large number of foes than to catch them asleep? Although
keen to fight, there was little chance he and his two companions would
overpower the Päëòavas. But he had promised to kill them. Although it was
sinful to kill sleeping men, it would nevertheless be an appropriate end for
them since they themselves had resorted to so much deceit and trickery during
the war. If there was to be any chance of success, there was no alternative but
to attack them while they slept, their weapons put aside and believing their
enemies defeated.
Determining to go at once into the Päëòavas’ camp, Açvatthämä woke up the
other two men. They sat up and shook off their sleep, listening as Açvatthämä
explained his intentions. When he had finished speaking, they sat silently,
filled with shame and unable to reply.
Seeing this, Açvatthämä defended his plan. “We should not hesitate.
Duryodhana has been slain unfairly, as was my father and the Kuru grandsire.
The Päëòavas have not hesitated to use unfair or wicked tactics. What need
have we to discuss this further? We are now the only survivors among the
Kauravas. If we do not adopt cunning, then we too will follow our comrades to
Death’s abode. Roaring in joy and beating their victory drums, the Päëòavas
have fallen into the embrace of sleep. This is our only chance to defeat them.
What do you say, O heroic men?”
Kåpa shook his head slowly. “Two factors influence the outcome of all acts:
endeavor and destiny. Without both there is no success. A man who does not
work but who depends on destiny alone will be ruined. Sometimes, however,
despite one’s best endeavor, destiny delivers only adverse results. O Brahmin,
we have tried our best and we have not been successful. It is therefore clear
that we are under the influence of adverse destiny. The foolish Duryodhana,
moved only by covetousness, acted without regard for virtue or the advice of
807

his elders. Thus he has met with calamity and we, his followers, have sunk into
sorrow. In my view, our best course now is to seek the shelter and advice of
others. Let us go to Hastinäpura and speak to Dhåtaräñöra and Vidura. They
will offer us wise counsel.”
Açvatthämä slapped his leg. He looked down at the slain crows littering the
ground. Overcome by anger and grief, he could not accept Kåpa’s advice. He
stood and paced back and forth, his hand clenching his sword hilt. His voice
was cold and emotionless. “The understandings of different men inevitably
differ. Everyone believes his own opinion to be right and that of others who
differ to be mistaken. Even then the understanding of a man changes with
changing circumstances. It is always difficult to ascertain one’s best course.
Therefore, by listening to wisdom and then acting in accord with one’s own
understanding of virtue, one should make his determination. I am of the firm
opinion that my plan is compatible with our duty as kñatriyas. We should show
our enemies no mercy. We must destroy them by any means.”
Açvatthämä made it clear that he would carry out his plan, with or without the
assistance of his colleagues. His voice rose. “Like Indra killing the Dänavas, I
will range among the Païchälas and Päëòavas. Ruthlessly cutting them down, I
will pay the debt I owe my father. Today the Päëòavas will follow the path he
has taken and the path of all the other heroes they so treacherously killed. I
will then be happy, considering myself to have done my duty.”
Seeing Açvatthämä’s determination, Kåpa replied, “By good luck do we see you
resolute. Clearly you cannot be dissuaded. With your heart bent on vengeance
I do not think even Indra could withstand you in battle. Therefore, let us await
the dawn and then ride out for an encounter with the Päëòavas. Kåtavarmä
and I will accompany you. For now, though, take off your armor and rest.
Refreshed and renewed, you will surely conquer the enemy in honest warfare.
There is no need to adopt mean tactics which will only incur the censure of all
men.”
Açvatthämä dismissed Kåpa’s suggestion. His mind was fixed on his dark plan.
There was no question of waiting until morning. Rousing his sleeping horses,
he said, “My heart is afflicted with desire and my mind with thoughts of
vengeance. How can I sleep? Thinking of my father’s death, I cannot find
peace. Indeed, I will not rest until Dåñöadyumna has paid the full price for his
heinous act. O twice-born one, how can a person like me even live while that
Païchäla prince still breathes? How can any of us rest while the king cries in
808

agony, his thighs broken by the wicked Bhéma? We will not be able to gain
victory on the battlefield against the Päëòavas, protected as they are by Kåñëa.
Let us kill them as they sleep. This is the only way we will achieve our
cherished end.”
Kåpa watched with dismay as Açvatthämä yoked his horses to his chariot. His
face was set in hard lines, picked out by the dancing rays of moonlight coming
through the banyan’s branches. Kåpa tried again to dissuade Droëa’s son.
“Dear nephew, think hard before you do this. Only a sinful person would even
contemplate what you propose. Have you lost sight of righteousness? Surely
one who does not control his senses cannot understand morality, even if he
serves learned superiors, just as a wooden spoon cannot taste the soup. A
humble man, however, with his senses in check, can immediately understand
his duties when he serves his elders, just like the tongue tasting the soup. As
your well-wisher, I am trying to restrain you from something that will result
only in your condemnation and which will leave you repenting afterwards. You
are celebrated in this world as a great warrior. Do not destroy your good
reputation. Do not sink into a limitless hell by killing sleeping men, who are as
good as dead already. Fight fairly and win everlasting fame. We will help you
without doubt. This is my opinion, O mighty-armed one.”
Açvatthämä mounted his chariot and looked down at Kåpa. “What you say is
true, O uncle, but in my view it is fitting that the Päëòavas meet such an end.
They have acted heinously themselves and now deserve no mercy. I cannot
stand the thought of Duryodhana lying in agony, nor of the wicked Païchälas
sleeping in peace after the sinful slaughter of my father. Having killed those
vile men, I do not care if I am born as a worm or an insect in my next birth.
You cannot frustrate my resolution. I am going––with or without you.”
Kåpa and Kåtavarmä looked at each other and shook their heads. They could
not stop him. It seemed as if destiny had ordained that the final act of the war
would be played out that night. They were the only surviving Kauravas and
Açvatthämä was their commander. Considering this, both men finally decided
to accompany him. If there was to be a fight, then it was their duty to assist
him. They had already committed themselves to Duryodhana’s cause, killing
countless warriors on the enemy’s side. There was no point now in abandoning
the fight when the Kauravas’ last hope depended upon them. Resigned, they
yoked their chariots and followed Açvatthämä, who had by this time already
driven away.
809

***
As he approached the camp’s northern gate, Açvatthämä saw before him a
strange being with a blood-soaked tiger skin wrapped around his loins. His
upper garment was a black deerskin, and he had a large snake draped around
his shoulders as a sacred thread. Around his biceps he wore two snakes as
armlets, and in his hands he held fierce-looking weapons. His mouth seemed
ablaze, and in his fearful face he had a hundred eyes.
Seeing the terrible being, Açvatthämä, who was beyond fear, raised his bow
and shot numerous celestial weapons at him; but the being absorbed them all
and stood unaffected. Açvatthämä released a long steel dart that flew like a
blazing comet toward the being, only to shatter into pieces when it struck him.
Droëa’s son then hurled his scimitar and then his mace, but those weapons
were also absorbed into the being’s body.
Having exhausted his weapons, Açvatthämä saw that the being was still
standing before him. He sensed it was Çiva, whom he had worshipped
throughout his life. Only that unlimited deity could have withstood his most
powerful attack. Açvatthämä threw down his weapons and jumped from his
chariot. Trembling, he knelt before the god. Surely he should have heeded
Kåpa’s admonition. Now the powerful Mahadeva, no doubt protecting the
Päëòavas on Kåñëa’s order, would kill him for his sinful intentions.
Bowing his head to the ground, Açvatthämä offered numerous prayers to the
powerful divinity. After praying and supplicating Çiva for some time, Çiva
spoke in a thunderous voice. “O child, all through the war I have protected
Päëòu’s sons. Out of my love for Kåñëa, I am always inclined to His
worshippers. Now the Päëòava warriors are being assailed by Time. They have
carried out the desires and plan of supreme Providence, freeing the world of its
great burden. Now their own destined end is near. O son of Droëa, it is
ordained that you will be the instrument of their destruction. I will empower
you. Take this sword and use it to slay the remaining Päëòava troops.”
Çiva held out a great sword, which shone brilliantly and had a handle set with
bright gems. After handing the sword to Açvatthämä, he vanished from the
spot.
Suddenly, Açvatthämä felt himself infused with tremendous energy. His body
seemed to burn with power and his eyes glowed. As he remounted his chariot
and moved toward the entrance of the Päëòavas’ camp, both Kåpa and
810

Kåtavarmä caught up with him. Açvatthämä was overjoyed to see them joining
him. Without telling them of the episode with Çiva, which had almost seemed
to be a dream, he said, “O heroes, it is good that you have remembered your
duties. We will now end the conflict by slaying the wicked Päëòavas. I will
enter the camp and range about like Yamaräja himself. You two should remain
outside. If anyone tries to escape, slay them.”
After the plan had been agreed upon, Açvatthämä went quietly toward the
camp. Clutching Çiva’s effulgent sword, he got down from his chariot and leapt
over the surrounding wall. Guided by signs, he stealthily made his way to
Dåñöadyumna’s tent. The whole camp was silent and still, the exhausted
warriors sunk in sleep.
Açvatthämä carefully entered Dåñöadyumna’s tent and saw him lying in sleep
on a rich silken bed. Moving swiftly, Açvatthämä kicked him. Dåñöadyumna
awoke and sat up. Açvatthämä caught him by the hair and dragged him from
the bed, still kicking his head and chest.
Dåñöadyumna, surprised and still half-asleep, was unable to overpower his
aggressor. Açvatthämä threw him to the ground and stamped on his neck.
Dåñöadyumna tore at his attacker with his nails and cried out, “O Açvatthämä,
kill me with a weapon. Let me thus, through you, reach the blessed regions
reserved for those who die in battle.”
Açvatthämä laughed hideously. “O wretch, there is no bliss for those who kill
their preceptors. Nor do you deserve a warrior’s death. I will slay you like the
animal you are.”
Açvatthämä repeatedly stamped on Dåñöadyumna with his heel, killing him
mercilessly. Hearing the Païchäla prince’s cries, the guards and women who
were in the tent came running.
Açvatthämä left the tent quickly, looking for the Päëòavas themselves.
Coming next to a large tent close to Dåñöadyumna’s, he guessed he had found
them. The tent was decorated with numerous flags and garlands and had the
finest of golden chariots standing nearby. Açvatthämä entered and, going into
the inner section of the tent, saw five warriors asleep next to one another.
Açvatthämä felt a surge of joy. Here were the brothers! Raising his sword, he
brought it down on the first of the five men and killed him with one stroke. He
then similarly killed the other four before anyone awoke.
Outside the tent he could hear the clamor of the warriors looking for him. He
rushed out with his fearful sword raised high, roaring like an infuriated lion.
811

Seeing him advance like Death personified with his sword dripping blood, the
warriors fell back in fear. Açvatthämä ran at them and slaughtered them as a
lion kills deer in the forest.
Quickly putting on their armor, other kñatriyas came out of their tents and
surrounded Açvatthämä. Charged with Çiva’s power, however, and filled with
his own wrath, Açvatthämä quickly slew them. He rushed into the next tent
and found Uttamaujas just rising from bed in surprise at the clamor outside.
Açvatthämä ran over and kicked him, killing him in the same way as he had
killed Dåñöadyumna.
Açvatthämä then encountered Yudhamanyu, who rushed at him whirling a
mace. Yudhamanyu struck Açvatthämä full on the chest, but Droëa’s son was
not affected. Seizing his assailant, he threw him to the ground and killed him
with powerful kicks and punches.
Numerous other warriors attacked Açvatthämä, but they were all savagely
slain. Relentlessly hacking at the Päëòava troops with his celestial sword, he
slew many while they lay on their beds and hundreds of others who tried to
resist him with weapons. Possessed by a frenzy of anger and bloodlust, he
moved through the camp killing every warrior he would encounter.
As the piteous cries of the women filled the air, Açvatthämä went swiftly
through the encampment, leaving a trail of death behind him. Caught
unawares and shocked by his intensity and power, none among the Päëòava
forces could resist him. Covered in blood and screaming out his battle cry, he
seemed like the mighty Yamaräja bent on killing all creatures.
Açvatthämä slew all of the surviving warriors. Like an elephant crushing
lotuses in a lake, he moved about with his flashing sword, resisting all attempts
to check him. Many invisible Räkñasas flew around the camp, filled with joy to
see so many corpses pouring forth fresh blood. Their terrible cries resounded
and mixed with the frightful howls of thousands of jackals.
Horses and elephants, terror-stricken, ran about wildly. Confused warriors
came out of their quarters and looked around in the darkness to see what was
happening. Seeing Açvatthämä whirling his bloodied sword, many of them
mounted horses and sped toward the camp’s gates. Others ran on foot, trying to
escape. As the men left the camp, Kåpa and Kåtavarmä met them and killed
them. Having no weapons, with dishevelled hair and garments and crying in
fear, they were cruelly butchered even as they fled crying for mercy.
Kåpa and Kåtavarmä, abandoning their shame, killed every last man they
812

found. They then set fire to the tents. Men dashed about in confusion and
terror and were cut down ruthlessly by the three Kaurava warriors. Calling out
for the Päëòavas, they fell to the earth, cut to pieces by the Kauravas’ weapons.
As twilight approached, Açvatthämä, seeing that no warriors had survived his
rampage, decided to leave. Drenched in blood, and with his sword seeming like
a grotesque extension of his arm, he appeared dreadful. Having slaughtered all
the Païchäla and Päëòava troops, he felt he had avenged his father’s death.
Again the camp was silent. The women and the few servants who had not been
killed were struck dumb with grief and terror. They hid themselves as Droëa’s
son left again by the northern gate. His two companions were waiting for him.
When they informed him that no one had escaped, he praised them.
After mounting his chariot, Açvatthämä considered how best to inform
Duryodhana. He wanted to cheer the defeated prince before he died, but
Duryodhana would hardly be able to believe that the Päëòavas and all their
troops had been slain. Açvatthämä thought he should show him the Päëòavas’
heads. That would convince him. He rode swiftly back into the camp. Going
quickly into the tent where the five dead brothers lay, he took out his sword to
sever their heads. The first light of dawn was entering the tent and, as he
approached the bodies, he realized with dismay that they were not the
Päëòavas at all. These were Draupadé’s five sons. The Päëòavas must not even
have been present, since no warrior in the camp had escaped.
Açvatthämä’s sword dropped to his side. Deeply disappointed, he wondered
what to do. After some thought he decided to take the five heads anyway and
convince Duryodhana that they were in fact the Päëòavas. At least he could
bring some happiness to the fallen Kuru leader before he died. He took the five
heads and placed them on his chariot, then drove out of the camp toward
Duryodhana. The sun had just risen as his party reached him.
The three men saw Duryodhana lying surrounded by carnivorous beasts. He
was pale and clearly on the verge of death. With difficulty he scared away the
wolves and hyenas that kept coming up to him. Açvatthämä leapt down from
his chariot. After chasing the beasts away, he knelt before Duryodhana. Kåpa
also got down and stood by the dying prince’s side. He addressed him in a
sorrowful voice.
“Surely nothing is difficult for destiny to achieve. See how this once great king
now lies here. He who would walk on the heads of all other kings now lies in
the dust, struck down by the foe and bathed in blood. His golden mace, so dear
813

to him, lies by his side like a faithful wife by the side of her husband. He who
was formerly attended by Brahmins seeking wealth is now attended by vicious
beasts and birds, seeking to eat his flesh. Witness the reverses brought about by
time.”
Açvatthämä spoke more joyfully, telling Duryodhana how he had slaughtered
the Päëòavas and their warriors. “I have killed them all. See here the heads of
the five brothers, O King.”
As Açvatthämä climbed onto his chariot to fetch the heads, Duryodhana
opened his eyes and sat up, leaning on his elbows. “O son of Droëa, you have
accomplished what not even Bhéñma, Karëa, or even your own father could
achieve.” His voice was barely above a whisper. “This has filled me with
happiness. I will go now to the heavens where we will all meet again.”
Açvatthämä came down from his chariot, holding the five heads by the hair.
He placed them by Duryodhana’s side and said, “Here are your sworn enemies,
O King.”
Duryodhana reached over and felt the heads. He found it hard to believe that
they could be the Päëòavas. They looked like them, but perhaps they were
their sons. Duryodhana knew how to tell the difference. He squeezed the skulls
with his powerful hands, exerting the last of his strength. As he did so, the
heads collapsed. He could understand that these were the heads of the
Päëòavas’ teenage sons.
Duryodhana fell to the ground with a sigh. “These are Draupadé’s sons, O
Brahmin, and not the Päëòavas. The heads of those five heroes are as hard as
iron, but I have easily crushed these heads even in my weakened condition.
Alas, what a terrible act you have performed! These boys were the future hope
of the Kuru house. Now everything is lost.”
Duryodhana lay lamenting, his eyes closed in pain. Although he hated the
Päëòavas, he was not pleased to see their sons murdered. Who now would carry
on what was, after all, his own family line? All his own brothers were dead.
Now by killing Draupadé’s sons, Açvatthämä had practically ended the Kuru
dynasty.
Gasping, “Alas, alas,” Duryodhana gave up his life. His head slumped to the
side as his last breath came out. The three Kauravas cried out in distress.
Seeing that he had died in acute disappointment rather than the joy for which
he had hoped, Açvatthämä immediately felt remorse.
After gazing with tear-filled eyes at the king, the three men built a large
814

funeral pyre. Placing Duryodhana’s body on it, they recited prayers and carried
out his last rites, sprinkling his body with sacred water fetched from the
Ganges. They then set light to the pyre and wailed in grief as the fire
consumed him. When the flames expired, Kåpa gathered up the last remains of
the body and carried them to the river, placing them in the water while
chanting Vedic mantras.
Having completed the rituals, the three warriors mounted their chariots and
set off in silence toward Hastinäpura.

Chapter 29
Açvatthämä Punished
In the Kaurava camp, the Päëòavas had risen before sunrise to say their
prayers and perform their morning rites. As Yudhiñöhira completed his
ablutions, Dåñöadyumna’s panicked chariot driver ran into his tent. After he
had been calmed, he described the night’s events.
“O King, Draupadé’s sons as well as those of Drupada have all been slain.
Açvatthämä, Kåpa and Kåtavarmä have committed a most cruel act. Even as
our men slept, they were killed without mercy. Açvatthämä came like Death
himself and slashed at everyone with his sword. Anyone who tried to flee was
cut down by the arrows of the other two. I think I am the only survivor.
Somehow I managed to escape from the camp and have come here to tell you.”
Yudhiñöhira dropped to the ground and cried out. Upon hearing their brother’s
distress cry, the other Päëòava brothers ran in to him and he informed them of
what had happened. They too began to cry and fell to the earth. Yudhiñöhira’s
voice rose above the others. “Alas, after defeating our enemies we are now
defeated. An already bitter victory, gained at the cost of the lives of so many
kinsmen, has become still more bitter. What happiness can we now enjoy with
all our sons, friends and followers slain? Alas, they have died like merchants in
a boat, who, having crossed the ocean, are wrecked in a shallow river. What
will become of Draupadé? How will she live after hearing that her sons were so
brutally slaughtered?”
Yudhiñöhira turned to Nakula and asked him to bring Draupadé to the Päëòava
815

camp so that he could break the terrible news to her. After Nakula left, the
other brothers comforted Yudhiñöhira, who then left the tent and mounted his
chariot. Accompanied by his brothers and Sätyaki, who had stayed with them
in the Kaurava camp, he made his way to his own camp.
As Yudhiñöhira entered the camp he saw the ground littered by bodies. Severed
heads and limbs lay strewn about, birds picking at them and beasts tearing
them apart. Seeing how the men had been slain without armor or weapons, the
Päëòavas seized their weapons and looked about wildly for signs of the killers.
Upon not finding Açvatthämä or his party, they tearfully entered their sons’
tent and found the five headless corpses still lying on their beds. Horrified,
they wailed in sorrow. Yudhiñöhira, feeling responsible for all the deaths, fell
trembling to the ground.
As Yudhiñöhira’s brothers tried to comfort him, Nakula entered the tent with
Draupadé. As soon as she saw her sons’ bodies she dropped senseless to the
earth. Sprinkling her face with cool water, Bhéma raised her and held onto her
as she stood shaking uncontrollably. Her delicate face was darkened with grief,
resembling the sun covered by storm clouds.
Supported by Bhéma, the Païchäla princess said, “By good luck, O King, you
have regained the earth after conquering your enemies. By good luck your
thoughts do not dwell on Subhadrä’s son, that mighty-armed hero who was so
cruelly killed by the Kauravas. Now it is my own sons who have been slain
through sin. Seeing how they have been killed by Droëa’s vicious son even
while they slept, I burn with unbearable grief. If that wretch does not pay for
this crime, then I will die. I promise to observe the Praya vow and fast until
death.”
Draupadé sat down and assumed a yogic posture, her legs folded by her side and
her arms outstretched. “I will not move from this spot until you bring me the
shining jewel from Açvatthämä’s head, having slain him like a beast.”
Yudhiñöhira consoled the weeping princess. Draupadé looked up at Bhéma and
implored, “Mindful of a kñatriya’s duties, O Bhéma, kill that wretch like Indra
killed Shambara. There is no man in the world who can equal your prowess.
Again and again you have been my refuge, and indeed the refuge of all your
brothers. Remembering those deeds, kill Droëa’s son and be happy.”
Draupadé’s voice was a wail. She covered her tear-streaked face with her hands.
Her head fell to her breast and she wailed piteously. She could not get the sight
of her five headless sons out of her mind. Repeatedly beating her chest, she
816

filled the tent with her loud sobs.
Bhéma looked around at the carnage caused by Açvatthämä. His eyes blazed
and his huge chest rose and fell rapidly. He lifted his mace, still bloodstained
from his battle with Duryodhana. Asking Nakula to become his charioteer, he
ran out of the tent and leapt aboard his chariot. Within moments he was
speeding out of the camp. He knew Açvatthämä would have first gone to see
the dying Duryodhana and would then head for Hastinäpura. Nakula drove his
chariot like the wind toward the road to Hastinäpura.
Soon after, Kåñëa arrived and discovered the grisly scene. After being
informed that Bhéma had set off in pursuit of Açvatthämä, he said, “O
Yudhiñöhira, Bhéma is dearer to you than life. Why do you stand here without
acting? Surely you know that Droëa gave Açvatthämä the Brahmashira,
capable of consuming all three worlds. Although his father ordered him to
never use that weapon against men, I am sure that in his desperation he will
release it against Bhéma. Only Arjuna, who also received the weapon from
Droëa, can check it. Do not delay. Order him to go after his brother. I will go
with him.”
Kåñëa reminded Yudhiñöhira of an incident which had occurred many years
ago in Dwärakä, which indicated Açvatthämä’s shameless and brazen nature.
Knowing that there was no weapon more powerful than Kåñëa’s Sudarçana
discus, he had gone to Dwärakä and asked Kåñëa to exchange it for the
Brahmashira. Kåñëa had said, smiling, “The discus is here by My side, O hero.
You may take it freely. I do not wish to have your weapon in exchange.” But
even after exerting all his strength, Açvatthämä could not move the discus.
When he gave up, Kåñëa asked why he desired the discus. Açvatthämä replied,
“If I had managed to take it, I would have challenged You to battle, O Yadu
hero. After defeating You, and holding Your discus, I would then have been
the most powerful man on earth.”
“You must stop him at once,” Kåñëa concluded. “He is wrathful, wicked and
cruel. Let us leave immediately.”
Yudhiñöhira agreed. Kåñëa spoke consoling words to Draupadé and, after
bowing to Yudhiñöhira, headed out of the tent. Preparing to follow him, Arjuna
said to Draupadé, “O gentle lady, when I behead that Brahmin, I will present
you with his head. Then I will wipe the tears from your eyes and pacify you.
After burning your sons’ bodies, you can then take your bath standing on his
head.”
817

Arjuna spat out the words “that Brahmin.” He knew it was forbidden to kill a
Brahmin, but by his behavior Açvatthämä had shown himself to have fallen far
from the path of Brahminical life.
Kåñëa’s charioteer, Däruka, still ready, stood just outside the tent. The chariot
was yoked to His four horses: Çaibya, Sugréva, Meghapushpa and Balahaka.
They stood still as Kåñëa and Arjuna climbed onto the chariot. Däruka gave
the command and the chariot moved off, quickly and smoothly picking up
speed. The celestial standard, bearing the emblem of Garuòa and decked with
gold and gems, fluttered in the breeze as the chariot traveled rapidly toward
Açvatthämä.
Within a short time they caught up with Bhéma, who could not be deterred
from pursuing Açvatthämä. Thinking only of the grieving Draupadé, he raced
on with his mace held aloft.
The two chariots sped toward the Ganges. When they reached its banks they
saw Açvatthämä amid the åñis. Droëa’s son had sought their shelter in hopes of
being protected from the Päëòavas. He knew there was nowhere within the
world––indeed the three worlds––where he could hide from Arjuna and
Kåñëa. He had thus entered among the Brahmins, knowing of the Päëòavas’
respect for them. He sat in their midst, clad in only a deerskin.
Bhéma leapt from his chariot and ran toward him with a roar. Açvatthämä
looked up and saw the furious Päëòava charging, as well as Arjuna and Kåñëa
standing on their chariot nearby. Çiva’s terrible power had left him as soon as
he had emerged from the Päëòavas’ camp, and he was terror-stricken when he
saw the two mighty Päëòavas and Kåñëa. He thought of the Brahmashira. That
irresistible weapon was his only hope.
Taking up a reed of kusha grass, Açvatthämä recited the incantations to invoke
the Brahmashira. Seeing this, Kåñëa shouted to Bhéma to stop. The Päëòava
obediently halted in his tracks.
As Açvatthämä invoked his weapon, a glaring light spread in all directions.
Witnessing the blinding force of the most powerful of all the Brahmä missiles,
which even he had never seen before, Arjuna offered prayers to Kåñëa. “My
dear Lord Kåñëa, You are the almighty Personality of Godhead. There is no
limit to Your different energies. Therefore, only You are capable of instilling
fearlessness in the hearts of Your devotees. Everyone in the flames of material
miseries can find the path of liberation in You only. You are beyond the
illusion of this world and nothing is unknown to You. Therefore kindly tell me,
818

what is this blazing light which threatens to consume everything?”
“Know from Me that this is the all-powerful Brahmashira. This wicked man,
afraid of imminent death, has thrown the weapon. But, O Pärtha, he has no
knowledge of how to withdraw it.”
Kåñëa knew that Droëa had not fully instructed his son on how to use the
weapon, realizing that he would likely abuse its power. Now he had desperately
released it, not caring that it could destroy the world even with himself in it.
Kåñëa urged Arjuna to counter the weapon. “Release your own Brahmä missile,
O Pärtha, which will combine with Açvatthämä’s. Then you may withdraw
both.”
Arjuna immediately touched Kåñëa’s feet and thought of the mantras to invoke
the weapon. He released the missile and it met with Açvatthämä’s in the sky. A
great circle of blazing light filled the heavens. It appeared as if a second
brilliant sun had risen and was about to burn the universe to ashes.
Vyäsadeva was sitting among the åñis on the bank of the river. Witnessing the
combined power of the two Brahmä weapons, he became alarmed. He ran over
to Açvatthämä and said, “O Brahmin, what are you doing? Why have you
thrown this weapon? It will destroy the world. Withdraw it at once.”
Açvatthämä looked at the åñi but made no reply. He was unable to withdraw
the weapon, but he could redirect it to another target. Açvatthämä saw that his
attempt to kill Arjuna and Kåñëa was being thwarted. His own powers were no
match for Arjuna’s superior military skills.
Açvatthämä realized that death now stared him in the face. Surely the
Päëòavas would show him no mercy. Frustrated and filled with despair, he
remembered that Uttarä, Abhimanyu’s wife, was pregnant with the child
conceived before the prince’s death. She was carrying the last of the Kuru line.
Açvatthämä’s mind raced. It was the proud Kurus who had killed his father,
and who were about to kill him too. Deciding that if he was to die he would
take the last hopes of the Kuru house with him, Açvatthämä concentrated on
Uttarä––and, in particular, on the child in her womb. He uttered mantras to
redirect the Brahmashira and it flew toward the Päëòavas’ camp, where Uttarä
had gone with Draupadé.
Unaware of Açvatthämä’s evil desire, Arjuna chanted the mantras to withdraw
his own weapon and the brilliant glare in the sky gradually subsided. Seeing
that the danger had passed, Vyäsadeva returned to his place amid the sages,
who were in the midst of performing a sacrifice to Viñëu.
819

In the Päëòavas’ camp, Uttarä suddenly felt herself in danger. She was not
sure of the cause, but could sense the approach of something. The beautiful
princess, still only a young girl, fell to the ground. Her limbs trembled and she
felt apprehensive. Terrified, she offered prayers to Kåñëa, whom she saw as her
only shelter. Folding her palms and bowing her head, she said, “O Lord of lords,
Lord of the universe! You are the greatest of mystics. Please protect me, for
there is no one else who can save me from the clutches of death in this world
of duality.”
Hearing her heartfelt prayer even as He sat on the chariot with Arjuna, Kåñëa,
who understood Açvatthämä’s intentions, at once expanded His personal
energy to protect Uttarä. He entered her womb in a mystical form and covered
the child. As the Brahmashira approached, it was neutralized by Kåñëa and
sent harmlessly into the sky. Uttarä and the other Päëòava ladies looked with
wonder at the missile as it rose upwards like a blazing comet. Surely Kåñëa had
saved them all from certain death.
After withdrawing his celestial Brahmä weapon, Arjuna fired another weapon
at Açvatthämä which immediately bound him with strong cords. Leaping from
Kåñëa’s chariot, he ran over to Açvatthämä and seized him by the hair,
dragging him up onto the chariot. Although capable, Arjuna was reluctant to
kill the son of his teacher.
Seeing Arjuna sparing Açvatthämä’s life, Kåñëa said, “O Pärtha, you should
not show mercy to him. He is no Brahmin––he has killed innocent boys in
their sleep. This is always against religious codes. His sins have been great. You
should kill him for his own good. Otherwise, he will descend into hell.
Furthermore, you have promised Draupadé that you will bring her the head of
her sons’ killer. Do not hesitate. He has brutally murdered your family
members and deserves death at your hands without doubt. Having blighted his
own family name, he is but the burnt remnants of his dynasty. Kill him at
once!”
Throwing Açvatthämä to the chariot floor, Arjuna replied, “I do not feel able
to kill him, O Kåñëa. How could I perpetrate an act so painful to my own guru’s
heart? If it is Your order, then it will be done; but for myself, I would rather
take him to Yudhiñöhira to hear his judgment. Draupadé, too, may decide what
should be done with this wretch.”
Kåñëa nodded. Däruka urged on his horses and in a short while they arrived at
the camp, Bhéma following just behind.
820

Arjuna dragged Açvatthämä before Yudhiñöhira and Draupadé, saying, “Here is
the killer of our sons. What should be done with him now?”
The soft-hearted Draupadé felt compassion for Açvatthämä, who sat with his
head down. As he was a Brahmin she folded her palms in respect and said,
“Release him, Arjuna, for he is the son of your martial teacher. It is said that
the son is one with his father, and thus it is as if Droëa himself were here.
Indeed, Droëa’s wife did not ascend his funeral pyre because she had a son.
Killing Açvatthämä will cause her, our worshipful superior, grief and cannot be
in accord with religious principles. My lord, do not make her cry like me. Nor
should we, the kingly order, become guilty of the sin of needlessly slaying
Brahmins. Such a sin can burn the whole body of a royal family to ashes.”
Yudhiñöhira, approving Draupadé’s words, said, “Excellent, excellent. O gentle
lady, your words are quite in accord with the sacred teachings of the Vedas.”
Arjuna and the twins also expressed their agreement––but not Bhéma. “We
need show this man no mercy. He has mercilessly killed sleeping men for no
purpose other than his own interests. Killing him is the only fitting
punishment.”
Bhéma advanced menacingly toward Açvatthämä with his fists clenched. His
eyes were wide with fury and he ground his teeth. Draupadé quickly came
between him and Açvatthämä, who still said nothing and stared at the ground.
Seeing the conflict, Kåñëa moved forward and placed a hand on Bhéma’s
shoulder, telling him to be peaceful. Turning to Arjuna, He said, “A Brahmin,
even when guilty of sin, is not to be killed; but if he is an aggressor, he must be
killed. All these rulings are in the scriptures. You should act accordingly. You
have to fulfill your promise to your wife, and you must also act to Bhémasena’s
satisfaction—and Mine. We both want you to kill this culprit.”
Arjuna looked at Kåñëa, who appeared to have four arms as He stood holding
Bhéma at bay and comforting Draupadé. He could understand Kåñëa’s equivocal
instructions. Açvatthämä should both be killed and not killed. Taking out his
razor-edged sword, he grabbed hold of Açvatthämä’s top-knot and severed the
hair along with the shining jewel that bound it. The jewel was the repository of
Açvatthämä’s mystic power, and as it was removed, he shriveled and collapsed.
Presenting the jewel to Draupadé, Arjuna said, “Here is the gem you desired, O
beautiful lady. Açvatthämä is now as good as dead, for to cut off the hair of a
powerful warrior is equal to killing him. Indeed, the Vedas also prescribe such
punishment for fallen Brahmins, but they never sanction killing the body.”
821

Bhéma praised Arjuna for his intelligent act which had satisfied everyone. He
led Draupadé to a nearby couch and sat her down as Kåñëa spoke to
Açvatthämä. “O son of Droëa, all wise men will know you as a coward and a
wretch from now on. You will have to endure the fruits of your sinful acts. For
three thousand years you will wander the earth, afflicted by disease and
completely alone, unable to speak to anyone. Wretched and foul-smelling, you
will dwell in deep forests and dreary wastelands. At the end of this period,
purified at last of your sins, you will ascend to the higher regions. Go now, O
wicked man.”
Arjuna and Bhéma dragged Açvatthämä to his feet and, unbinding him, drove
him from the camp. Deprived of his jewel and cursed by Kåñëa, his power was
gone and he disappeared into the woods to begin his lonely exile.
After his departure, Yudhiñöhira sorrowfully asked Kåñëa how Droëa’s son had
been able to kill the warriors in their camp. “I cannot see how it was possible
that the sinful Açvatthämä could slay Dåñöadyumna and so many other
powerful fighters. Tell me, O Kåñëa, what power possessed him?”
Kåñëa explained how Açvatthämä had worshipped Çiva and obtained from him
the power to kill the warriors. “But know from Me that their time had come.
Having carried out My will, they have now reached everlasting regions of bliss.
Therefore, O King, you need not lament for them.” Kåñëa consoled
Yudhiñöhira with Vedic wisdom, while the other Päëòavas and their women
listened to His words. The sun was approaching the meridian and Yudhiñöhira,
feeling comforted, told his brothers that they should go to the Ganges to
perform the last rites of their sons and other relatives. Wrapped in simple
cotton cloths, the bodies of all the slain men were carried to the river bank,
followed by the mournful procession of the Päëòavas. The women walked at
the head of the procession, followed by hundreds of Brahmins who were
reciting Vedic mantras and throwing kusha grass on the ground.
Gradually they approached the river and began the funeral ceremonies. The
many servants who had been brought from the city placed the thousands of
corpses on large pyres built along the river bank. As the women’s piteous wails
carried into the breeze, the Brahmins performed the rituals and the pyres were
ignited. Everyone then entered the water and offered prayers for the departed
souls.
After the funerals were complete, the Päëòavas and Kåñëa slowly began the
journey to Hastinäpura.
822

***
Dhåtaräñöra and Gändhäré sat alone in their chamber. After Kåñëa had left
them, they were once again overcome by grief. The blind king sat with his head
fallen to his chest, his breath coming in tearful sighs. He looked like a oncegreat tree shorn of its branches. Saïjaya entered the chamber. As he
announced himself, Dhåtaräñöra stood to greet him, then collapsed.
Saïjaya lifted the old king gently and said, “Why do you grieve, O Monarch?
Grief is useless. Eighteen akshauhinis have been killed and the earth divested
of hundreds of kings. All your sons have been slain, along with so many of
their kinsmen, friends and counselors. You should now perform their funeral
rites. What is the use of lying here shedding tears?”
Dhåtaräñöra cried out and dropped back onto the silk rug spread over the floor
of his darkened chamber. Saïjaya pulled back the heavy drapes from the
nearby window and sunshine poured into the room. The king and queen both
appeared disheveled and withered by grief. Neither had slept for days.
Saïjaya again helped Dhåtaräñöra to his feet and the old king fell back onto his
throne. In a choked voice he said, “Bereft as I am of sons, friends and
counselors, I will have to wander the earth in a wretched state. What is the use
of living? Alas, I did not heed my advisors’ words and now I lament. Kåñëa told
me to make peace with the Päëòavas and rule the earth without a rival. Bhéñma
and Vidura agreed. I chose to follow my wicked son. Now he is dead and I am
experiencing an ocean of grief. Surely my sins in previous lives have been great
and thus I suffer now. Who on earth is more afflicted than me? Destiny has
dealt me unbearable blows. I will end my life. Let the Päëòavas come here and
see me bent upon taking that final great journey toward the eternal Brahman.”
Saïjaya shook his head. He had heard Dhåtaräñöra’s empty lamentations so
many times. Taking hold of the king’s hand, he replied, “Cast off your grief, O
King. You are well acquainted with Vedic instructions regarding the certainty
of death and the eternality of the soul. Everything happens as it should. All
men receive the proper results of their own acts. For your fault your sons have
been destroyed. Only out of covetousness did you follow your son, who was
ever guided by wicked men. Thus has your own perverted intelligence cut you,
exactly like a sharp sword. So many people tried to redirect you to the path of
virtue, but you would not listen. Although learned and intelligent, you were
not qualified to be emperor of the earth, for you lacked discrimination.”
823

As he had done on previous occasions, Saïjaya made it clear to Dhåtaräñöra
that he had only himself to blame. Now he was forced to repent. “A man who
keeps a burning coal in the folds of his cloth and then is burned by the fire is
simply a fool if he laments. You and your son kept that Päëòava fire in your
midst and fanned it with your words and deeds. Now your sons have fallen into
the blaze like insects. Why do you weep?”
Since Vidura had left the palace to go on pilgrimage, Saïjaya had more and
more assumed the role of the king’s advisor. As Vidura had always done, he
spoke frankly and without fear. “Rise up, O Monarch, and attend your duties.
Why do you cry for that which can no longer be avoided? All created beings
will be destroyed, everything high will eventually fall, union always ends in
separation, and life always ends in death. All creatures are like members of a
caravan bound for the same country. Death will meet each of them in turn;
none will escape. Thus it is immaterial who goes first. Your sons, meeting a
glorious death in the thick of battle, have surely gone to higher places. The
scriptures clearly state this. For a kñatriya, there is no better death than to die
in battle. Your grief for your sons is unwarranted and meaningless. It will only
increase if you indulge it. Only the less intelligent allow themselves to be
overcome by grief. It does not bestow any benefit upon the grief-stricken;
rather, it deviates him from his duty and thwarts his aims in life.”
Saïjaya had never stopped advising Dhåtaräñöra for his own good, despite the
fact that his advice was ignored. Now that the king had lost everything, he
would be far more likely to take good counsel seriously. Saïjaya spoke for some
time, repeating the wisdom he had heard from the åñis. Dhåtaräñöra listened
attentively, encouraging him to continue and feeling a sense of relief from his
words.
“O King, all men receive the results of their own actions alone. By acting with
a desire for profit, one attains only repeated births in this world along with
their concomitant sufferings. Those who are wise act only to achieve
liberation. By surrendering their acts unto the Supreme, they free themselves
from the bondage of work. One who does his duty only as a sacrifice for the
pleasure of Viñëu will surely rise to regions of deathlessness where eternal
happiness is enjoyed. Those whose hearts are possessed by lust and greed for
material enjoyment, however, will continue to suffer.”
Dhåtaräñöra felt Saïjaya’s reprimand. Repenting his foolishness, he rose from
his throne and again fell to the floor. Gändhäré wept silently as Saïjaya
824

attended to him by sprinkling cool, perfumed water on his face.
While the old charioteer consoled Dhåtaräñöra, Vyäsadeva entered the
chamber. He shone with spiritual effulgence, seeming to glide across the
chamber as he approached the king.
Hearing that the sage was present, Dhåtaräñöra got up to welcome him and said,
“Alas, O lord, I am undone. Fie on this world and fie on humanity. All our
pains have their root in the state of human existence. How can one tolerate
the pain of losing one’s wealth and all one’s loved ones? The calamity that has
befallen me will only end with life itself. Therefore, I shall end my miserable
existence today.”
Dhåtaräñöra again fell sobbing to the ground. Seeing him in that state,
Vyäsadeva said, “O mighty monarch, hear my words. You are learned and
intelligent. You know everything, so take recourse in that wisdom now. When
everything in this world is temporary, why do you grieve for that which is lost?
Time itself, making your son the cause, has brought about this destruction. No
one can change destiny. I have known destiny’s course, settled by the celestials,
and I will explain it to you now so that you may find peace of mind.”
Vyäsadeva explained how he had attended an assembly in Indra’s court some
time ago. There he had seen many great åñis, headed by Närada, and also the
Goddess Earth herself. The all-powerful Viñëu had come to the assembly,
where Earth had beseeched him: “My dear lord, you have promised to relieve
my burden. Let that come to pass soon.”
Viñëu had replied, “The eldest of Dhåtaräñöra’s one hundred sons will
accomplish your desire. Through that king, your object will be achieved.
Fighting for his cause, all the kings who are exploiting your resources will meet
in a fierce battle and slay one another. O beautiful damsel, return and
continue to bear the weight of all creatures. Your burden will soon be
lightened by the battle.”
Vyäsadeva went on to explain that Duryodhana was an incarnation of Kali,
the deity presiding over the impending age of quarrel and suffering. It was by
his dark influence that the slaughter had been brought about. Dhåtaräñöra
should not blame the Päëòavas. They too had been told by Närada of the
arrangement made by the celestials. Filled with grief to hear that they would be
involved in such carnage, they had endeavored to avoid it––but Duryodhana
would not be swayed.
Vyäsadeva concluded, “I have thus revealed to you the gods’ secret, O King.
825

You should not grieve. All the warriors who died are now living in the higher
planets in joy. The earth is no longer feeling the burden of them, and a
righteous monarch has assumed rulership in the form of Yudhiñöhira. Thus the
world will now be led on the path of virtue. Cast off your sorrow. If the
compassionate Yudhiñöhira sees you in this state, he will give up his life. Take
hold of yourself. Spend your remaining days in asceticism and attain the goal
of life.”
Dhåtaräñöra sighed. Getting to his feet with Saïjaya’s assistance, he replied, “O
best of åñis, thinking of my sons I am sunk in grief and almost losing
consciousness, but your words have convinced me to continue living.
Understanding that everything has been ordained by the gods, I will endeavor
to put aside my sorrow. Thus will I live.”
Vyäsadeva then disappeared. Feeling comforted, Dhåtaräñöra and Gändhäré
retired to their private quarters to rest, having spent the night grieving.

Chapter 30
Yudhiñöhira’s Sorrow
Just before noon, Dhåtaräñöra called for his servants and asked to be taken to
the Ganges to perform the funeral rites for his departed relatives. He also asked
that the Kuru ladies attend, and the servants went out to fetch them and
arrange for their journey.
The ladies left their quarter wailing. Crying and beating their breasts, they
mounted chariots that would transport them to the river. With their hair
disheveled and their ornaments abandoned, they had left their houses like deer
leaving a mountain cave after their leader’s fall. Calling out the names of their
husbands and sons, they proceeded toward the river. Upon hearing their
anguished cries, people felt that the hour of universal destruction was at hand.
Dhåtaräñöra and Saïjaya rode just behind the ladies, followed by many
servants. Two miles later they encountered Kåpa and Kåtavarmä. With choked
voices they told the king how Duryodhana had been killed by Bhéma. They
then informed Dhåtaräñöra of Açvatthämä’s night massacre. Both warriors
looked ashamed.
826

Finally, Kåpa said, “We are now fleeing. Açvatthämä has been captured and
released by Arjuna. Kåñëa cursed him to wander the earth for three thousand
years in exile, and he has left for the forest. Grant us your permission, O King,
and we will return to our homes.”
Dhåtaräñöra felt his heart sink even further. He told the two men to return to
their abodes and ordered the procession to continue. They soon reached the
Ganges.
Word that they were on their way to the Ganges had reached Yudhiñöhira, so
the Päëòavas and Kåñëa decided to meet them at the river. Draupadé and the
Païchäla ladies, their hearts heavy, also went.
As the Päëòavas approached the Ganges they saw thousands of Kuru ladies
mourning. Yudhiñöhira walked toward them and they surrounded him, crying
out. Some of them censured him. “Where is your righteousness, O King?
Where is your truth and compassion? You have mercilessly slain sires, brothers,
preceptors, sons and friends. What is the use of sovereignty now that even your
own sons and allies are dead? Alas, the war has brought nothing but grief to
everyone.”
Passing silently among the ladies, Yudhiñöhira made his way to Dhåtaräñöra and
bowed at his feet. Each of his brothers followed suit, announcing their names
as they offered obeisances. With difficulty, Dhåtaräñöra embraced Yudhiñöhira
and blessed his brothers. When he heard Bhéma’s name, however, his heart
blazed with anger. Concealing his feelings, he called Bhéma forward so that he
could embrace him as he had Yudhiñöhira.
Kåñëa understood Dhåtaräñöra’s intentions. He touched Bhéma on the shoulder
to indicate that he should wait. Exercising the mystic prapti power, He brought
the iron image of Bhéma from Duryodhana’s gymnasium in Hastinäpura. He
pushed the statue forward into Dhåtaräñöra’s open arms. The blind king,
possessed of the strength of ten thousand elephants and burning with fury,
squeezed the statue with all his power. Taking it to be Bhéma himself, the king
shattered the iron form into many pieces.
As the statue fell apart, Dhåtaräñöra’s chest was severely bruised and he
vomited blood. Exhausted from his effort and soaked in blood, he dropped to
the ground like a blossoming pärijäta tree. Saïjaya knelt by his side and lifted
him, saying, “Do not act like this, O King.”
Having released his anger, Dhåtaräñöra was instantly remorseful. He thought he
had killed Bhéma.
827

Seeing that the king’s anger had abated, Kåñëa said, “Do not grieve, O Bharata.
Knowing you were angry, I dragged Bhéma from certain destruction. You have
only broken his statue form. Who could escape from your angry embrace,
which is as tight as the embrace of Death? In any case, how would killing
Bhéma do you any good? It will not revive your sons, O King. Give up your
spite and be peaceful.”
Dhåtaräñöra hung his head in shame. He was helped to his feet by his servants
and they took him to the river to change his clothes and wash him. After this,
when the blind king was seated on a fine rug by the riverside, Kåñëa said, “You
are learned in all the scriptures and aware of morality. Why do you harbor
anger against the Päëòavas? Everything that has happened has been caused by
your folly. I Myself tried to warn you before the battle, but to no avail. You
have repeatedly ignored the advice of Vidura, Bhéñma, Droëa, and Saïjaya.
Only a king who sees his own shortcomings can enjoy prosperity, but he who
acts by his own judgment alone and who does not follow well-wishing advisors
has to suffer. Bhéma has rightfully slain your crooked son, that mean wretch
who dragged Päïcälé into the assembly. Remembering both his and your
antagonism toward the Päëòavas, govern your anger.”
Dhåtaräñöra was subdued. “It is just as you say, O Mädhava. I have been
deviated from virtue by a father’s affection. I am no longer angry. Let me
embrace both Bhéma and Arjuna in love. With all my sons dead, my happiness
now depends on the Päëòavas, who are no less to me than my own sons. Alas, I
have acted like an enemy to those whom I should have nurtured and
protected.”
After embracing them all, Dhåtaräñöra asked the Päëòavas to go and see
Gändhäré. Before they came before her, Vyäsadeva went to the queen. The åñi
could see into the hearts and minds of all beings and, understanding that she
was intending to curse Yudhiñöhira, he said, “Do not harm the Päëòavas, O
Gändhäré. Take this opportunity instead to exercise forgiveness. Remember, O
Queen, that it was you who blessed Duryodhana with the statement, ‘Victory
always attends righteousness.’ Your words have not proven false. Certainly the
Päëòavas are endowed with all virtuous qualities. Cast away your evil desire.”
As Vyäsadeva spoke, the Päëòavas arrived before Gändhäré and offered their
respects, touching her feet one by one.
Shedding tears, Gändhäré said to Vyäsadeva, “I do not entertain any ill feelings
for the Päëòavas, O sage, but grief has shaken my heart. Surely the Kauravas,
828

puffed up with pride and arrogance, have perished due to Duryodhana’s folly
and the foolishness of his advisors. I do not blame the Päëòavas, but they have
done something I cannot accept. Bhéma struck my son down with an unfair
blow. Surely this was not consistent with virtue.”
Bhéma, having learned from Kåñëa of Gändhäré’s empowering glance over her
son, replied to her. “Whether or not the blow was fair, it was the only way your
son could be killed. Surely you know this, O Queen. The sinful prince acted so
treacherously toward us and without thought of virtue on many occasions.
Thus he deserved to be slain by whatever means were possible. Without killing
him, Yudhiñöhira could not have established a righteous rule. Therefore I did
what was in my power and felled him in battle, exactly as I had promised. Were
I not restrained by Yudhiñöhira I would have done that long ago––on the day
he insulted Drupada’s daughter.”
Bhéma felt that the real reason his killing of Duryodhana with a low blow was
not sinful was because Kåñëa had ordered it. After all, virtue had its root in
Kåñëa and was meant only for His pleasure. Knowing that Gändhäré’s faith in
Kåñëa was not the same as his own, Bhéma did not present her with this reason.
It would only diminish whatever respect she had for Kåñëa.
Gändhäré’s voice wavered. “You have been most inhumane, Bhéma. How could
you drink Dushashana’s blood. Surely only a Räkñasa would do such a thing.”
Bhéma felt no remorse, but he reassured the queen. “O chaste lady, you should
know that I did not allow his blood to pass my teeth. When Dushashana
committed his sins against Draupadé, I made a terrible vow under anger’s
influence. Without fulfilling that vow, my reputation would have been sullied
and my truthfulness compromised. You should not attribute any fault to me, O
Gändhäré. Without having checked your sons previously, you should not now
blame we who are innocent.”
Gändhäré wept silently, thinking of her sons. Her frail body shook and
maidservants came up to support her. After some time she regained her
composure and said, “Why, O Bhéma, could you not have spared even a single
one of our sons? How will we survive without support in this world?”
Her anger rising again, the queen asked, “Where is Yudhiñöhira? I wish to
address Päëòu’s eldest son.”
Trembling, with his palms folded, Yudhiñöhira stood before Gändhäré and said,
“Here he is, O Queen, the cruel destroyer of your sons. I deserve your curse, for
I am the root of this great destruction. Curse me at once, O Queen. I care not
829

for kingdom, wealth, nor even life itself. By bringing about the slaughter of
kinsmen and friends, I have proved myself a fool and as one who hates his own
family.”
Gändhäré fought to control her anger. Aware of her husband’s weakness and
her sons’ sinfulness, and thinking of Vyäsadeva’s words, she restrained herself
from uttering a curse. It was obvious that Yudhiñöhira felt more than enough
remorse and pain. Still, he should not have allowed Bhéma to have perpetrated
his vicious acts against her two eldest sons. Behind the blindfold around her
head, Gändhäré felt her eyes burn with anger. Although she had used much of
her ascetic power when she had blessed Duryodhana, it had not been
exhausted. She lifted the blindfold slightly and looked down at Yudhiñöhira’s
feet. As she glanced down, Yudhiñöhira’s toes, with their perfectly manicured
nails, were singed and his nails turned brown.
Seeing this, Arjuna stepped back behind Kåñëa. Yudhiñöhira, however, did not
react. Gändhäré, gaining control of herself, spoke reassuringly to the brothers.
She told them to go to Kunté, who was longing to see them again.
The brothers then presented themselves before their mother. Seeing them for
the first time since their exile, Kunté cried, covering her face with a cloth.
After weeping for some time, she repeatedly embraced and patted her sons,
lamenting as she saw the wounds and scars on their bodies.
Draupadé fell before Kunté, her tears wetting Kunté’s feet. “O venerable lady,
where have all your grandsons gone? Seeing you in such distress, why are they
not coming before you? O Mother, how can I live and what do I care now for
any kingdom? Alas my sons are no more.”
Kunté raised Draupadé and consoled her. As she spoke to the Päëòavas’
grieving wife, Dhåtaräñöra and Gändhäré were led up to them. Hearing
Draupadé weep, Gändhäré said, “Do not grieve so, dear daughter. This terrible
slaughter has been brought about by the irresistible course of time. Everything
was foretold by Vidura and Kåñëa, both of whom tried in vain to sue for peace.”
As she thought of Kåñëa, Gändhäré felt her anger rise once more. Although He
had tried unsuccessfully to bring about peace, He could have forced the issue if
He had desired. He had at His command a vast army containing many of the
most powerful warriors on earth. But more than that, He was said to be an
incarnation of the Supreme Lord. Surely nothing was beyond His capabilities.
Gändhäré felt that, ultimately, everything was Kåñëa’s fault. The åñis had even
said that the destruction of the warriors had been His divine arrangement.
830

Asking for Kåñëa to come before her, Gändhäré said, “The Päëòavas and
Kauravas have been rooted out, O Kåñëa, even before Your eyes. Why were
You indifferent to them? You could have prevented the slaughter. O Mädhava,
since You deliberately allowed this universal destruction, You should now feel
the consequences. By whatever little merit I have acquired by serving my
husband, I curse You, O holder of the discus. Since You callously allowed the
Kurus and Päëòavas to kill one another, so You will be the destroyer of Your
own kinsmen. O Govinda, on the thirty-sixth year from now You will kill Your
own family members in a fratricidal fight, finally dying Yourself by foul means.
The ladies of Your family will thus weep even as the Kuru ladies are now
doing.”
Kåñëa bowed His head and folded His palms. “Your words will be true, O chaste
lady. There are none in this world who can exterminate the Vrishnis and
Yädavas. In delivering this curse you have assisted Me, for I have been
wondering how to take My kinsmen back out of this world. Neither gods,
Gandharvas, nor Asuras can kill them. They will therefore slay each other.”
The Päëòavas, upon hearing Gändhäré’s curse and Kåñëa’s reply, gazed mutely
at one another. They were stupefied. The thought of Kåñëa’s departure, even
though thirty-six years away, was unbearable. How would they live in His
absence? They looked at Him with tears in their eyes.
Glancing affectionately at the Päëòavas, Kåñëa said, “Arise, O Gändhäré, and
shake off your grief. Your son Duryodhana, whom neither you nor your
husband stopped, was malicious, envious and arrogant. Why do you blame
others for your own fault? From the beginning you should not have allowed
your son to live. He was the embodiment of hostility and disobedient to his
elders. Thus he has met a fitting end. Give up your useless grief, for by
indulging it, it simply increases. As a Brahmin woman brings forth children to
practice austerity and a vaiçyä bears offspring for keeping cows, so a kñatriya
woman brings forth sons to be killed in battle and for no other reason.”
When Kåñëa was finished, Gändhäré remained silent. Dhåtaräñöra then asked
Yudhiñöhira where he felt the fallen warriors went after dying in battle.
Yudhiñöhira replied, “By the grace of Lomaça Åñi I have been granted the
vision to see where the heroes have gone. All of them have attained the gods’
celestial abodes. Even those who fell while fleeing or turning their faces from
the fight have gone upwards to regions of enduring pleasure. Indeed, having
died in Kåñëa’s presence, the dead warriors have doubtlessly all reached
831

auspicious destinations.”
Comforted by Yudhiñöhira’s assurance, Dhåtaräñöra gave orders that the funeral
rites be performed for his sons and their followers. Thousands of Brahmins
chanted hymns from the Säma and Åg Vedas, while funeral pyres blazed all
along the river bank. The Kurus entered the river and stood waist deep to offer
oblations of sacred water to their departed relatives. Women’s cries filled the
air, drowning out the Brahmins’ mantras.
As the Päëòavas were about to enter the river to make their funeral offerings,
Kunté came to them and said quietly, “O heroes, offer an oblation for Karëa.
That effulgent fighter, the ornament of battle who ever delighted in fight, was
Sürya’s son and my own firstborn child. He was your eldest brother.”
The five brothers were shocked. Yudhiñöhira and Arjuna glanced at one
another. They had long suspected that Karëa was of divine origin. It was
hardly possible that such a warrior could have sprung from a çüdra. But the son
of their own mother? How had they never discovered it? Why had Kunté not
told them?
Yudhiñöhira cried aloud. It was certain that his mother had, as always, spoken
the truth. The Päëòava spoke in surprise. “O noble lady, were you the mother
of that Karëa who was like a sea having arrows for its billows, mighty arms for
its sharks, and the sounds of his bowstring for its roar? Were you the mother of
that one who swore constant enmity with Arjuna and whom no one but
Arjuna could resist? How did you conceal this fact, like a man hiding fire in
the folds of his cloth? Tell us how he became your son and why you hid this
from us? Alas, I am undone with an even greater grief upon hearing this news
than I was upon hearing of Abhimanyu’s death.”
Yudhiñöhira cried out again. Along with all the other respectable personalities
killed in the war, he had also brought about the death of his elder brother. Had
he known of Karëa’s identity, then the war could have been averted.
Duryodhana would not have even considered fighting without him. United
with Karëa, the Päëòavas would have been invincible.
Trembling, Kunté said, “Alas, dear son, I have long kept this secret, unable
from fear to speak it to anyone. Even while a maiden did I bring forth that
mighty warrior. Sometimes I thought of telling you, but something always made
me hesitate. Now seeing that he has died along with his sons and has none to
offer his last rites, I cannot conceal the truth any longer.”
Kunté’s mind returned to the fateful day when Sürya had entered her chamber.
832

She looked at the Ganges, flowing gently now as it had the day she pushed the
basket containing Karëa into her waters. She fell sobbing to the ground.
Yudhiñöhira lifted her up, running his cool hand across her forehead. “O
Mother, how much pain you must have suffered. O Karëa! Where have you
gone without greeting us as your younger brothers?”
Yudhiñöhira looked at Kåñëa, who stood waist-deep in the river making
offerings to the departed souls. Surely it was for His own inscrutable reasons
that He had not told them the truth about Karëa. But Kunté should have
trusted them. She could have revealed Karëa’s identity long ago and saved so
much bloodshed. In a trembling voice, his mind clouded by grief, Yudhiñöhira
said, “O Mother, tell me how Karëa took birth and why he was cast away.
Surely the gods must have executed some plan through you, O gentle lady.”
Kunté told her sons the story. They listened in amazement. It was a strange
destiny that had caused him, the eldest Päëòava and the son of the most
powerful sun-god, to be separated at birth from his heritage and cast in the role
of enemy to his own brothers. The brothers all looked at Kåñëa, who was
coming out of the water. With water running down His body, He shone in the
bright afternoon sunshine. As He came over to Kunté and the Päëòavas,
Yudhiñöhira told Him what Kunté had just said. Folding his palms he asked, “O
Lord, why were we never informed?”
Kåñëa replied, “It was out of My love for My aunt that I did not reveal her
secret. But, O King, Karëa knew the truth. Still, he could not be swayed from
his loyalty to Duryodhana although he understood the consequences. With
your brothers you should now offer him his due rites.”
Kunté and her sons entered the river and stood there for some time, silently
making their offerings to Karëa and all their other dead relatives. When they
were finished, Yudhiñöhira made arrangements for them to stay on the river
bank for the coming month. In accordance with scriptural injunctions, he
ordered that everyone live there for thirty days to make daily offerings for the
dead.
As evening fell, the Päëòavas sat with Kåñëa. They were surrounded by
numerous åñis, headed by Närada. Yudhiñöhira questioned Närada about Karëa.
He wanted to know every detail of his life. Närada narrated the story in full.
He told him how Karëa had been raised by Adhiratha and Rädhä. Due to his
powerful nature, he had sought the best training in martial arts. His enmity for
Arjuna had been born when Droëa refused to teach him, seeing him as the son
833

of a charioteer. Karëa had left Droëa, resolved to return and humiliate him by
defeating his best student. It was then that he had gone to Paraçuräma and
been taught, only to be later cursed for his deceit.
After hearing about Karëa, including his promise to Kunté not to kill any of
his brothers but Arjuna, Yudhiñöhira cried. He turned to Kunté and said, “If
only Karëa had come to me as a brother. Surely I would have given him the
earth and averted this calamity. Becoming the leader of the Päëòavas, he
would have shone in this world like Indra shines in the heavens.”
Kunté pulled her white sari over her head. Tears ran freely from her eyes as she
replied. “O child, O great hero, you should not think in this way. I tried my
best to convince Karëa of what was in his best interests, but he would not
listen. Even his father, the mighty Sürya, came to him in a dream and tried,
without success, to persuade him. Neither Sürya nor myself could sway him
from his enmity against the Päëòavas. Seeing him firmly under the influence
of destiny and bent upon doing you harm, I gave up my attempt to change his
mind and left him. It would only have made matters worse if I had then
informed you of his identity.”
Yudhiñöhira covered his face with his hands and sighed. “O Mother, I do not
blame you for your silence. Surely you were moved by supreme destiny. Still, I
feel you should have confided in me. I therefore say that from this day on no
woman will be able to hold a secret.”
Seeing Yudhiñöhira mournful, Närada said, “O King, do not give way to sorrow.
You have righteously acquired the earth by the strength of your arms. Ever
abiding by your duties, you have escaped with life from the battle and now
stand as the undisputed ruler of the world. Why do you not rejoice? I hope
everything is well with you. Rise up and take your rightful position. Give joy to
your friends and lead this world to the path of virtue.”
But Yudhiñöhira was downcast. The åñi’s words did not cheer him. His mother’s
revelation about Karëa had only compounded his remorse. Certainly the slain
warriors had reached higher regions, but what of their widows and orphans
who numbered in the millions? Yudhiñöhira cared for the people like a loving
father. The world was now full of grief-stricken women and children who had
no protectors.
Soberly, he said, “O best of sages, I have conquered the world by relying on
Kåñëa, by the Brahmin’s favor, and by the might of Bhéma and Arjuna. Still, a
heavy sorrow preys on my mind. I have killed all my kinsmen only because I
834

wanted the kingdom. Having caused the death of Subhadrä’s darling son and of
Draupadé’s sons, my victory, O holy one, seems little better than defeat. Those
gentle ladies’ grief cuts my heart. Thanks to me, there are now so many women
in the same state. How can I possibly enjoy the earth?”
Yudhiñöhira vented his anguish. Praising forgiveness and self-control, he
censured the kñatriya’s life, which was always violent and angry. Although he
had scrupulously executed his duties, his nature was more that of a Brahmin
than of a warrior. Before Kåñëa and his brothers he stated his intentions to
spend the rest of his life in penance.
“We have waged war like dogs fighting for a piece of meat. Now we no longer
desire that meat. I will throw it aside. The endeavor was useless. We have not
gained our object and our enemies have not gained theirs. The evil Kauravas,
indulged by the foolish king Dhåtaräñöra, have met with destruction and we are
left with the burnt remnants. I will go to the forest, abandoning my
attachment for this world. With my mind fixed on renunciation, I will attain
to the goal ever sought by ascetics and sages. Let Bhéma become king. Or you,
Arjuna, with Kåñëa as your dear friend, may rule the earth. I do not wish to be
king any longer.”
Yudhiñöhira fell silent. Arjuna looked at Kåñëa and then back at Yudhiñöhira.
He licked the corners of his lips and frowned. Night had fallen, and the flames
of the sacred fire by which they were sitting cast an orange glow on his
handsome face, which flushed as he replied.
“How, O lord, have you spoken such words? Having conquered your enemies,
you are now the world’s rightful ruler. You are a kñatriya. It is your duty to
protect the people. Poverty befits åñis, but not kings. Rather, kings must
perform sacrifices and then distribute wealth to those in need. Indeed, by using
wealth properly, pious kings increase their virtue and fame. The world stands
in need of a leader. It is your religious obligation to fulfill that role. Following
in the footsteps of Dilépa, Nahusha, Ambaréña, and so many other great
monarchs in our line, you should become emperor of the earth. How could any
like you accept any other path?”
Yudhiñöhira remained silent. He was not convinced. Finally, he said, “I cannot
accept your praise of wealth and worldly attachment. Focus your mind on your
inner self and you will understand what I am saying. My only desire is to give
up materialistic life and to take the path trodden by mendicants. This world is
an illusion only foolish men desire. From now on I will take only what is
835

absolutely necessary to survive, passing my time in austerity and meditation.
Even as I contemplate such a life, I feel the happiness born of detachment. Let
me go to the forest and aim for the eternal abode of the Supreme Spirit.”
Then Bhéma spoke. Like Arjuna, he was frustrated by Yudhiñöhira’s reluctance
to rule after endeavoring so hard to regain the kingdom. His voice rang out
into the still night.
“Surely, O King, your understanding of truth in this case is like one who
foolishly recites the Vedas but knows nothing of their meaning. Censuring the
duties of kings, you wish to lead an idle life. Had we known that this was your
intention, we would not have fought. But we did fight. If you now abandon
your duty, then killing Dhåtaräñöra’s sons was a senseless act.
“Yet the wise have said that killing our enemies and leading a righteous
government is our proper course. Kshatriyas possess forgiveness and selfcontrol, and they exercise those qualities by doing their own duties and not
those of others. Your withdrawal now would be like one who, having slain his
many foes, finally dies by his own hand, or like a person who has climbed a tree
to get the honey but falls before tasting it, or like a starving man who obtains
food but then refuses to eat.”
Bhéma continued to cite similes and denounce Yudhiñöhira’s planned
renunciation. He pointed out that a king’s duties were ordained by the
Supreme Lord Himself and were therefore not reproachable. Renunciation was
only approved for kings when they became old or defeated. As long as he had
strength and ability, a virtuous kñatriya should exert himself to rule and protect
the people.
Bhéma concluded, “If, O King, one could attain perfection simply by
renunciation, then the mountains and trees would be perfected beings. They
all lead lives of abstention; they do not harm anyone and they practice
celibacy. Real renunciation means performing one’s duty as the Supreme Lord
desires. The world moves with all beings acting according to their God-given
natures. One who abstains from action can never achieve success.”
Yudhiñöhira did not break his silence. Arjuna said, “O King, there is an ancient
history mentioned in the Vedas regarding the relative merits of renunciation
and action. Listen as I repeat it now.”
Arjuna told a story about some young Brahmins who had gone to the forest,
having abandoned their duties and resolving to live a renounced life. Indra
came to them in the form of a bird and asked what they were doing. When
836

they told him, he replied, “This course of action is not approved by scripture.
The Vedas define the Brahmin’s duty. A man who gives up his duty is
condemned and defeated. On the other hand, one who performs his duty only
because it ought to be done, and who lives on the remnants of sacrifice after he
has made offerings to the Supreme and to kinsmen, ancestors, gods and guests–
–that man attains to goals which are normally difficult to achieve. Indeed,
there is nothing more difficult than the life of a dutiful householder, which in
the end leads to genuine detachment from all worldliness. This is the surest
path of righteousness.”
Arjuna explained how the Brahmins then gave up their lives of premature
renunciation and returned to their duty and achieved success.
Yudhiñöhira still said nothing. Nakula then also tried to encourage his elder
brother to accept his duty of kingship. Citing Vedic injunctions, he described
the sacrifices meant for kñatriyas. Kings were enjoined to renounce their
wealth by distributing it in charity to the Brahmins and the people in general
at great sacrifices. Leaving everything behind and going to the forest was
simply not in accord with Vedic principles for a king. He must perform
sacrifices for the good of the people and act as their protector. If he gave up
such duties in the name of renunciation, it would simply result in disaster for
himself and his subjects. Real renunciation was something internal, not
external. One who did his duty in a mood of detachment was the true
renunciant, not the man who gave up his duty.
Then Sahadeva spoke, concurring with his brothers. As Yudhiñöhira sat in
silence amid the åñis tending their sacrificial fire, Sahadeva said, “O King, it is
difficult to renounce material attachments by stopping work. May our enemies
have the merit that goes to one who renounces work but whose mind still
covets material things. On the other hand, may our friends have the merit
earned by he who rules the world having shaken off internal attachments. The
word mama, mine, is death; while its opposite, näma, is eternal Brahman. It is
Death and Brahman which impel all men to action. The wise man, free from
false conceptions of the self and realizing himself to be eternal spirit, works
without being attached to the results. Thus his work is spiritual and he attains
the Brahman. That man who still desires the fruits of his action, however, even
if he lives in the forest, lives within the jaws of Death. In truth, O King, even
inaction is considered action if one desires a result. Therefore, do your duty in
a detached mood and earn everlasting virtue.”
837

Even after his brothers had spoken, Yudhiñöhira said nothing. He already knew
what they were saying and could not deny the truth of it. Still, his heart was
not inclined toward ruling the world. He sat staring at the ground. The
compassionate Päëòava thought of Bhéñma, still lying on the battlefield on his
bed of arrows; of Droëa, whom they had ruthlessly killed; and of Karëa, his
own brother whom he had killed before he even knew his identity. Yudhiñöhira
thought of Abhimanyu and Draupadé’s sons, of their young wives, all grieving
for their husbands. If he had given up his desire for half the kingdom, none of
them would have died. Duryodhana, for all his faults, was an efficient
administrator. What need was there to destroy so many lives?
Seeing her husband’s melancholy, Draupadé said soothingly, “O King, your
brothers are crying themselves hoarse trying to do you good, but you do not
reply. O lord, when we were dwelling in the forest, suffering from cold and
wind and sun, you said to your brothers, ‘Soon we shall slay Duryodhana in
battle and win back our kingdom.’ O best of the virtuous, that has now come to
pass and yet you are depressing our hearts by your reluctance. All of you
brothers are like celestials. Each of you is capable of ruling the universe with
all its moving and nonmoving beings. If I had married only one of you, my
happiness would have been complete. Surely it is a kind of madness which now
possesses you. Why else would you be prepared to renounce your prescribed
duties? Do not give way to folly. Take up the scepter and the rod of
chastisement! Rule Goddess Earth with righteousness. Worship the gods with
sacrifices. Give charity and subdue the wicked. In this way, my lord, become
happy and give joy to your brothers.”
Yudhiñöhira still showed no signs of having heard. Crickets could be heard
from the nearby forest as the Päëòavas sat in silence. In the sacrificial
compound, Brahmins murmured Vedic mantras and chanted the holy names of
the Supreme. Kåñëa looked at Yudhiñöhira with compassion, but said nothing.
Bhéma, growing impatient with his elder brother, spoke again, trying to change
his mind.
“Please forgive me, O King, but I cannot silently tolerate your weakness.
Everything we have worked so hard to achieve is now being threatened by your
bewilderment. You seem to have lost your good sense. Surely you know right
from wrong. Why are you hesitating to do your duty? You have never displayed
such faintness of heart before, allowing yourself to be overpowered by
sentiment. Have you forgotten the Kauravas’ sins? Have you forgotten the ills
838

inflicted upon us and Draupadé? Do you not recall the miseries we endured in
exile, awaiting this day? You have won one war, O King. Now you face an even
greater battle––the battle with your mind. If you expire before gaining victory
in that fight, then you will have to take another birth and resume the battle
until you win.”
Yudhiñöhira stiffened. Bhéma’s suggestion that he was not able to control his
mind was painful. Taking a deep breath, he replied, “O Bhéma, I think it is you
who is overcome by his mind. Surely you are afflicted by the sins of discontent,
worldly attachment, greed, vanity and ignorance. You urge me to accept the
earth and abandon my desire for renunciation, but how will that satisfy my
soul or even my senses? Desires for enjoyment can never be satisfied, and they
stand as impediments on the spiritual path. Only those able to give up all such
desires can attain life’s perfection. One free from all desire becomes eligible to
enter eternal regions of bliss, but those who remain entangled in the vain quest
for worldly pleasure are most certainly obliged to remain in this world of
suffering.”
Feeling reprimanded, Bhéma made no reply. Arjuna spoke again, reciting an
ancient history from the Vedas concerning the famous king Janaka. He too had
once decided to abandon his kingdom and wealth, adopting a life of asceticism
in the forest. At that time his wife had spoken to him strongly, bringing him
back to the path of duty. She argued that, although he wanted to leave the
kingdom in a mood of detachment, if he were actually detached, then it would
not matter to him whether he was a mendicant or a king. If he still coveted
material things, then even his mendicant’s waterpot and staff would become
objects of attachment.
Yudhiñöhira listened as his brother narrated the story. He enjoyed hearing the
narration, even though he had heard it many times––but it did not change his
mind. There were many different instructions in the Vedas, each meant for a
different time or circumstance. Considering the present situation, Yudhiñöhira
remained convinced that renunciation was the only course possible for him.
He looked at Arjuna with affection. “I know you are speaking with a desire to
do me good, dear brother, but your words do not touch my heart. Although you
are expert in martial sciences, you are not conversant with the subtler spiritual
subjects. Unless you serve a self-realized soul, you cannot understand the true
path of religion. Like Bhéma, you see wealth and worldliness as superior to
asceticism. But while the path of worldly duties has its place, it serves only as a
839

means to attain the higher path of renunciation. It is the soul which must be
sought, and ultimately the Supreme Soul, both of whom are quite separate from
matter. Thus must all materialism be utterly renounced.”
Fascinated by the arguments between Yudhiñöhira and his brothers, the åñis
smiled and nodded in approval as each one spoke. They looked at Kåñëa, who
was also enjoying the discussion but who chose to remain silent. One of the
åñis, Devasthana, spoke to Yudhiñöhira, describing the ascetic life. He explained
that even a life of asceticism was not devoid of action. Indeed, the ascetics in
the forest worked hard in order to perform sacrifices and worship the deities.
Nor was it certain that even they would achieve perfection by their work.
Devasthana said that the life of a pious king, who performed sacrifice and
carefully practiced his duty, was no less religious than that of the ascetic
Brahmins, and no less likely to lead to life’s perfection.
Yudhiñöhira did not respond. Vyäsadeva also spoke at length about the duties
and glories of the kñatriyas. He condemned the kings who failed to discharge
their duties. If a kingdom went unprotected and the people suffered, the king
would be visited by sins. He would also be culpable for the crimes committed in
the kingdom. The right course for a king was to carry out the function of ruler
and protector, taking to renunciation only at the end of his life.
Yudhiñöhira did not like to disobey Vyäsadeva or the other åñis, but he still had
no heart for the ruler’s role. Folding his palms, he said to Vyäsadeva, “My lord,
the thought of sovereignty, with all its objects of enjoyment, does not give me
joy. I am still grieving. Hearing the lamentations of all the women who have
lost their men, I cannot feel peace.”
The immortal sage smiled. “Do not be concerned with happiness or distress, for
both are ephemeral. By the influence of time one meets with joy and suffering
one after the other. Pleasure begets misery and from misery pleasure is again
born. In this world there are only two kinds of permanently happy men: the
complete fools and those who have mastered the mind and senses. Those
between these two must suffer. Therefore, a wise man abandons attachment
and aversion and simply does his duty to please the Supreme. Your duty is to
rule this earth, O Bharata. By performing that duty you will gain undying fame
and virtue, rising up in the end to the highest regions hereafter.”
Yudhiñöhira was torn. It was against his nature to deny the sages’ advice, but
his doubts persisted. How could he take the throne after causing so much
destruction? With tears running down his face he looked up at Vyäsadeva and
840

said, “I am the most sinful man! Just see my heart, so full of ignorance! This
body, which is meant for serving others, has killed many, many phalanxes of
men. I have directly or indirectly killed boys, Brahmins, well-wishers, friends,
parents, preceptors and brothers. Even if I live for millions of years, I will not
be relieved from the hell that awaits me for these sins. Although there is no sin
for a king who kills to maintain his citizens or some other righteous cause, this
injunction does not apply to me in this case.”
Yudhiñöhira knew that for a king to kill while executing his duties was not
sinful, but he was not a king when the war had been fought. All the killing had
come about simply to make him the king instead of Duryodhana. Such
selfishness was surely sinful.
“The path of sacrifice will not save me from the hell which now awaits me. As
it is not possible to filter muddy water through mud or purify a wine-stained
pot with wine, it is not possible to counteract the killing of men by sacrificing
animals.”
Seeing Yudhiñöhira sunk in remorse, Kåñëa moved closer to him. He took his
hand, covered with sandal-paste and resembling marble, and smiled. “Do not
grieve so, O best of men, for you will become ill. Those who have lost their
lives cannot be brought back by grieving. All of them are like objects obtained
in a dream that disappear when one awakens. Purified by the striking of
weapons, they have thrown down their bodies and ascended to heaven. Who
will lament for them? Their women should also rejoice that they have attained
such exalted destinations. And now you should take your rightful position as
king.”
Both Närada and Vyäsadeva spoke next. They tried at length to convince the
Päëòava to shake off his grief and to assume the throne. But after everything
was said, Yudhiñöhira still could not agree. He took up a handful of earth and
let it run through his fingers. He wanted to please Kåñëa and to satisfy the åñis,
but he felt stained by sin. He was not convinced that performing his duty
would purify him.
He looked up at Vyäsadeva. “O great sage, surely it is true that one who
performs his duties in accordance with scriptural injunctions does not accrue
sin. This I understand, but it is the sins I have already committed that burn
and consume me. How will I be freed from them? Having committed genocide,
I will doubtlessly fall into hell. I think it best that I atone by abstaining from
food and drink, and reduce my body until my life airs depart. Surely I can be
841

released by no other means.”
Vyäsadeva said that there were many factors which had brought about the
kñatriyas’ death. Principally, their previous acts were the ultimate cause, but it
had also been the influence of all-powerful time moving under God’s will
which had decreed they must die. The Päëòavas had been nothing more than
instruments of Providence.
“Men like you do not go to hell. You have followed the path of the gods and
will attain an exalted destination. Sometimes virtue appears like sin while at
other times sin resembles virtue. Only the learned know the difference. In your
case, you should not fear, dear child. Even if there were some irregularities on
the battlefield, you should not fear. Only he who deliberately sins without
compunction or regret is bound by the fetters of sin and falls into hell. This
was not your mood. Only with reluctance did you fight, and now you are
repentant. That repentance will purify you. Still, you may perform, if you
desire, acts of atonement. Although your belief that you have been sinful is
delusion, you may perform the expiatory rites meant for kings.”
Yudhiñöhira questioned Vyäsadeva about the rites of atonement and the sage
described them. When he was finished, Yudhiñöhira said, “You have pleased me
with your instructions, O sage. I understand that there are methods of
atonement which will help me. I still have doubts about becoming king,
however. How can I ensure that I am not touched by further sin? Please tell me
in detail about a king’s duties. I need to be instructed how such duties can
always be consistent with virtue. It seems to me that the acts a king must
perform are often vicious and dangerous.”
After looking at Kåñëa, who seemed to light up the night with His radiance,
Vyäsadeva replied, “If, O King, you wish to hear of morality and the duties of
kings at length, you should approach Bhéñma. I do not think there is anyone
who exceeds his knowledge in this regard. He has been instructed by Båhaspati
in the heavens as well as by Vasiñöha and Cyavana Åñis here on earth. He has
also heard from Sanat Kumära, Märkaëòeya, Paraçuräma, and even Indra.
Surely he will clear your doubts. Go to him where he lies on the battlefield, for
his time of death has not yet come.”
Hearing Bhéñma’s name, Yudhiñöhira only felt the more aggrieved. Tears again
sprang from his eyes. “How will I approach the grandsire after I have killed him
so deceitfully?”
Kåñëa placed His hand on Yudhiñöhira’s shoulder. “Do not indulge in grief. O
842

best of kings, you should do what the holy åñi has said. Go to Bhéñma and hear
from him about your duties. With your doubts cleared by that great man, you
should then satisfy the Brahmins and your brothers and become king.”
The discussions had gone all night. As the first light of dawn appeared on the
horizon, Yudhiñöhira decided to accept Vyäsadeva’s advice and to go and see
Bhéñma. Rising up for the good of the world, he said, “So be it. After getting
myself duly consecrated by the Brahmins, I will approach the wise Kuru
grandfather.”
Yudhiñöhira was still reluctant, but he would not go against Kåñëa’s desire. He
was prepared to be coronated as emperor, but he would need to hear further
instructions from Bhéñma before he could give his heart to the task.
Seeing Yudhiñöhira standing at last, the other Päëòavas looked at one another
with relief. Arrangements were made to fetch everyone to the city so that the
installation ceremony could take place. Like the moon conjoined with the sun
and surrounded by stars, Yudhiñöhira accompanied by Kåñëa and his brothers
proceeded toward Hastinäpura. Praised by bards and singers, he rode upon a
white chariot covered with deerskins and yoked to sixteen white bullocks.
Bhéma held the reins while Arjuna held a beautiful white umbrella over his
head. On either side of Yudhiñöhira stood the twins, fanning him with goldhandled cämaras.
Yudhiñöhira had Dhåtaräñöra go at the head of the procession and the old Kuru
monarch sat with Gändhäré on a golden chariot. Immediately behind
Yudhiñöhira came Kåñëa on His own chariot driven by Däruka and drawn by
His four lustrous horses. Sätyaki sat by Kåñëa’s side. A large number of
elephants and chariots made up the rest of the procession. They left the forest
region of the Ganges and moved slowly along the smooth road toward the city.
As they entered Hastinäpura they were met by the sound of drums and
conchshells, as well as the cheers of thousands of joyous citizens.

Chapter 31
Bhéñma’s Instructions
Having heard that the Päëòavas were returning, Hastinäpura’s citizens had
843

quickly decorated the city with colorful festoons and garlands. They then lined
the streets and threw flowers and rice as the procession passed. Seeing the five
brothers again, the people felt as if their consciousness had returned to their
bodies. Everyone shed tears and called out in happiness.
As the procession made its way along the road, wealthy ladies threw down silk
cloths and gems from the balconies of mansions. The ladies also called to
Draupadé, who rode behind her brothers on a chariot covered with a silk
canopy, “You are worthy of praise, O blessed princess, who waits by the side of
these heroes like Gautami by the side of the seven celestial åñis. Surely your
religious acts and vows have borne fruit.”
Yudhiñöhira made his way toward the Kuru palace, where he was greeted by
pleasing speeches made by leading citizens. “By good luck you have returned to
us after defeating your enemies. O best of kings, having regained your kingdom
by virtue and prowess, may you remain as our ruler for a century. Protect your
subjects like Indra protects the gods.”
Yudhiñöhira’s chariot then took him through the broad palace gates and into
the compound. Brahmins chanted Vedic mantras to invoke auspiciousness as
Yudhiñöhira stepped down from his car and went into the temple. He bowed
before the Deities, worshipping them with gems, garlands and incense. When
he emerged from the temple, he saw Brahmins waiting and carrying sacred
articles. They uttered blessings and worshipped him as he made his way to the
assembly hall.
Among the Brahmins was a Räkñasa in disguise. His name was Charvaka, and
he was Duryodhana’s old friend. Although he was dressed like a Brahmin, he
reviled Yudhiñöhira. “O son of Kunté, all these ascetics have made me their
spokesman. They say, ‘Fie on Yudhiñöhira! He is a wicked king and he
destroyed his kinsmen. It would be best if he now gave up his life.’”
Hearing Charvaka’s words, the Brahmins set up an angry uproar. They then
fell silent in shame. None of them agreed with Charvaka, and they looked
anxiously at Yudhiñöhira, who bowed his head and said, “O Brahmins, be
pleased. It is exactly as you say. Do not cry fie upon me, for I will soon cast off
my life.”
“These are not our words, O King. We have not said anything of the kind. All
prosperity to you.”
Some of the leading sages looked carefully at Charvaka. By their spiritual
vision they understood his identity. “This is the wicked Räkñasa, Charvaka,
844

Duryodhana’s friend.”
With their eyes red with anger, the sages held their sacred threads and uttered
the Vedic syllable ‘Hun!’ Charvaka fell like a tree blasted to the roots by
Indra’s thunderbolt.
Praised and reassured by the Brahmins, Yudhiñöhira entered the assembly hall
with a cheerful mind and took his place on a golden throne. On two more
golden seats facing him sat Kåñëa and Sätyaki, while Bhéma and Arjuna sat at
his sides. Kunté sat on a white ivory throne with the twins by her side.
Dhåtaräñöra and other Kuru elders sat nearby on seats as effulgent as fire.
The hall filled with the sound of sacred chants and the ceremony began.
Yudhiñöhira was anointed with holy water from golden vessels, as well as with
milk, honey, yogurt, and ghee. After he had dressed in pure white silks and put
on golden ornaments and bright garlands, he was seated by Dhaumya on a
handsome seat spread with tiger skins. With Draupadé by his side, he made
offerings into the sacrificial fire. When the ceremony was complete, Kåñëa
concluded the rituals by sprinkling sanctified water from a large white conch
onto Yudhiñöhira’s crowned head.
Yudhiñöhira rose, king of the Kurus. Thousands of drums sounded and the hall
was filled with cheers and shouts of approval. Yudhiñöhira distributed charity
to the many Brahmins present, beginning with Dhaumya and the priests who
had conducted the ceremony. He gave away heaps of gold and gems and was
repeatedly blessed and eulogized.
After giving abundant charity, Yudhiñöhira took his place on the royal throne
and began to speak. “Great indeed must be that man who receives such praise
and worship from all these learned Brahmins. I do not feel worthy of such
words. Surely we are your favorites, since you describe us as having
accomplished so much. King Dhåtaräñöra is, however, our father and our god. If
you wish to please me, obey him and do what he desires. He is the master of the
world, of you, and of me. Do not treat him differently than you did in the
past.”
The noble Yudhiñöhira was concerned that Dhåtaräñöra would now be
disregarded or even ill-treated. Most people blamed him for the devastation.
After making it clear that he would not accept such behavior toward the blind
monarch, Yudhiñöhira appointed his ministers. Bhéma became Prince Regent,
Arjuna commander of the army, and the twins as administrators of justice.
Dhaumya was made head priest, and Saïjaya royal counselor. Yudhiñöhira then
845

instructed Yuyutsu to care for Dhåtaräñöra and carry out his commands as to
any state administration he ordered in his role as ruler of Hastinäpura.
Yudhiñöhira then arranged for the Brahmins to perform the çraddhä
ceremonies for the departed, and ordered that the many widows be given
adequate provisions. Yudhiñöhira also asked that houses for food distribution,
as well as public baths and monuments, be constructed in the names of the
slain warriors. Dhåtaräñöra, on behalf of his departed relatives, distributed
wealth to the Brahmins.
Bhéma was given the splendid palace which was formerly occupied by
Duryodhana, and he entered it joyfully like a mighty mountain lion entering a
cave. Dushashana’s more splendid palace was given to Arjuna, and he and
Kåñëa went there to rest after the ceremony. Nakula and Sahadeva were given
the palaces of Durmarshana and Durmukha, respectively. All of the Päëòavas
were as pleased as the gods in heaven as they entered their new abodes.
***
The morning following the installation, Yudhiñöhira thought again of Bhéñma.
It was time to return to the battlefield. The Päëòava king went to consult with
Kåñëa. When he entered Arjuna’s palace, he found Kåñëa sitting on a large
white sofa bedecked with gems. The dark-hued Kåñëa, clad in yellow silk and
adorned with celestial ornaments, resembled a sapphire set in pure gold.
Yudhiñöhira said, “O foremost of intelligent persons, have You rested well? Are
Your faculties fully invigorated? O divine Lord, by Your favor we have
regained the world and have not transgressed the duties of our order. Please
tell me what should now be done.”
Kåñëa made no reply. He appeared to be in meditation. Surprised, Yudhiñöhira
said, “Wonderful it is, O You of immeasurable power, that You are rapt in
meditation. Seeing that You have withdrawn Yourself from the world and
adopted the fourth state of absorption in the self, I am filled with wonder. As
calm as a lamp in a windless place, You appear as immobile as rock, Your bodily
hairs standing erect on Your body. If I am fit to understand the cause, O
Govinda, be pleased to tell me.”
Returning to external consciousness, Kåñëa replied, “That foremost of men,
Bhéñma, who now lies on a bed of arrows and is like a fire about to be
extinguished, is thinking only of Me. Thus is My mind also concentrated on
him. My mind is fixed in him, the twang of whose bow and the slaps of whose
846

palms not even Indra could bear. I was thinking of him who carried away the
three princesses of Koçala after defeating the world’s kings. I was rapt in
thought of he who fought for twenty-three days with Paraçuräma, before the
sage finally admitted his inability to overcome that best of his own disciples.
Controlling his senses and concentrating his mind fully on Me, Gaìgä’s son
seeks My refuge. It was for this reason that I fixed My mind on him.”
Kåñëa told Yudhiñöhira that Bhéñma would soon depart and thus he and his
brothers should leave at once to see him. “When that great man leaves, so all
kinds of knowledge about morality and duty will leave with him. No one can
deliver instructions comparable to his, not even Me.”
Suppressing his tears, Yudhiñöhira replied, “What You have said about Bhéñma
is true. I have heard of his greatness from the Brahmins. Now You, whose
words are truth itself, have confirmed the same. If You are pleased to show us
favor, O Mädhava, then accompany us as we proceed to where Bhéñma lays.
When the sun turns toward the north some days from now, he will leave for
the heavens by his own sweet will. Let him see You one more time before then,
dear Kåñëa. You are the shelter of the eternal Brahman and the final resting
place of all beings.”
Kåñëa turned toward Sätyaki sitting nearby. “Let My chariot be yoked. We will
leave at once.”
Yudhiñöhira touched Kåñëa’s feet, who then stood up and embraced the
Päëòava. He went out of the palace and immediately made arrangements to go
to the battlefield. Mounting his chariot, he was driven along Hastinäpura’s
central highway, followed by his brothers and Kåñëa, each mounted on their
own chariots. They soon arrived at Kurukñetra, witnessing again the awful
scene of the eighteen-day war. The field was littered with the wreckage of
weapons and chariots. Skulls as white as conches were lying everywhere.
Animal bones lay in heaps. The field looked like an abandoned sporting
ground used by the Destroyer.
Bhéñma, however, was surrounded by ascetics. His body shone like the setting
sun. Seeing him from a distance, the five Päëòavas and Kåñëa got down from
their chariots and approached him on foot. They offered their obeisances to
the åñis and prayed for their blessings, then took seats around Bhéñma, who lay
perfectly still on his arrow bed.
Kåñëa, tears running down His cheeks, said, “O hero, is your mind and
understanding still as clear now as before? I hope you are not overwhelmed by
847

pain or grief. Surely it is wonderful that you have been able to maintain your
life in such a condition. I do not think anyone else in all the worlds could do it,
nor have I heard of anyone as devoted to truth, penance, charity, sacrifice and
virtue. None can equal you in prowess nor in Vedic or moral knowledge. O
mighty-armed Bhéñma, the Brahmins have described you as a Vasu, but I
consider you more powerful than those gods. Indeed, you are equal to Vasava
himself, the great king of the gods.”
Kåñëa had told the Päëòavas how Bhéñma had formerly been Dyau, the leader
of the Vasus. By Vasiñöha’s curse, whom the Vasus had offended, they had been
obliged to take birth on earth. Although the åñi had granted that they could
soon return to heaven, he ordered that Dyau remain on earth for some time, as
he was the Vasus’ leader. The Vasus were born as Gaìgä’s sons, but she had
cast each of them into the Ganges at birth so that they could quickly return to
heaven. When Bhéñma was born, however, she had not cast him into the river.
Rather, the other Vasus had endowed him with their own power and he had
become equal to all of them combined. Thus he was invincible on earth.
After praising Bhéñma at length, Kåñëa asked him to remove Yudhiñöhira’s
doubts about his duty. “Dispel the sorrow of Päëòu’s eldest son. He is distracted
by grief because so many of his kinsmen were slain in the battle. Other than
you, O foremost of orators, none can destroy the doubts that arise regarding
duty. Persons like you live only for other’s benefit. Solace Påthä’s virtuous son,
whose mind is heavy with anguish.”
Bhéñma raised his head a little and looked into Kåñëa’s face. “Obeisances to
You, O divine Kåñëa. You are the creator and destroyer of all things.
Everything material and spiritual emanates from and rests upon You eternally.
I can now see Your universal form with all its divine attributes. I take refuge in
You, O Lord, and beseech Your mercy. Tell me, O all- powerful Supreme
Person, what will be best for me now? I desire only to reach Your blissful
abode.”
Kåñëa gently stroked Bhéñma’s head. “I know of your devotion to Me, O
foremost of men. Thus I have allowed you to see My divine form, which is only
revealed to My devoted servants. You are pure-hearted and have never swayed
in your faith or love. You will therefore attain those regions from which one
never returns. Fifty-six days remain of your life, O Bhéñma, after which you will
doubtlessly come to Me. When the sun turns to the north, you will quit your
body, taking with you your extensive knowledge. Therefore we have all come
848

to hear from you. Be pleased to speak and remove Yudhiñöhira’s grief.”
Bhéñma’s head fell back and he closed his eyes. His face was covered with tears.
The Päëòavas were filled with sorrow to see him so pained. They sat with their
heads bowed and their palms folded as Bhéñma replied. “O great one, O
Näräyaëa. O Lord of all the worlds, my heart is filled with joy upon hearing
Your words, but how can I say anything in Your presence? You are the
reservoir of knowledge. He who can speak on heaven before Indra will be able
to speak about morality and duty in Your presence. Furthermore, O Keçava, I
am in too much pain. I am weak and can barely speak. My strength is leaving
me and my understanding is clouded. I can hardly discern anything. I think it
is only through Your power that I live at all. You should therefore speak for
Yudhiñöhira’s benefit and for the benefit of the world. How can I speak, a
disciple before his guru?”
The autumn sun was warm and Bhéñma was shaded with a large umbrella. The
cries of vultures and hyenas still ranging about the battlefield was covered by
the Brahmins chanting auspicious mantras. The Kuru grandfather, who was
being fanned with a white chamara, felt overwhelmed by divine love as he
gazed at Kåñëa.
Kåñëa smiled. “Your words become you, O powerful one, who are a great soul
and the foremost of Kuru’s race. Regarding your pain, hear now the boon I will
grant you out of love. From now until you die, you will be free of pain, hunger,
thirst and bewilderment. Your perception and memory will remain unclouded
and your mind will be peaceful. Your knowledge will be as clear to you as fishes
in a still lake. Thus you will be able to answer all of Yudhiñöhira’s questions.”
As Kåñëa spoke a shower of flowers fell from the sky. The åñis praised Kåñëa,
while the gods played divine instruments. A cool, fragrant breeze blew and
everything became peaceful. Even the animals and birds were silent.
The sun was setting. Kåñëa told Bhéñma that he and the Päëòavas would return
the next morning to hear him speak. After they had bowed before the
grandfather, they left on their shining chariots, going to their nearby riverside
encampment to spend the night.
***
The next day, Dhaumya led the Päëòavas and Kåñëa back to Bhéñma. As he
rode out from his camp on a chariot as bright as fire, Yudhiñöhira resembled
Kuvera surrounded by the Guhyakas. Kåñëa and Arjuna were seated on the
849

same chariot and they appeared like a couple of resplendent gods. All three
were worshipped by Brahmins as they headed out followed by Dhåtaräñöra and
Gändhäré and thousands of other citizens, all of whom desired to see Bhéñma
one last time before he departed.
When the Päëòavas arrived, they dismounted from their chariots and bowed at
his feet. Kåñëa bowed with them. The hundreds of åñis surrounding Bhéñma
stood aside to allow Yudhiñöhira and his companions to approach. The
Päëòavas saw that almost every famous sage from all parts of the universe had
now arrived. There was Parvata, Närada, Vyäsadeva, Bharadväja, Paraçuräma,
Asita, Gautama, Atri, Kaçyapa, Aìgiräsha and many others, all of them
shining like sacrificial fires.
Bhéñma, who had received and worshipped the sages with his words, also
respectfully greeted the Päëòavas and Kåñëa as they took their places near him.
Kåñëa inquired how he was feeling, and Bhéñma told Him that his pain and
fatigue were gone. “Indeed, O Mädhava, by Your grace my mind is perfectly
calm and clear. I see all things—past, present and future—as clearly as I would
a fruit held in my hand. Soon I will depart from this world, thinking only of
You, O Govinda.”
Päëòu’s sons sat silently, overtaken with affection for their dying grandfather.
Seeing this, Bhéñmadeva was himself overwhelmed with love. Tears sprang to
his eyes and he said, trembling, “Oh, my dear son Yudhiñöhira, what terrible
sufferings and injustices you good souls have suffered, even though you are the
son of religion personified. Only because you were protected by the Brahmins,
religion and the Supreme Lord himself did you manage to survive.”
Bhéñma spoke reassuringly, trying to dispel Yudhiñöhira’s despondency by
pointing out how he was under divine protection. Everything was going on
according to the Supreme Lord’s will, and no one should grieve for such
inevitabilities.
As everyone listened respectfully, Bhéñma continued. “The many miseries
endured by your mother and my daughter-in-law Kunté are especially
lamentable. Upon the great King Päëòu’s death, she became a widow with
many children, thus suffering. Later, she suffered more due to your sufferings.
In my opinion, this is all due to inevitable time, under whose control everyone
in every planet is carried, just as the clouds are carried by the wind. Surely the
effects of time are irreversible and all-powerful. How else could there have
been such difficulties in the presence of Yudhiñöhira, the son of Dharma, and
850

the invincible Bhéma and Arjuna? Above all, how can one suffer when he has
as a well-wisher the Supreme Lord?”
Bhéñma turned his head slightly and fixed his gaze on Kåñëa. “It is this divine
and unknowable Kåñëa who controls everything. Time is simply His energy.
Surely even the greatest seers and åñis cannot understand His plans. Despite
their exhaustive inquiries about Kåñëa’s activities, they remain bewildered. O
Yudhiñöhira, best among the Bharatas, I therefore maintain that all this
destruction is within the Supreme Lord’s plan. Accepting His inconceivable
will, you must follow it. You are now the appointed administrative head and
thus you should take care of those subjects who have been rendered helpless.”
Bhéñma knew that this argument would be the most effective in convincing
Yudhiñöhira to do his duty. All of the Päëòavas were devoted to Kåñëa, but
sometimes their intense, intimate love for Him made them forget that, after all,
He was the supreme controller of all the events in the universe. Bhéñma was
simply reminding Yudhiñöhira of what he already knew. If the Päëòava became
fully convinced that the war and its outcome had been Kåñëa’s own plan, he
would not hesitate to perform his kingly duties.
Thanks to Kåñëa’s boon, Bhéñma’s voice had recovered its former resonance.
He continued to look at Kåñëa as he spoke. “This Govinda is none other than
the supremely powerful original person. From Him comes Näräyaëa and all
other deities. Still, He has appeared among the descendants of King Våñëi and
moves about this world like one of us. Thus He bewilders us with His own selfcreated energy.”
Bhéñma turned his face back toward Yudhiñöhira. “O King, only great
personalities such as Çiva, the godly Åñi Närada, and Kapila, the divine sage
incarnation, know about Kåñëa’s confidential glories by their own direct
relationship with Him. My dear child Yudhiñöhira, that personality whom, out
of ignorance, you thought to be your maternal cousin, your very dear friend,
well-wisher, counselor, messenger and benefactor, is in fact the Supreme Lord
of the entire material and spiritual creation.”
Bhéñma went on describing Kåñëa’s position, whom he explained was present in
everyone’s heart as the Supersoul. Equally kind to everyone, He was free from
the false concept of differentiation. He did not see other creatures in terms of
the body they inhabited. Thus whatever He did was free from material
consideration.
Bhéñma stopped for a moment, overcome by spiritual ecstasy. Tears flowed
851

freely down his face, and Yudhiñöhira wiped them away gently with a soft
cloth. Recovering his composure, Bhéñma concluded. “Yet despite being equally
disposed toward everyone, that very Kåñëa has graciously come before me while
I am ending my life, for I am His unflinching servant. That Supreme Person,
who appears in the mind by attentive devotion and meditation, releases the
devotee from the bondage of karma when he leaves his material body. May my
Lord, who is four-handed and has a beautifully decorated lotus face with eyes
as red as the rising sun, kindly await me at that final moment of my life.”
Bhéñma spoke in a voice that touched the hearts of all present. Kåñëa returned
his affectionate gaze and raised His hand in blessing. He glanced across at
Yudhiñöhira and nodded slightly, indicating that the Päëòava monarch should
now place his doubts before Bhéñma.
Yudhiñöhira then began to ask about the essential principles of various religious
duties. Bhéñma responded in detail, repeating the Vedic knowledge which he
had imbibed from the celestial åñis and had personally realized. He cited many
examples from the ancient histories to illustrate his points, and his audience
was spellbound. Even the gods assembled to hear his instructions, and the day
soon passed.
At sunset, everyone retired to their encampment, planning to return at sunrise
the next day. For more than fifty days, the conversation continued. Bhéñma
first defined all the classifications and duties of the four castes and orders of
life in terms of the individual’s qualifications. Then he systematically described
how one could become free from material entanglement even while still
engaged in work. He further explained acts of charity, a king’s practical duties,
and which activities led to salvation.
Bhéñma answered Yudhiñöhira’s questions to the Päëòava’s full satisfaction. At
the end of the fifty days, Yudhiñöhira felt his doubts and uncertainty cleared.
Gradually, the sun moved toward its northern declination. As it passed into
the northern hemisphere, the time favored by perfected yogés for leaving the
world, Bhéñma ended his instructions to Yudhiñöhira and thought of departing.
Being completely free of material attachment, he withdrew his mind from
everything else and fixed his eyes upon Kåñëa, who stood before him,
displaying four hands and dressed in glittering yellow garments. Bhéñma then
stopped his sense activity, and he began to pray to the controller of all living
beings.
“Let me now invest my thinking, feeling and willing, which were so long
852

engaged in different subjects and occupational duties, in the all-powerful Lord
Kåñëa. He is always self-satisfied; but sometimes, being the leader of the
devotees, He enjoys transcendental pleasure by coming to the material world—
although He Himself creates the material world. He has appeared on earth in
His transcendental body, which is blue like a tamäla tree. That divine body
attracts everyone in the three planetary systems. May His lotus face, decorated
with sandalwood pulp, be the constant object of my attraction, and may I not
desire any material results for my acts.”
Remembering his encounters with Kåñëa during the war, Bhéñma continued.
“On the battlefield Kåñëa drove the chariot of His intimate friend Arjuna, His
flowing hair ash-colored due to dust raised by the horses’ hooves. Because of
His labor, beads of sweat wetted His face. He enjoyed all these decorations,
intensified by the wounds dealt by my sharp arrows. Let my mind be ever fixed
in this remembrance.”
Bhéñma knew that Kåñëa’s engagement in the battle was simply an aspect of His
transcendental enjoyment. Kåñëa enjoyed showing His love for Arjuna by
assisting him in ways that reciprocated with Arjuna’s desire. He had enjoyed a
similar reciprocation with Bhéñma, who had relished the sight of Kåñëa rushing
toward him in anger. Remembering that loving exchange, Bhéñma recounted
the pastime.
“Fulfilling my desire and sacrificing His own promise, He got down from the
chariot, took up a wheel, and ran toward me just as a lion goes to kill an
elephant. That image is forever fixed in my mind—Kåñëa’s beautiful blackish
face smoldering in anger as He charged toward me with His bright yellow
garment falling to the ground. His armor was shattered by my arrows and His
body was smeared with the blood of His wounds. May that Lord Kåñëa, the
Supreme Person who awards salvation, be my ultimate destination.”
The old Kuru hero felt sorry that he had attacked Kåñëa, although he knew
that his arrows could not have harmed Him. Becoming silent for some time, he
meditated deeply upon the incident. He had felt an intense ecstasy when
Kåñëa had come at him in anger. Kåñëa Himself had obviously been
experiencing pleasure, enjoying the mood of chivalry created by the fight.
Bhéñma found himself swimming in the remembrance of that feeling. Surely
the exchange with Kåñëa on the battlefield had been the most sublime moment
of his life. Now here was that same Supreme Person, mercifully standing before
him despite the fact that Bhéñma had assailed both Him and His intimate
853

friend Arjuna during the war.
The sun was reaching the meridian and Bhéñma knew his departure was near.
He controlled his mind, absorbing it in thoughts of Kåñëa alone. Thinking of
Kåñëa’s many divine pastimes during His presence on earth, he spoke one final
time.
“I can now meditate with full concentration upon that one Lord, Kåñëa, visible
before me, because I have transcended the misconception of duality. It is this
Kåñëa who is present in everyone’s heart and who is the ultimate destination
for all transcendentalists, including those who accept the absolute truth as
being simply the Brahman. Even though the sun may be perceived differently
by different people in different parts of the world, the sun is one. I therefore
surrender myself fully to that all-powerful, omnipresent Kåñëa. May all be well
with the worlds.”
After saying farewell to Yudhiñöhira and his brothers, and instructing them to
always worship the Brahmins and remain fixed in truth, Bhéñma fell silent and
stopped breathing. Suddenly his life air shot out from the crown of his head
and went into the sky like a blazing comet. The åñis present could see that he
had left his body in a brilliant spiritual form and entered into Kåñëa, thus
going to the eternal transcendental atmosphere where Kåñëa forever displays
His loving pastimes. They folded their palms and uttered praises of Kåñëa, then
became silent out of respect for Bhéñma. The Päëòavas sat silently shedding
tears, seeing that their beloved grandfather had departed.
A few minutes later, the gods sounded their drums to honor Bhéñma. The
kñatriyas blew their conchshells and also beat drums. Demonstrations of honor
and respect were made by all present, and showers of flowers fell from the sky.
The Päëòavas gazed mutely at the old Kuru leader, unable to move for some
time. Finally they fought back their tears and personally collected the wood to
build the funeral pyre. Bhéñma’s body, wrapped in a silken cloth, garlanded, and
smeared with fragrant scents and sandalwood pulp, was placed on the pyre.
Yuyutsu stood at his head holding a shining white umbrella. Bhéma and Arjuna
fanned him on either side with cämaras, while Yudhiñöhira and Dhåtaräñöra
fanned him at his feet.
The Brahmins performed the last rites, offering libations into the fire on
Bhéñma’s behalf and chanting hymns from the Säma Veda. They then handed a
flaming torch to Yudhiñöhira, who lit the pyre. As the flames consumed
Bhéñma’s body, the women cried out in grief.
854

After Bhéñma had been cremated, the Kurus and the Päëòavas returned to the
Ganges. Bhéñma’s ashes were cast into the holy waters and everyone made
offerings. Suddenly, the goddess Gaìgä rose up from the river. Radiant in her
white silks and gold ornaments, she wept for the death of her son.
“Alas, where has my son gone? Of royal conduct and disposition, he was
devoted to virtue and to serving his elders. Even the great Paraçuräma could
not defeat him. In Kashi he single-handedly overpowered the world’s kings and
took away the princesses. Now he has been slain by the heartless Çikhaëòé.”
Seeing Gaìgä grieving, Kåñëa spoke to her and consoled her. He reassured her
that Bhéñma had attained the highest destination. His fame on earth would last
forever, and now he was gone to a place from which no one returns.
Comforted, the goddess cast off her grief. The Kurus then worshipped her and
obtained her permission to return to the city.

Chapter 32
Kåñëa Returns to Dwärakä
Yudhiñöhira began ruling the earth as lord of the Kurus. Surrounded by his
brothers, he resembled Indra seated in Amarävaté. Yudhiñöhira had arranged
that Dhåtaräñöra continue as chief administrator of Hastinäpura. The blind
king, attended by Saïjaya and Yuyutsu, gave orders which even the Päëòavas
followed out of deference. Draupadé, Subhadrä and the other ladies treated
Dhåtaräñöra and Gändhäré as father and mother. Even Kunté behaved toward
Gändhäré as one would act toward a senior. Kåpa had returned to the city and
become Dhåtaräñöra’s trusted counselor, and Vyäsadeva and other åñis also
advised him.
Yudhiñöhira, however, still felt a deep sense of guilt and shame. Seeing the
thousands of bereaved women and children in the city, he was consumed by
sorrow. Kåñëa, who at Yudhiñöhira’s request had agreed to live in Hastinäpura
for some time, spoke to the mourning king. “Do not indulge your grief, O best
of men, for by so doing you will increase the grief of your people and even give
pain to your departed relatives. You should celebrate and perform sacrifices.
Give joy to your subjects. Make profuse offerings to your forefathers and
855

distribute charity to the Brahmins. Thus any trace of sin caused by the war will
be washed off. Perform the Ashvemedha sacrifice, O King, and renounce this
useless grief.”
Sighing, Yudhiñöhira replied, “O Govinda, I know You are fond of me. You
have always favored me and my brothers. O Janärdana, speak again of eternal
spiritual truths, for my mind is still heavy. Reassured by Your words, which I
imbibe like nectar, I will become enthused to carry out my duties.”
Kåñëa was always inclined to satisfy Yudhiñöhira’s desires. He knew that the
Päëòava monarch had no other refuge. Although Kåñëa wanted to return to
Dwärakä to see His relatives, He had acceded to Yudhiñöhira’s repeated pleas
that He stay in Hastinäpura. Now, seeing his dejection, Kåñëa spoke once more
to assuage his sorrow.
“O foremost of Bharata’s race, you must now contend with the most powerful
enemy of all: your mind. Your only weapon in this battle is knowledge, and you
have no army to assist you. O King, you already know everything. You know
that all beings are undying, spiritual entities, that this material world is
nothing more than a temporary illusion, and that the primary aim of life is to
seek spiritual emancipation. Stand firm on this knowledge, O Yudhiñöhira, and
do your duty.”
Kåñëa explained how one desiring liberation must become free from
attachment and aversion to material objects, which included the material body
and all its designations. Yudhiñöhira’s lamentation was based on seeing only the
external situation. He was grieving for matter without seeing spirit. All those
who had been killed were still existing in new bodies. Those who were grieving
for them would also soon die, forgetting their present sorrow. The prime duty
of every man is to realize his true identity as an eternal part of the Supreme.
That realization would bring complete freedom from the material misery
caused by ignorance.
“By doing your material duties only for God’s pleasure will you gain this
realization, O King, for such actions are on the spiritual platform and will soon
raise you to spiritual consciousness. Throw off your ignorance and do what
must be done. Prepare for the sacrifice, please the gods and Viñëu, satisfy the
Brahmins, and rule this world with justice and compassion.”
Solaced, and instructed by Dhaumya and other åñis, Yudhiñöhira gradually gave
up his anguish. He thanked Kåñëa, who then asked if He may go to
Indraprastha with Arjuna. The two friends wanted to spend some time
856

together in that beautiful city, especially in the celestial Mayasabha.
Yudhiñöhira gave his permission and soon they were traveling in Kåñëa’s
chariot, moving swiftly along the broad highway that went from Hastinäpura
toward the north.
Arjuna and Kåñëa spent weeks at Indraprastha. Upon their arrival they were
greeted by thousands of overjoyed citizens. Arjuna and Kåñëa then retired to
the Mayasabha and also spent time together in the delightful, wooded regions
surrounding the city. They spoke together about the many battles that had
been fought and which the Päëòavas had won. Kåñëa could see that Arjuna too
was grieving for the loss of his sons and friends and thus He consoled him.
After some weeks, Kåñëa again wanted to return to Dwärakä and He asked
Arjuna to secure Yudhiñöhira’s permission. “You should know that I am unable
to do anything which may displease your brother. My life, wealth and followers
are at his disposal. But I think I should return to see My aging father Vasudeva
and My other relatives. The earth with her belt of seas and mountains, mines,
and forests has come under Yudhiñöhira’s sway. I have spoken words of reason
and wisdom to comfort him. He is now determined to do his duty. Therefore, I
think it is time for Me to go. Let us approach Yudhiñöhira together and seek his
approval.”
Arjuna’s heart sank at the thought of Kåñëa’s departure, but he knew it was
time. Kåñëa had not seen His relatives since the war. They would surely be
grieving for Abhimanyu, and would be missing Kåñëa Himself. Reluctantly,
Arjuna assented to Kåñëa’s request. Early the next day, they made their way
back to Hastinäpura.
As they traveled Arjuna said, “Dear Mädhava, I have come to know Your true
identity from Your profound instructions delivered on the first day of the war,
but, my Lord, I find it difficult to recall those instructions. Indeed, my mind is
confused now that You are about to leave us. Please, if You are agreeable,
repeat that knowledge to me.”
Kåñëa smiled affectionately, “Surely you are fickle-minded, O son of Päëòu.
Those truths I spoke were confidential and unknown even to the gods. I am
not pleased that you have forgotten them, and I do not think I can repeat them
now. But I will recite an ancient history on the same subject. Focus your mind
and try to understand, O Pärtha, for this knowledge will free you from material
bondage.”
As Däruka drove the chariot to Hastinäpura, Kåñëa narrated the history. Lost
857

in his love for Kåñëa, Arjuna was captivated by His eloquent speech. The
chariot moved swiftly along the smooth road, passing through various villages
and alongside fields full of crops or grazing cattle. When the day’s journey was
almost over, Kåñëa concluded His instructions and said, “If you have any love
for Me, O scion of Kuru, you will lead your life according to these instructions.
Always remember your actual identity as soul and remain fixed in rendering
service to the Supreme Soul. In that way, you will never fall into illusion
again.”
Arjuna replied that as far as he was concerned, Kåñëa was the Supreme Soul.
Remembrance of Him was all that was required to achieve perfection in life. “I
am convinced of Your glories, O Govinda. Indeed, I could not reach the end of
Your glories if I were to recite them continuously with a thousand mouths and
for a thousand years. You are the one Lord of all creatures, known variously
only due to the various perceptions of different men. Everything that we, the
Päëòavas, have achieved is simply due to Your favor.”
Kåñëa embraced Arjuna, who assured Him that he would gain Yudhiñöhira’s
permission for His departure. “Although my heart is breaking at the thought of
You leaving, I understand that You must return to Your family. We have
already been favored by Your long presence here.”
The chariot entered Hastinäpura, passing throngs of cheering citizens who
rushed to the roadside to watch it go by. Arjuna and Kåñëa smiled at the people
and received their worship by offering them blessings. They soon reached the
royal palace and went quickly before Yudhiñöhira, bowing at his feet and
greeting him with affection. They then offered their obeisances to Dhåtaräñöra
and Gändhäré, who occupied thrones close to Yudhiñöhira’s.
When the formal greetings were over, Arjuna and Kåñëa sat before
Yudhiñöhira, being fanned by maidservants with chamara whisks. Seeing them
both looking up at him, Yudhiñöhira said, “It appears you have something on
your minds. Speak it out, O heroes. Whatever you desire, I will satisfy it. Do
not hesitate to reveal your minds.”
Arjuna, who had expected his brother to say just that, smiled. “The lord of the
Våñëis and Yadus, Keçava, wishes to see His father and other relatives in
Dwärakä. O King, if you think it proper, then please let Him go. Grant Him
permission to repair to His own city.”
Yudhiñöhira and his brothers gazed at Kåñëa, who had been with them now for
months. As soon as He had heard of their coming out of exile, He had left
858

Dwärakä to be with them, guiding them back toward their former positions as
rulers of the world. All the brothers knew that without Kåñëa they could not
possibly have succeeded. Now His work was done. Duryodhana and his army of
invincible warriors had been overcome. The Päëòavas were now the
undisputed monarchs, their position better now than before their exile. Both
Hastinäpura and Indraprastha, the two great capitals of the earth, were now
under their command.
But the Päëòavas cared little for power and opulence. For them, Kåñëa’s
presence and love was more valuable than rulership of the earth. Yudhiñöhira’s
acceptance of the throne, and even his declaring war against the Kauravas, had
been due ultimately to his understanding that it was Kåñëa’s desire. Hearing
that He now desired to return to Dwärakä, Yudhiñöhira said, “O lotus-eyed one,
O Mädhava, I will allow You to go. Go and see my maternal uncle and the
goddess Devaké. You have been away for a long time. Offer them my deepest
respects, and also Balaräma, who is ever worthy of the world’s worship. Think
of us daily, and if it pleases You, return when we perform the Ashvamedha.
Everything we possess is simply due to Your favor.”
Yudhiñöhira immediately dispatched swift messengers to Dwärakä to inform
the citizens of Kåñëa’s impending arrival. He also ordered that Kåñëa be given
gems and gold in large amounts. Graciously accepting the gifts, Kåñëa said, “O
mighty-armed one, you are the lord of the earth. Whatever I possess is yours
and you may do with it as you wish. I will go now, but I will surely return to see
your sacrifice.”
Kåñëa decided to leave for Dwärakä early the next morning. He rose from His
seat like the sun rising above the eastern hills and left the assembly hall with
Arjuna and Sätyaki at His side. Yudhiñöhira and the other Päëòavas followed
Him as He mounted His chariot, going with His two friends to Arjuna’s palace
for the night.
After sunrise Kåñëa prepared to leave. Mounting His jeweled chariot, He
proceeded to Yudhiñöhira’s palace to say His final farewells. Hearing that He
was about to depart, Kunté and the other Kuru ladies came out to see Him. The
noble ladies, resplendent in silk, stood with tears in their eyes, mentally
offering their obeisances at Kåñëa’s feet again and again.
Remembering the many times that Kåñëa had protected her and her sons,
Kunté stood by the side of His chariot with folded palms and offered prayers.
“O Kåñëa, You are the original personality, unaffected by anything in this
859

material world. You exist within and without, yet You are invisible to all.
Foolish men fail to recognize Your identity as the Supersoul in all beings, for
You cannot be known by the material senses. Only those who are free from lust
and avarice can approach and know You, for otherwise You remain covered by
Your own illusory energy. Yet You reciprocate with those who come to You in
love, acting from within their hearts to free them from illusion.”
Standing outside the great royal palace, which towered above her like a white
mountain, Kunté praised Kåñëa for some time. She described the many
occasions that she and her sons had been in danger and how Kåñëa had saved
them. Her voice trembled with a sublime joy. “O Govinda, I wish that all those
calamities would happen again and again so that we could see You again and
again, for seeing You means that we will no longer see repeated birth and
death.”
During her sons’ exile, Kunté had devoted herself to fasts and asceticism. She
was a self-realized soul and understood that the ultimate aim of life was to
achieve freedom from rebirth in the material world. Realizing that her many
difficulties in life had forced her to meditate on Kåñëa, she felt that those
difficulties had been a great blessing, for she had come to know Kåñëa as the
final goal of all spiritual practices. Kunté had cultivated detachment from
matter and prayed that Kåñëa would sever her last attachments to the world in
the form of her feelings of affection for her sons and other relatives. Kunté
knew that in order to achieve complete liberation, she had to see all living
beings, including her own family, as eternal spirit souls. One in true knowledge
sees and loves all creatures equally, knowing them to be parts of the Supreme.
Bodily designations are temporary and, ultimately, meaningless.
After describing Kåñëa’s transcendental qualities, Kunté concluded her prayers
with a heartfelt plea. “O Lord of Madhu, as the Ganges forever flows to the sea
without hindrance, let my attraction be constantly drawn to You without
being diverted to anyone else. You are my and my sons’ only shelter. How are
You leaving us today, even though we are completely dependent on You and
have no one else to protect us, especially now that so many kings are at enmity
with us?”
Kunté knew that although the Päëòavas had conquered their enemies, they
would soon have to contend with the sons and followers of the kings they had
killed. Those kings had only brought some of their forces to fight at
Kurukñetra, leaving sons or brothers to rule in their absence. Thus there were
860

still many rulers around the world who commanded armies and who would
likely be antagonistic to the Päëòavas.
With her gaze fixed on Kåñëa’s face, she added, “As the name and fame of a
particular body is finished with the disappearance of the living spirit, similarly,
if You do not look upon us, all our fame and activities will end at once. O
Kåñëa, You possess all mystic powers, and You are the preceptor of the entire
universe. You are the almighty God, and I offer You my respectful obeisances.”
Kåñëa held up His hand, decorated with jewels and red sandalwood paste, in
blessing as Kunté ended her prayers, enchanting all who saw Him with His
beauty and grace. He told Kunté that just as she was always thinking of Him,
He never forgot her or her sons.
Then it was time for Kåñëa to leave. Sätyaki mounted the chariot, and the
royal escort Yudhiñöhira had arranged led Him from the city. Yudhiñöhira and
his brothers climbed up on Kåñëa’s chariot and embraced him. The palace
ladies praised Kåñëa from the balconies, showering Him with flowers. The
streets were lined with citizens longing for one final sight of Kåñëa. After the
Päëòavas had said their farewells and dismounted, Däruka commanded Kåñëa’s
celestial horses and His chariot moved off.
The Päëòavas stood gazing after the chariot as it went along the red stone road
leading from the city. When it was out of sight, they slowly and silently made
their way back into the palace.
***
When Kåñëa was alone on His chariot, Däruka urged on the horses. The
chariot quickly reached the speed of the wind. Passing lakes, rivers, forests and
hills, as well as towns and hamlets, it finally arrived in Dwärakä. As He
approached the city, Kåñëa blew a blast on His conch shell. The guards heard
the sound and threw open the city gates with shouts of joy. They announced
Kåñëa’s imminent arrival and the citizens ran out of the city. Seeing Kåñëa
returning after so long, they felt as if they had woken from a long sleep. They
offered Him cows, gold and gems, and cheered and beat drums as He passed.
Tall flags lined the roofs of mansions, and the ground was strewn with flower
petals. As Kåñëa’s chariot moved slowly along the road, the citizens waved
branches of palm, banana and mango trees. In every doorway stood golden
waterpots, baskets of fruit, sugarcane, pots of milk, and other auspicious
articles. Incense billowed from every house and hundreds of thousands of
861

candles burned.
As He moved toward His father’s palace, Kåñëa saw the opulence of His city—
the orchards and flower gardens, the beautiful lakes teeming with swans and
thick with red and blue lotuses. Golden archways studded with precious stones
stood at every crossroad, and white mansions lined the roads.
Numerous Brahmins worshipped Kåñëa, and Kåñëa heard them praising Him as
He passed. In voices suffused with ecstasy they said, “O Almighty One, You are
worshipable by even the gods and are the ultimate goal of life for all
transcendentalists. You are our protector, guide and worshipable Lord. By good
fortune have we seen You again, for You rarely visit even the denizens of
heaven.”
The Brahmins prayed that Kåñëa not leave Dwärakä again, saying that each
day He was absent felt like thousands of years.
Kåñëa received their prayers and worship by glancing at them affectionately.
As the chariot moved forward, a number of powerful men went ahead to clear
the road. Followed by a procession of elephants, chariots and walking citizens,
Kåñëa’s chariot gradually made its way through the dense crowds and arrived at
Vasudeva’s palace. In the courtyard He saw colorfully dressed dancers and
actors expertly enacting His pastimes with grace, while singers and poets
glorified Him to musical instruments.
Pleased, Kåñëa dismounted from His chariot and met the leading citizens.
According to their status He bowed before them, embraced them, or offered
them His blessings. He exchanged greetings, shook hands, and offered
benedictions to hundreds of citizens. Then He entered His father’s house.
Devaké was the first to greet Kåñëa as He came into the house. After He had
placed His head at her feet, she embraced Him and sat Him upon her lap,
stroking His head and offering Him her blessings.
Kåñëa then greeted all the senior palace ladies, seeing them as mothers, and
then went before Vasudeva. After He had touched His father’s feet and
received his embrace, Kåñëa sat by his side and told him the news from
Hastinäpura. Vasudeva had not heard much about the war, and he asked Kåñëa
to tell him everything that had happened since His departure.
Surrounded by other Vrishni elders, Vasudeva listened to Kåñëa’s narration.
Kåñëa deliberately avoided telling His father about Abhimanyu’s death.
When Kåñëa stopped speaking, Subhadrä, present by her father’s side, asked,
“Why, O Kåñëa, have You not told Your father about my son’s death?” After
862

saying this, she dropped to the palace floor in a swoon.
When Vasudeva heard her words, he also fell, overcome by grief. Kåñëa quickly
took them both up and consoled them. “My dear father, dearest sister, how
could I speak that which would only give you sorrow? You should know that
the heroic Abhimanyu died in the thick of battle. While contending with
numerous invincible fighters, never once showing his back, he finally gave up
his life. Only due to the inevitable influence of time did the mighty hero fall in
battle. None could have slain him. He has now reached regions of undying
happiness. Cast off your burning grief and we will make his funeral offerings.”
After going to a sanctified spot in the palace compound, Kåñëa, along with
Balaräma and aided by the Brahmins, personally performed Abhimanyu’s
çraddhä ceremony. On behalf of His departed nephew He gave charity to
millions of Brahmins. He distributed heaps of gold and gems, along with
hundreds of thousands of cows. The ceremony was attended by all the leading
Vrishnis, headed by their king, Ugrasena, and all of Kåñëa’s thousands of sons
and other relatives.
After the ceremony, Kåñëa retired to His personal quarters in Rukméëé’s
palace, and the citizens of Dwärakä returned home feeling both joy and sorrow.

Chapter 33
Yudhiñöhira’s Ashvamedha Sacrifice
In Hastinäpura the Päëòavas settled into their lives as rulers. Yudhiñöhira was
the embodiment of justice and virtue. None could fault him. Due to the gods’
cooperation, who were pleased by the people’s piety under Yudhiñöhira’s care,
there was never a shortage of rain. The earth produced abundant crops and
supported countless cows, who moistened the ground with the milk that
dripped from their full milk bags. The people felt they had everything they
desired and were free from anxiety. They were not afflicted by disease, mental
agony, or excessive heat and cold. Sons always outlived their fathers and no
women became widows.
Some months after Kåñëa’s departure, Uttarä, who was staying with Kunté and
Draupadé, gave birth to her son. She named him Parékñit. After Dhaumya had
863

performed his birth and naming ceremonies, Yudhiñöhira asked them, “O
Brahmins, please tell me if this child will become a saintly king, as famous and
glorified in his achievements as his noble predecessors?”
Dhaumya replied that the boy, who had been saved from death by Kåñëa while
still in the womb, would certainly be famous as a great devotee of the Supreme
Lord. “He will be known as Viñëurata, or one who is always protected by the
Lord. Endowed with all good qualities, he will be exactly like Ikñväku, Manu’s
famous son, in maintaining the people. For following religious principles and
for his truthfulness, he will be exactly like Räma, the son of king Daçaratha. He
will give charity and protect the helpless. As a warrior, he will be as irresistible
as the mighty ocean, possessing skills in archery equal to those of Arjuna.
Indeed, O King, he will expand the fame of his family like Bharata himself.”
Yudhiñöhira was overjoyed. Here was a worthy heir to the Kuru line. The
Päëòavas still sorrowed at the loss of their own sons, but seeing Parékñit solaced
them. He was clearly marked by auspicious lines on his body. Yudhiñöhira
arranged for much charity to be distributed on the boy’s behalf. The sages who
had attended the birth ceremony received the wealth but gave most of it away.
Then they left for the mountains, their minds set on their ascetic practices.
Soon after Parékñit’s birth, Yudhiñöhira began to think of the sacrifice he would
like to perform. He still desired to atone for the killing at Kurukñetra, and the
åñis had recommended that he perform the Ashvamedha. As with the Räjasüya,
the sacrifice would give him the opportunity to again establish his position as
the earth’s emperor. He would have to send out the sacrificial horse to all parts
of the land. Anyone not accepting his rule would be obliged to fight.
Although he had no personal ambition to rule the earth, Yudhiñöhira wanted
to ensure that the world was on the path of peace and religion. There could
not be another Kurukñetra. It was also Kåñëa’s desire that the virtuous
Yudhiñöhira and his brothers be clearly established as the earth’s foremost
rulers. Yudhiñöhira thus set about making his preparations.
Knowing that the performance of an Ashvamedha requires immense wealth,
Yudhiñöhira was anxious. The treasury had been seriously depleted by the war.
The Päëòava revealed his anxiety to Vyäsadeva, who told him of a great store
of wealth lying in the North. The sage told Yudhiñöhira about a former
emperor of the earth, named Marutta, who had possessed almost unlimited
wealth. He had pleased Çiva by performing a sacrifice and the god had given
him a mountain made of gold. From that mountain he had fashioned sacrificial
864

altars of pure gold, as well as vast numbers of gold plates and other utensils.
These were now lying in a cave in the Himälayas. Vyäsadeva instructed Arjuna
how to find the cave and Arjuna left at once, returning after a month with the
immense riches carried on a seemingly endless line of bullocks and elephants.
Yudhiñöhira then invited rulers from around the world to attend the sacrifice.
He wanted to establish peaceful relations with all kings, but he knew that there
would be a lot of inimical feelings left from the war. There were many kings
who had not participated in the Kurukñetra war who would likely be neutral,
but there were also some kings whose fathers or brothers had been killed by the
Päëòavas and who harbored enmity with them. Knowing this, Yudhiñöhira
asked Arjuna to follow the sacrificial horse. Anyone seeing the horse and not
agreeing to Yudhiñöhira’s rule would have to face Arjuna. The Päëòava put on
his golden armor and prepared himself for the expedition.
After being blessed by the Brahmins, Arjuna set off in pursuit of the horse. He
was followed by a large body of warriors, as well as a number of sages who would
perform the sacred rites to invoke auspiciousness and ensure his success.
Yudhiñöhira had earnestly entreated Arjuna not to kill anyone unless it was
absolutely unavoidable. Remembering this, he first tried to establish peaceful
relations through diplomacy; but in some cases, he was forced to take up arms.
He fought a battle with the Trigartas, who bore him enmity for having slain
their king and his brothers during the war. After they had been overpowered,
another fierce fight took place between Arjuna and king Vajradatta, the son of
Bhagadatta. That battle lasted for three days, with Arjuna finally defeating
Vajradatta but sparing his life. After the king had agreed to bring tribute for
Yudhiñöhira’s sacrifice, Arjuna moved south.
A powerful battle took place with the Sindhus, who were grieving Jayadratha’s
death. Tens of thousands of warriors came out to contend with Arjuna. He
attacked them with arrows from the Gäëòéva, cutting their weapons to pieces
and forcing them to flee.
In the Sindhu capital, Duryodhana’s sister Dushala lived. When she saw that
Arjuna was crushing her troops, she came hastily out of the city holding an
infant in her arms. Seeing her rushing onto the field with her child, the
warriors lowered their weapons. She fell before Arjuna, crying. “Stop, O hero!
Do not destroy the last of our race. See here this child, who is your own
relative, the son of my son. Out of sheer grief for Jayadratha’s death, the father
of this boy has given up his life. Now you, Jayadratha’s killer, are bent upon
865

annihilating the rest of his family and followers. O Arjuna, pray forget the sins
of this child’s grandfather and have mercy on him.”
Seeing the weeping Dushala, whom he regarded as a sister, Arjuna cast aside
his bow. He censured the life of a kñatriya and cried out, “Fie on the wicked
Duryodhana! That mean person, so covetous of the kingdom, has brought
about the death of all my kinsmen.”
Arjuna got down from his chariot and consoled Dushala. She turned to the
Sindhu warriors and told them to put down their weapons and make peace
with Arjuna. They complied. Arjuna then dismissed her and she returned to
the city, leaving him to continue his travels.
The horse reached Maëipur, where Arjuna was greeted peacefully by his own
son Babhruvahana, whom he had conceived with the princess Citräìgadä. As
Arjuna had agreed at the time of his birth, Babhruvahana had remained at
Maëipur, ruling that kingdom and not taking any part in the great war. He
came to Arjuna with offerings of gold and gems, but Arjuna was nevertheless
clearly displeased. His mind was seized with anger and he shouted out to his
son, “Why, O child, have you come in peace when an antagonist has entered
your land? This is never in keeping with kñatriya duties. You have acted like a
woman! I have come here bearing arms and you should have challenged me
with heroic words. O wretched boy, take up your weapons and give me battle.”
Babhruvahana was surprised by his father’s reaction. He tried to appease him,
but Arjuna would not listen. He repeatedly goaded his son to fight.
As that exchange was taking place, Ulüpé suddenly appeared from the earth.
The daughter of the Näga king, and Arjuna’s wife, stood before Babhruvahana
and said, “Listen, O prince. I am Ulüpé, your mother, and have come here
desiring to do both you and your father good. Fight with him, for this will
please him and you will then acquire merit.”
Hearing his stepmother’s words as well as the repeated urgings of his father,
the prince agreed. After putting on his blazing armor and mounting a chariot,
he stood before his father ready for battle. Seeing the sacrificial horse nearby,
Babhruvahana had some of his men seize it and take it into his city. Arjuna
was incensed and he rained down arrows on his powerful son.
A terrible fight took place between father and son. Both showed no quarter,
releasing countless arrows at one another. Arjuna was suddenly struck on the
shoulder by a steel shaft that pierced him deeply and made him almost lose
consciousness. He leaned on his standard pole. When he regained his senses,
866

he praised his son. “Excellent! Well done! O son of Citräìgadä, I am pleased
with you for your prowess and power. Now stand fearlessly, for I will let loose
my terrible shafts.”
Arjuna fought relentlessly, shooting arrows which smashed his son’s chariot
and killed his horses. Jumping to the ground, the prince stood fearlessly before
his father. In a moment he took out a long golden arrow bedecked with jewels
and kanka feathers and fired it from his fully drawn bow. That arrow sped
toward Arjuna and struck him on the chest, piercing his armor.
Gasping in pain, Arjuna fell from his car and lay on the earth. Babhruvahana,
himself pierced all over by Arjuna’s shafts, was seized with grief upon seeing his
father killed. Overpowered, he too fell to the ground.
Citräìgadä heard that her husband and son had both fallen on the battlefield.
She rushed out of the city. Seeing them lying there, she too fainted. When she
had recovered her senses, she saw Ulüpé standing before her. Knowing that
Babhruvahana had fought his father at her behest, she said, “O Ulüpé, see our
ever-victorious husband slain as a result of your instructions to my son. Do you
not know the practices of respectable women? Are you not devoted to your
husband? If Arjuna has offended you in some way, you should have forgiven
him. Why are you not grieving? O snake-lady, you are a goddess. I beseech you
to revive our husband.”
Citräìgadä ran over to Arjuna and fell to the ground weeping. With the arrow
protruding from his chest and blood seeping from the wound, he seemed like a
hill with a tree on the summit and its rocks running with red oxide. The
Maëipur princess placed Arjuna’s feet in her lap and cried uncontrollably.
Regaining consciousness, Babhruvahana got to his feet and ran over to his
father. Along with his mother, he too began to cry. In a choked voice he
lamented, “Alas, what have I done? What is the atonement for one who has
killed his father? I should doubtlessly suffer every sort of misery for such a sin.
Indeed, I cannot continue my life. I will sit by my father’s side, abstaining from
food and drink, until death takes me. Let me follow the path taken by Arjuna.”
The prince cried for some time, then fell silent. He sat in a yogic posture next
to Arjuna and prepared to observe the Praya vow of fasting until death.
Seeing both her co-wife and stepson overcome by sorrow, Ulüpé approached
them. By her mystic power she fetched from the Näga kingdom a celestial gem
that had the power to revive the dead. Taking the effulgent gem, which shone
with a hundred different hues, she went over to Babhruvahana and said, “Rise
867

up, O son. You have not killed Arjuna. Indeed, neither man nor god can slay
him. He is an eternal åñi of indestructible soul. His apparent death is simply
illusion. O child, take this gem and place it on your father’s chest and he will
rise.”
The prince did as he was told and, almost at once, Arjuna opened his eyes. His
wound healed and he sat up and looked around. Babhruvahana sighed with
relief. He bowed at his father’s feet and begged forgiveness. Kettledrums
resounded in the sky and a shower of flowers fell. Voices in the heavens called
out, “Excellent! Excellent!”
Arjuna stood up and embraced his son with affection. “What is the cause of all
these signs?” he asked. “Why has your mother Citräìgadä come onto the field?
Why do I also see the Näga princess here?”
Babhruvahana told his father to ask Ulüpé. Arjuna looked at her, the question
in his eyes. “What brings you here, O daughter of the Nägas? Have you come
here desiring to do us good? I hope neither I nor my son have done you any
injury.”
Ulüpé smiled and reassured Arjuna that she had not been offended. She had
urged the prince to fight to serve both him and Arjuna. “Listen to my words, O
mighty-armed Arjuna. During the war you deceitfully killed Bhéñma, placing
Çikhaëòé before you when you approached him. For that sin you would have
fallen into hell, but your sin has been expiated by your son’s actions.”
Ulüpé explained that soon after Bhéñma’s fall, she had seen the Vasus come to
the river Ganges to bathe. While they were there, they called for the goddess
Gaìgä and said, “Arjuna has unfairly slain your son. For this we will curse him
to die.” Gaìgä had agreed. Seeing all this, Ulüpé had gone before her father in
anxiety. She told him what she had seen and her father, king of the Nägas,
went at once to the Vasus. He begged them to be merciful to Arjuna, his sonin-law, and they replied, “Dhanaïjaya has a youthful son who is now king of
Maëipur. That king will cast his father down in battle and free him from our
curse.”
Ulüpé continued, “It is for this reason that you were slain by your son. Indeed,
not even Indra could kill you, but it is said that the son is one’s own self. After
he killed you, I revived you with this celestial gem.”
Ulüpé showed Arjuna the brilliant jewel and he cheerfully replied, “Everything
you have done is agreeable to me, O goddess. You have not committed any
fault.”
868

Babhruvahana beseeched Arjuna to spend a night in the city with his two
wives, but Arjuna declined, saying that he could not rest until the sacrificial
horse returned to Hastinäpura. He took leave from his wives and his son, who
said he would soon come to Yudhiñöhira’s sacrifice. After telling his wives to
join him in Hastinäpura, he continued on his way in pursuit of the horse.
Arjuna next came to Rajagriha, the city where he had long ago gone with
Bhéma and Kåñëa to kill Jaräsandha. Jaräsandha’s grandson, Meghasandhi, still
only a boy, but observing the duty of a kñatriya, came out and offered to fight
with Arjuna with bold and heroic words. “It seems this horse is protected only
by women,” he challenged, and a great fight ensued. During the battle,
Meghasandhi’s chariot was smashed and he was finally overpowered. Arjuna
said, “At the command of Yudhiñöhira I will not slay those kings whom I defeat
if they acquiesce to his rule.”
Meghasandhi agreed to attend Yudhiñöhira’s sacrifice and offer tribute, and
Arjuna continued on his way. He fought with several other monarchs, obliging
them to accept Yudhiñöhira as emperor, before the horse at last reached the
road leading back to Hastinäpura.

Chapter 34
Vidura Instructs Dhåtaräñöra
In Hastinäpura, Yudhiñöhira heard from his men that Arjuna was approaching
the city. Hearing that all was well with his brother, he joyfully set about
making preparations for his sacrifice. His priests had arranged for the sacrifice
to be performed on the full moon day in the month of Mägha. They selected an
auspicious spot on a large, level plain outside the city, and sanctified it with
Vedic rites. A golden altar was constructed, and numerous mansions were built
for the visiting kings. Messengers were then dispatched to all parts of the land
to invite them.
Soon numerous monarchs began to arrive, as well as thousands of ascetics. The
Päëòavas greeted them all warmly and offered them the finest accommodation.
As the day of the sacrifice approached, Yudhiñöhira himself went out of the
city and entered the royal pavilion. As he proceeded, he saw the sacrificial
869

arena, resembling Indra’s heavenly capital. Triumphal arches had been built,
and the ground was paved with gold bricks. Jars, jugs, ladles, seats, and other
necessary paraphernalia had been arranged around the fire altars which
surrounded the main altar. The main altar shone like the sun. Yudhiñöhira did
not see anything that was not made of gold.
The guests were filled with wonder at its opulence. They were fed sumptuously
by thousands of servants, and provided with anything they desired.
Yudhiñöhira arranged that drums and cymbals should be sounded each time a
hundred thousand Brahmins had been fed. The crash and clash of those
instruments was heard again and again throughout the day. There were hills of
food, huge tanks of ghee, and lakes filled with milk. The citizens joyfully came
out to attend the sacrifice, dressed in colorful silks and adorned with burnished
golden earrings. The women were decorated with jewels and ornaments, and
their faces shone like radiant moons.
A few days before the sacrifice, Kåñëa arrived with His son Pradyumna, and
Sätyaki and Balaräma. Numerous other Yadus and Vrishnis accompanied Him
and they all entered the sacrificial arena like gods descending from heaven.
Yudhiñöhira and his brothers worshipped Kåñëa and Balaräma and offered
Them the best mansions for Their residence. Kåñëa spoke about Arjuna, who
had not yet returned from his expedition. He told the other Päëòavas that He
had received news about him and that he would be arriving the next day.
After the Päëòavas and their guests had spent the night in their mansions
outside the city, they went the following day to greet Arjuna. With
Dhåtaräñöra at their head, they proceeded with a large number of Brahmins
and citizens. In a short while, they saw the sacrificial horse, looking as beautiful
as the celestial horse Ucchaisravas, followed by Arjuna on his blazing chariot.
Yudhiñöhira and his brothers welcomed Arjuna with affection, praising his feat
in subduing the world’s kings and bringing the horse back safely. Kåñëa
embraced him and went with him into his mansion, where they spent a
pleasant evening together.
When the day of the sacrifice arrived, Vyäsadeva came to Yudhiñöhira and
said, “The time for the sacrifice has come. The priests await you. O King, you
should make offerings three times greater than are required by the ordinance.
Give three times the required charity to the priests at the end. In this way, you
will acquire the merit of three Ashvamedhas. This will certainly free you from
any sin that may have accrued from the war.
870

Attended by Kåñëa and thousands of kings, the sacrifice was duly performed
according to the instructions of Vyäsadeva and Dhaumya. Everyone present
considered it no less magnificent than the Räjasüya had been years before.
When it was complete, and the time had come to give dakñiëa, Yudhiñöhira
offered the entire earth to Vyäsadeva, saying, “O great sage, this is the proper
dakñiëa ordained for this sacrifice. Take this earth, conquered by Arjuna, and
divide it among the åñis. I will enter the forest, for I cannot take the property of
Brahmins.”
The crowd buzzed with excitement at Yudhiñöhira’s announcement. Everyone
applauded him. Even the gods praised him. Vyäsadeva, pleased, replied, “The
earth is now mine. O King, I now give it back to you. What need does an
ascetic have for this world? How can Brahmins rule the world? Take it back
and rule over it as enjoined by scripture.”
Hearing Kåñëa confirming Vyäsadeva’s words, Yudhiñöhira replied, “Let it be
so.” He then arranged for all the golden sacrificial utensils to be distributed
among the Brahmins, along with heaps of gems and millions of milking cows.
The frugal Brahmins accepted only enough for their survival. Large amounts of
wealth were left, which Yudhiñöhira then distributed to the kñatriyas, vaiçyäs
and çüdras. No one attending the sacrifice left without a valuable gift, and
everyone went home praising Yudhiñöhira.
Kåñëa and His followers stayed for a few days after the sacrifice, enjoying the
Päëòavas’ company. Then, after being worshipped by Yudhiñöhira, they
returned to Dwärakä. Yudhiñöhira now felt free of sin. Having made
arrangements for the world to be properly governed by pious kings, he
continued to live happily with his brothers in Hastinäpura.
***
The years passed quickly for the Päëòavas after the sacrifice. Although they
thought constantly of Gändhäré’s curse, dreading the day that Kåñëa would
leave the world, they treated her and her old husband with the highest respect.
Dhåtaräñöra felt as if he was lord of the earth. Hundreds of servants waited
upon him and provided him with anything he desired. All the kings who came
to Hastinäpura with tribute for Yudhiñöhira were asked to offer their respects
and worship to Dhåtaräñöra. The blind monarch, receiving treatment like Indra
in heaven, forgot his grief and was happy. Gändhäré was also attended and
served with respect by Kunté and Draupadé, as well as Ulüpé, Citräìgadä, and
871

the other Päëòava ladies.
With the exception of Bhéma, Yudhiñöhira and his brothers acted toward
Dhåtaräñöra like disciples toward their guru. Seeing their humility and
obedience to his commands, Dhåtaräñöra regarded the brothers like his own
sons. He felt only shame when he remembered Duryodhana, who had
destroyed their family and had never been so respectful toward him as were
Päëòu’s sons .
But Bhéma could not forget the ills the Päëòavas had experienced at the
Kauravas’ hands. Unable to forgive the blind king, he reluctantly offered him
respect, but inwardly seethed at seeing the royal treatment accorded him by
Yudhiñöhira. Dhåtaräñöra also could not feel much love for Bhéma, who had
killed his sons. He tried to offer the Päëòava his blessings, but his mind was
still filled with malice toward him.
Through his own servants, Bhéma arranged for many deeds that were
disagreeable to Dhåtaräñöra. He caused the commands of the old Kuru chief to
be disobeyed and looked for opportunities to give him pain. Out of anger he
would stand within Dhåtaräñöra’s hearing and utter hurtful words. Slapping his
arms, he would say, “With these two mace-like arms I have crushed all the
blind king’s sons. Due to coming within the reach of these arms, the wicked
Kauravas have all been dispatched to Death’s abode.” Or he would speak other
words offensive to Dhåtaräñöra.
Although hurt by Bhéma’s words, Dhåtaräñöra said nothing about the situation
to Yudhiñöhira. He felt too indebted to the Päëòava king to disturb him in any
way. Gändhäré also tolerated Bhéma’s painful utterances, considering them the
inevitable reactions to her and her husband’s past actions.
Thirty-five years went by with Yudhiñöhira ruling the world. The Päëòavas
thought always of Kåñëa and became increasingly concerned as the day
approached when Gändhäré’s curse would take effect. Seeing Parékñit grown
into a powerful prince, exhibiting all virtuous qualities, they began to think of
retiring. They knew that although death in battle was the best way for a
kñatriya to give up the body, death in the forest while practicing asceticism was
an honorable second best. Pious kings always spent their last years in the forest
seeking spiritual perfection.
One day, the Päëòavas heard that Vidura had returned to Hastinäpura. The
Kuru minister had been gone for many years on pilgrimage, practicing
austerities. Although the Päëòavas occasionally received word of him, they
872

had not seen him since he had left. They often remembered their uncle with
affection. When he returned, they ran toward him, overwhelmed with
happiness and love. One by one the five brothers fell at his feet and clasped
them.
Vidura was met by Dhåtaräñöra, Kåpa, Saïjaya, Gändhäré, Kunté, Draupadé, and
all the other palace residents. Vidura appeared emaciated by his long practice
of asceticism, but he shone with spiritual energy. He had spent much time in
the company of Brahmins, hearing extensive spiritual instructions from the
powerful Maitreya Åñi. Desiring to see Dhåtaräñöra and the Päëòavas before
the end of his life, he had come for a final visit to Hastinäpura.
Yudhiñöhira and his brothers worshipped him with offerings of arghya and
other auspicious items. After feeding him sumptuously, they had him seated in
the royal assembly hall, where he would always sit when he had acted as
Dhåtaräñöra’s prime minister.
Recalling the many times that Vidura had helped them when they were young
and suffering from Duryodhana’s antagonism, Yudhiñöhira sat at his feet and
said, “My Uncle, do you remember how you always protected us, along with our
mother, from calamity? Your partiality, like the wings of a bird covering her
fledglings, saved us from destruction. While traveling across the earth, how did
you maintain yourself? At which holy places did you render service?”
By his own developed spiritual power, Yudhiñöhira could understand that his
uncle had achieved a high level of spiritual realization. Like himself, Vidura
had always taken pleasure in hearing from åñis and practicing asceticism. He
had not been sorry to leave the city, but had accepted it as a providential
arrangement for him to perfect his life.
Seeing that the old Kuru minister had achieved that perfection, Yudhiñöhira
said with folded palms, “My lord, saints like your good self are holy places
personified. Because you carry the Personality of Godhead within your heart,
you turn every place into a place of pilgrimage.”
Yudhiñöhira asked Vidura what he had seen on his long pilgrimage, and Vidura
gradually described everything. Having become self-realized, he was
experiencing the highest transcendental happiness and was ready to give up his
material body and assume his eternal spiritual identity. Out of compassion for
his brother Dhåtaräñöra, however, whom he could understand was still
materially attached, he decided to remain for some time in the city first.
Realizing that the blind king was fast approaching the end of his life while still
873

living in spiritual ignorance, Vidura wanted to instruct him one last time in
order to break his attachments to sense pleasure.
A few days later, Vidura found an opportunity to speak with Dhåtaräñöra. In
the presence of all the Päëòavas and their wives, he addressed him with strong
words. “My dear king, you should get out of here immediately. Do not delay.
Just see how fear has overtaken you.”
Vidura sarcastically addressed Dhåtaräñöra as king. Since arriving back in
Hastinäpura, he had understood the situation. He saw how Dhåtaräñöra was
enjoying the respect and honor Yudhiñöhira offered him, and considered
himself king. Now, as he faced the last years of his life, he was becoming afraid.
Death would take from him all his power, and where would he go? So many
sins had been perpetrated under his rule. Vidura was frank. “This frightful
situation cannot be remedied by any person in this material world. My lord, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in his form as eternal time has approached us.
Whoever is under the influence of supreme time must surrender his dear life,
what to speak of his wealth, honor, children, land and home. Your father,
brother, well-wishers and sons are all dead. You have expended the major
portion of your life. You are invalid and you are living in another’s home.
Decrepitude is fast overpowering you, yet still you try to enjoy life, living at
Bhéma’s expense.”
Vidura had seen the tension between Dhåtaräñöra and Bhéma. He mentioned it
to provide the necessary impetus for Dhåtaräñöra to renounce his position and
to practice asceticism.
Trying to invoke Dhåtaräñöra’s shame and also his self-respect, Vidura
continued, “Your life is little better than that of a household dog. What need is
there to live such a life, subsisting as you do on the charity of those you tried to
kill by arson and poisoning? You insulted their wife and usurped their kingdom
and wealth. Now you are dependent on them. O Bharata leader, despite your
unwillingness to die and your desire to live even at the cost of your honor, your
miserly body will certainly deteriorate like an old garment. Nothing in this
world is permanent.”
The Päëòavas listened in silence. Vidura was as sharp as ever. Yudhiñöhira
reflected on his profound counsel. If only Dhåtaräñöra had been wise enough to
take it years ago, how different things might have been. Surely now, though,
Dhåtaräñöra would heed his brother’s words. He had absolutely nothing left for
which to live.
874

“That man is called undisturbed who goes to an unknown, remote place and,
freed from all ties, quits his material body when it has become useless. He is
certainly a first-class man who awakens and understands, either by himself or
from others, the falsity and misery of the material world and thus leaves home,
depending fully on the Personality of Godhead residing in his heart. Please,
therefore, leave for the northern hills immediately. Soon the iron age of Kali
will set in, and the atmosphere will be opposed to the practice of spiritual life.”
Vidura’s words cut into Dhåtaräñöra. The old king silently digested his
instructions. As always, his intelligent minister spoke the truth. What was the
point of continuing his useless and broken life? Certainly no auspicious
destinations were achieved by the man who attempted to enjoy his senses until
the last minute of his life. As Vidura correctly pointed out, where was his
shame? How had he continued to live in the Päëòavas’ house after everything
he had done to them? And the unforgiving Bhéma took every opportunity to
remind him of that.
Dhåtaräñöra felt his attachment and fear give way to detachment. He made up
his mind to leave for the forest. Knowing that Yudhiñöhira would not easily
accede to him going alone as an ascetic into the wild, he did not reply to
Vidura. His departure would have to be secret. He folded his palms and bowed
his head to his brother, calling for his servants to take him to his chamber.
Vidura followed his brother, leading Gändhäré back to the chamber. He spoke
alone with them and arranged a day when they would leave for the forest
together. Vidura too desired to end his days while practicing asceticism.
Wanting to avoid scenes of grief and difficult farewells, they decided to leave
secretly on the next full moon night.
***
In his assembly hall, Yudhiñöhira thought of Vidura. It had been months since
Vidura had delivered his instructions to Dhåtaräñöra, and neither of them had
been seen since. Dhåtaräñöra had left instructions that he did not want to be
disturbed, being attended only by Saïjaya and one or two other intimate
servants. Yudhiñöhira guessed that he had wanted to be alone with Vidura and
receive further instructions. Perhaps he would think of retiring to the forest.
But today was the annual çraddhä ceremony in honor of his sons. He would
surely wish to be present.
Yudhiñöhira decided to go and see him. Accompanied by his brothers, he made
875

his way to Dhåtaräñöra’s quarters in the palace gardens. The fragrance of exotic
blossoms carried on the warm breeze as he walked through the manicured
lawns and flower beds. Varieties of birds filled the air with delightful sounds,
and beautiful maidservants sat in groups around lotus-filled ponds.
The brothers entered Dhåtaräñöra’s chamber and found Saïjaya sitting alone.
Seeing his despondent expression, Yudhiñöhira felt anxious. Yudhiñöhira could
understand that Dhåtaräñöra had left. “O Saïjaya, where is our old uncle?
Where is my well-wisher, Uncle Vidura, and my mother Gändhäré, who is
afflicted still due to her sons’ demise? My uncle Dhåtaräñöra was also mortified
due to the death of his sons and grandsons. That great man took care of us
when we were rendered fatherless as children. Undoubtedly, I am ungrateful,
for I repaid him by killing his sons. Has he taken my offenses seriously and,
along with his wife, finally drowned himself in the Ganges?”
That Dhåtaräñöra had gone without telling him filled him with sorrow. Out of
humility the Päëòava king considered that it could only be due to his own
offenses. With tears welling up in his eyes, he looked at Saïjaya, who covered
his face with his hands and said nothing. The old charioteer was grief-stricken
and unable to speak. His master had left without saying anything even to him.
Saïjaya gradually pacified his mind with his own intelligence and wiped away
his tears. Looking up at Yudhiñöhira he said, “My dear descendent of the Kuru
dynasty, I have no information about your two uncles and Gändhäré. O King, I
have been cheated by those great souls. Although I remained Dhåtaräñöra’s
obedient and most confidential servant, he has gone without telling me
anything.”
Yudhiñöhira looked at Dhåtaräñöra’s altar, where he had sat each night with
Gändhäré, making offerings to the deities. The sacrificial fire had gone out and
the deities had been removed. Controlling his sorrow, Yudhiñöhira moved
closer to the distraught Saïjaya and gently consoled him.
At that moment, Närada Åñi suddenly appeared before them. Yudhiñöhira and
his brothers, along with Saïjaya, offered their obeisances at his feet.
Obviously, he had come with a message. After offering him a seat, Yudhiñöhira
said, “O godly personality, I do not know where my two uncles have gone. Nor
can I find my ascetic aunt who is grief-stricken by the loss of her sons. Without
doubt, you know everything, including even the Lord’s plan. Please soothe our
sorrow with your profound words.”
Närada replied, “O pious king, do not lament for anyone, for everyone is under
876

the Supreme Lord’s control. Therefore, all living beings should worship only
Him to be well-protected. As a bull, bound through its nose, is held fast, so all
men are bound by God’s laws. Even as a player sets up and disperses his
playthings according to his own will, so the supreme will of the Lord brings
men together and disperses them. O King, in all circumstances, whether you
consider the soul to be an eternal principle or not, or everything to exist in
some impersonal absolute, or to be an inexplicable combination of matter and
spirit, feelings of separation are due only to illusory affection and nothing
more.”
Närada looked compassionately at the Päëòavas. Knowing them to be
important instruments in the Lord’s arrangements, he had often come to them
with his instructions. The brothers listened in respect as he reassured them
with eternal truths from the Vedas. He told them to give up their anxiety for
Dhåtaräñöra, which was based on ignorance. They could do nothing for the
blind king now. Every living being was moved by the force of God and should
therefore depend on Him alone. Ultimately, no man could protect or shelter
another unless it was also the Lord’s desire. Even the man who wanted to give
shelter to another was himself in need of protection, being held in the jaws of
inevitable death. Thus all intelligent men should worship the Lord as their
only assurance of safety.
Närada continued, “The Supreme Person, Kåñëa, in the guise of all-devouring
time, has now descended on earth to eliminate the atheistic demons from the
world. His work is almost complete and He will soon depart. You Päëòavas may
wait here simply as long as the Lord remains on earth.”
Närada then informed the Päëòavas that Dhåtaräñöra, accompanied by his wife
and Vidura, had gone to the southern side of the Himälayas to a mountain
where there were many ashrams. He had engaged in mystic yoga, bringing his
mind and senses under control. Soon he would attain samädhi and leave his
material body, burning it to ashes by invoking the fire element from within
himself. Gändhäré would enter the fire and follow him to his next destination.
Then Vidura, seized both by delight and grief at his brother’s departure, would
himself leave that place to end his own days.
Närada stopped speaking and indicated that he was ready to leave. After being
worshipped by the Päëòavas, he rose into the sky and vanished. Yudhiñöhira
thought about what he had said. It was glorious that Dhåtaräñöra had accepted
such an end to his life. There was no point in lamenting, nor was there any
877

need to fear that he might have taken offense. The old king had given up
material affinities. He would no longer be thinking of material relationships
and the politics associated with them. As Närada had made clear, Dhåtaräñöra
was meditating on his pure spiritual identity, free of mundane attachments.
As the Päëòavas made their way back to their palace, they met Vyäsadeva. He
told them that Kunté had also gone with Dhåtaräñöra. The brothers were moved
by grief to hear the news, but it was not a surprise. For a long time their mother
had withdrawn herself from the world. Since she had prayed to Kåñëa that day
He had left for Dwärakä, she had been spending her days in meditation and
prayer. She had eaten frugally, finally coming to the point where she took her
food once every thirty days. Now she was gone. Thinking again of Närada’s
instructions, and of all the wisdom they had heard from the other åñis, they
controlled their minds. Their mother had acted rightly. It was always the
accepted custom to leave for the forest without announcement. After all, death
never made announcements when it arrived.

Chapter 35
The Päëòavas Retire
As the thirty-sixth year of Yudhiñöhira’s rule approached, Arjuna visited
Dwärakä. He knew Kåñëa’s departure was close at hand, and he wanted to see
Him one last time. His brothers were hoping that he might persuade Kåñëa to
make a final visit to Hastinäpura. Maybe Kåñëa could even be convinced to
counter Gändhäré’s curse and remain on earth. Surely that was within His
power.
Arjuna had been gone for a few months and Yudhiñöhira began to observe
inauspicious omens. The seasons appeared out of order, and men were
abandoning their prescribed duties. There were constant disputes arising
between the citizens, and people were cheating each other everywhere. Seeing
that the people were overwhelmed by pride, anger and greed, Yudhiñöhira
spoke to Bhéma.
“My dear brother, it is now some time since Arjuna left for Dwärakä. I see
many portents which indicate that a great calamity has occurred. Has the time
878

for Kåñëa’s departure arrived, as the godly Åñi Närada indicated? What else
could account for the many signs of irreligion which we now see? All our good
fortune and everything auspicious has come only from Kåñëa. In His absence,
everything will be lost.”
Yudhiñöhira pointed out to Bhéma the various omens he had witnessed: the
jackals that howled at the rising sun, the dogs that barked fearlessly at him, his
horses that appeared to weep. He could hear the shrieks of crows and owls at
all times, and thunder constantly filled the sky. The earth seemed to tremble
and the wind blew violently, carrying clouds of dust. Deities in the temple
seemed to cry and perspire. It appeared as if they were about to leave.
Yudhiñöhira concluded, “I think that all these disturbances indicate a great loss
to the earth’s good fortune. The world was fortunate to have been marked with
the Lord’s footprints. These signs indicate that this will no longer be.”
Even as Yudhiñöhira spoke, a messenger came to inform him that Arjuna had
returned. Yudhiñöhira had him enter at once and Arjuna was soon bowing at
his feet and embracing him. Yudhiñöhira saw that he was dejected. Tears
flowed from his eyes and his face was pale. He could barely look at his brother.
Feeling even more disquieted, Yudhiñöhira said, “My dear brother, please tell
me whether our friends and relatives in Dwärakä are all passing their days in
happiness. Is my respectable grandfather, Surasena, happy? Are my maternal
uncle Vasudeva and his younger brothers doing well? Are Ugrasena and his
younger brother still living? How are Hridika and his son, Kåtavarmä? Are
Akrüra, Jayanta, Gada, Säraëa and Satrajit all happy? How is Balaräma, the
Personality of Godhead and the protector of all devotees?”
Yudhiñöhira went on naming their friends in Dwärakä and asking after their
welfare. The Päëòavas had often visited Dwärakä and spent happy days there.
After listing the chief residents of Kåñëa’s city, Yudhiñöhira finally asked about
Kåñëa. “Is Lord Kåñëa, the original Supreme Person, who is always affectionate
toward His devotees, enjoying the pious assembly at Dwärakä surrounded by
His friends? That all-powerful person, along with Balaräma, who is the
primeval Lord Ananta, is staying in the ocean of the Yadu dynasty for the
welfare, protection and general progress of the entire universe. The members
of the Yadu dynasty, being protected by the Lord’s arms, enjoy life like the
residents of the eternal spiritual world. Under Kåñëa’s protection, they live
without fear, surpassing even the gods in their power and opulence.”
Looking at Arjuna’s downcast face, Yudhiñöhira asked if he was well. Although
879

the Päëòava king suspected that Kåñëa and His family had departed, he
continued to inquire from Arjuna, hoping that there was some other reason for
his brother’s moroseness.
“My brother Arjuna, please tell me whether your health is all right. You appear
to have lost your luster. Is this due to others disrespecting and neglecting you
because of your long stay at Dwärakä? Has someone addressed you with
unfriendly words or threatened you? Could you not give charity to one who
asked, or could you not keep your promise to someone? Could you, a great
protector of the people, not give protection to some helpless persons when they
approached you for shelter? Have you contacted a woman of questionable
character, or have you not properly treated a deserving woman? Have you been
defeated on the way by someone who is inferior or equal to you? Have you
committed an unpardonable or abominable mistake?” Yudhiñöhira paused, not
wanting to express his greatest fear. Bhéma and the twins shed tears as they too
guessed the truth. After a moment of silence, Yudhiñöhira concluded, “Or, my
dear brother, are you now feeling empty for all time because you have lost your
most intimate friend, Lord Kåñëa? O my brother Arjuna, I can think of no
other reason for your becoming so sorrowful.”
Arjuna could not reply. His mouth was dry and his limbs trembled. He buried
his face in his hands and wept. At last he managed to check his tears and said,
“O King, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, who treated me like an
intimate friend, has left me alone. Thus my incomparable power, which
astonished even the demigods, is gone. I have just lost Him whose separation
for a moment would render all the universes inauspicious and void, like bodies
without life. Only by His merciful strength was I able to vanquish the lusty
princes assembled at king Drupada’s svayaàvara.”
Arjuna then described the many incidents where he had been able to achieve
incredible feats of prowess due to Kåñëa’s grace. Recounting the numerous
occasions when the Päëòavas had escaped from precarious and dangerous
situations, Arjuna continued in a doleful voice. “The military strength of the
Kauravas was like an ocean in which there dwelt many fearsome aquatics. It
was insurmountable, but because of Kåñëa’s friendship, I was able to cross it.
Great generals like Bhéñma, Droëa, Karëa and others all directed their
invincible weapons against me. Yet by the Lord’s grace they could hardly touch
a hair on my head. Surely it was only due to my lack of esteem for Him that I
dared engage Him as my chariot driver, for He is worshipped and offered
880

services by the best of men who desire to attain salvation.
“O King, His joking and frank talks were pleasing and beautifully decorated
with smiles. His affectionate addresses unto me as ‘O Pärtha, O friend, O son
of the Kuru dynasty’ and all such intimacies I now remember, and thus I am
overwhelmed. We used to sleep, sit and loiter together. When we boasted about
our chivalry, if He exaggerated, I would reproach Him by saying, ‘My friend,
You are very truthful.’ Even in those hours when His value was minimized, He
would tolerate my utterings, excusing me exactly as a friend excuses his friend
or a father excuses his son.”
Arjuna broke off, unable to continue. His brothers all sat stupefied, also saying
nothing. The unthinkable had finally happened and Kåñëa had left. They
listened as Arjuna, regaining his composure, went on to describe how, in
Kåñëa’s absence, he had been overpowered by a group of cowherds when he was
trying to protect Kåñëa’s wives.
Arjuna looked at his two hands. “Where has my wondrous power gone? I have
the same Gäëòéva, the same arrows, the same chariot drawn by the same
horses, and I use them as the same Arjuna to whom all kings offer their
respects. But in Kåñëa’s absence, all of them have at once become useless.”
Yudhiñöhira embraced his distraught brother. He sat him on a throne and had
servants fan him. After Arjuna had sipped a little water, he told his brothers
what had transpired in Dwärakä. “O King, since you have asked me about our
friends and relatives in that holy city, I will inform you that all of them were
afflicted by the Brahmins’ curse. As a result, they became intoxicated with
wine and fought among themselves with sticks, not even recognizing one
another. Now they are all dead.”
Arjuna related the details of the terrible event. He explained how years ago a
number of boys in Dwärakä had played a joke on some powerful åñis, headed by
Närada, when the sages were visiting the city. The boys had dressed up Kåñëa’s
son Sämba as a woman and placed an iron ball under his clothes, making him
appear pregnant. They had then asked the sages, “Will this lady give birth to a
girl or a boy?” The åñis, angered by the boys’ insolence, answered, “This one will
give birth to an iron ball which will destroy your dynasty. Only Kåñëa and
Balaräma will survive.”
When the Yadu king, Ugrasena, heard about the curse, he had the iron ball
ground into a powder and thrown into the ocean. Later, the Yadus observed
fearful omens in Dwärakä. They saw the embodied form of Time, black and
881

terrible, moving about the city. The powerful Yadu and Vrishni bowmen shot
hundreds of thousands of arrows at him, but none could strike him. Day by day,
stronger and stronger winds blew, and the streets swarmed with rats and mice.
Earthen pots cracked with no visible cause, wells spewed out their water, and
the bodies of men trembled. All sorts of inauspicious creatures––crows, owls
and jackals––filled the air with their cries. Asses were born of cows and mules
from elephants. Clean, well-cooked food, when served, was covered with
worms. The heavy tread of running men was constantly heard, but no one
could be observed running. The citizens committed sinful acts without shame.
They disregarded the Brahmins, forgot to worship the temple deities, and
insulted their elders and preceptors. Only Kåñëa and Balaräma did not behave
in these ways. When They observed the fearful portents and heard how the
citizens were having frightening dreams, They called an assembly.
With everyone present, Kåñëa said, “O leaders of the Yadu dynasty, please note
these terrible omens that have appeared in Dwärakä, just like flags of Death.
We should not remain here any longer. The women, children, and old men
should leave the city and go to Sankhoddara. We ourselves will go to the holy
Prabhäsa, where the river Sarasvaté flows toward the west. There we should
bathe for purification, fast and fix our minds in meditation. Let us then
worship the gods and present them with rich offerings. Then we should
worship the Brahmins and offer them charity. In this way, we may be able to
counteract what these signs portend.”
The assembly signaled their agreement and arrangements were made. The
Yädava warriors mounted their chariots and set out for Prabhäsa, on the
seacoast. The women traveled in their midst. When the procession reached
Sankhoddara, halfway between Dwärakä and Prabhäsa, the women remained
while the men continued.
With a loud blast of conchshells and the blare of thousands of trumpets the
Yädavas arrived at Prabhäsa. They took up their residence in palaces and
mansions and performed sacrifices to worship the gods. At the end of the
second day, influenced by destiny, they drank large quantities of maireya wine,
which had been prepared for the sacrifices. Intoxicated, they began to joke.
Sätyaki then insulted Kåtavarmä, whom he had never forgiven for helping
Açvatthämä kill the sleeping Päëòava troops. In a mocking voice he said,
“What kñatriya possessed of prowess would kill men embraced by sleep? Were
they not already dead? O son of Hridika, your action cannot be tolerated.”
882

Kåtavarmä’s anger blazed. Pointing at Sätyaki with his left hand as a way to
disregard him, he thundered, “Professing yourself a hero, how could you cruelly
kill the armless Bhurisrava even as he sat in meditation with his weapons cast
aside?”
Kåñëa threw an angry glance at Kåtavarmä. Sätyaki leapt to his feet. Pulling
out his sword he bellowed, “I swear by truth that I will send Kåtavarmä along
the path taken by Dåñöadyumna and Çikhaëòé. His life and fame have come to
an end.”
Sätyaki ran at Kåtavarmä, whose reflexes had been dulled by the wine, and
with a sweep of his sword beheaded him. Kåtavarmä’s friends then attacked
Sätyaki and assailed him with iron cooking pots. Pradyumna came to his aid,
and the two men stood back to back as a large number of warriors closed on
them. Although they put up a brave fight, they were soon overwhelmed and
slain.
When He saw His son Pradyumna killed, Kåñëa became angry. He took up a
handful of reeds that were growing nearby. The reeds had grown from the iron
powder that had been cast into the ocean on Ugrasena’s order. They were like
iron rods and Kåñëa wielded them like deadly weapons. He quickly slew all the
men who had killed His son.
Other Yädavas and Vrishnis took up their weapons and entered the fray. Soon
a violent battle was raging. When their weapons had been smashed, they too
took up the reeds. Bewildered by wine and influenced by Gändhäré’s and the
åñis’ curses, they killed one another without compunction. Father killed son,
son slew father, and brother killed brother. Like insects flying into a fire, they
destroyed one another. In less than an hour, millions of men were dead. Only
Kåñëa and Balaräma survived, along with Däruka, who carried the news back
to Dwärakä.
Arjuna paused in his narration. His mind was confounded as he recounted the
story. He knew that it had been Kåñëa’s desire. The Lord had wanted His own
family and followers to leave the world. With the onset of the Kali age, they
might create a greater disturbance than the atheistic demons. After all, they
were far more powerful than the demons. No one could have checked them.
Only if they slew one another could they be killed.
Taking a deep breath, Arjuna continued. He described how Kåñëa Himself had
departed. When all the Yädavas and other warriors died, Kåñëa had watched
Balaräma sit down in meditation on the seashore. As Balaräma became
883

absorbed in trance, the many-hooded divine serpent Ananta-sesha had come
out of His mouth. Worshipped by Varuëa and other gods, the serpent went
toward the ocean and vanished.
Seeing Balaräma depart, Kåñëa entered a nearby forest. He sat beneath a
pippala tree in meditation. As He did so, the principal gods all approached Him
invisibly. They all desired to see His last pastime on earth. Not far from where
Kåñëa sat there was a hunter. The man had caught a large fish and found in its
belly a lump of iron, the last remnant of the iron ball thrown into the sea.
With that lump he had fashioned an arrowhead. While hunting with the
arrow, he came across Kåñëa. By Kåñëa’s own illusory energy, he mistook
Kåñëa’s foot to be an animal, seeing it from a distance through the bushes. He
released the arrow and struck Kåñëa’s foot, whereupon the Lord departed from
the world, worshipped by the gods with Brahmä at their head.
Arjuna then told how Däruka had returned to Dwärakä. He had been told that
he would find Arjuna there and that he should ask him to take the women to
Indraprastha. When Däruka reached the city, he went to Kåñëa’s father
Vasudeva and told him the heartbreaking news. Along with Devaké, Vasudeva
fell to the ground in a faint. Tormented by separation from Kåñëa, they both
gave up their lives.
Arjuna, who had only recently arrived in Dwärakä, was himself overpowered
by sorrow when he heard what had happened, but he tried to follow Kåñëa’s
directions. He had first arranged for Vasudeva and Devaké’s funeral
ceremonies, however. When the funeral pyre was ablaze, Vasudeva’s other
wives entered the fire, rapt in thought of Kåñëa.
Arjuna then traveled to Prabhäsa in order to perform the last rites for all the
slain warriors. Millions of men had died, and it took weeks for Arjuna to
arrange for funeral ceremonies for those who had no male members left in the
family. The womenfolk were brought from Sankhoddhara, and as the
cremations took place many widows entered the fire embracing their lords,
thus attaining the same destinations reached by those men.
Finding Kåñëa and Balaräma’s bodies, Arjuna marveled at the sight. Their
bodies still shone with the same brilliant effulgence as They had in life. Arjuna
could understand that it was not possible for Them to die. Their apparent
death was simply a display of Kåñëa’s illusory energy. Both Kåñëa and Balaräma
were manifestations of the original, transcendent Supreme. Arjuna concluded
that the material bodies They left behind were simply meant to bewilder the
884

faithless. The Lord was merciful even to those who desired to be atheists.
Stupefied by grief and moving like a wooden doll, Arjuna arranged for expert
priests to cremate the bodies of the two Lords. Rukméëé and Kåñëa’s other
principal queens ascended the funeral pyre and gave up their lives.
When all the funeral ceremonies were completed, Arjuna returned to
Dwärakä. He arranged for the remaining women and children, and the
Brahmins, vaiçyäs, and çüdras, to be taken in chariots to Indraprastha. Kåñëa
had told Däruka that the city would soon be inundated by the sea, and Arjuna
was concerned to get everyone out first. They made a sorry procession, wailing
and calling out Kåñëa’s names as they left Dwärakä. Even while they were
leaving the city, the ocean began to flood the land. Looking behind them they
saw waves crashing into the great island fortress and swirling through its
streets and houses.
The procession, bereft of heroes, proceeded by slow marches toward
Indraprastha. After some days, they reached the Panchajala province. Arjuna
decided to camp there for a while. The region was infested with robbers, and
when they saw the thousands of richly adorned ladies from Dwärakä, they
decided to attack the camp. Coming together in a force, the robbers, dressed as
cowherds, rushed at the camp with loud cries. Armed with clubs and bows, they
fell upon the ladies and led them away, looting as they went.
Arjuna mounted his chariot and rode toward them, calling out, “O sinful
wretches, stop at once. Flee from here now if you have any love of life. Wait
only a moment and I will cut your bodies to pieces.”
Urged by destiny, the robbers disregarded Arjuna and carried on with their
plundering. Arjuna raised his Gäëòéva but, to his amazement, he found himself
barely able to string it. His strength seemed to have disappeared. With great
difficulty he drew back the bow and fired his arrows, but they fell short of their
targets. The Päëòava then tried to invoke the celestial weapons, but they
would not appear. In frustration and anger he ran after the robbers and struck
them with his bow, but despite his efforts, he was unable to prevent them from
taking away many of the Yadu ladies.
Sighing with sorrow, Arjuna could understand that it was somehow the Lord’s
arrangement. Now that Kåñëa had departed, his great power had vanished. In a
state of complete dejection, he resumed the march toward Indraprastha. When
they arrived at the city, Arjuna installed Vajra, the son of Kåñëa’s son
Aniruddha, as king. Still only a boy, the prince had not gone to Prabhäsa with
885

the older kñatriyas. He was filled with grief for the death of all his relatives, but
counseled by learned Brahmins, he began to rule over the city.
Once he had ensured that everything was in order, Arjuna decided to return to
Hastinäpura to see Yudhiñöhira. As he was about to leave, he heard that
Vyäsadeva was present in a hermitage near the city and went to visit him.
Falling at his feet, Arjuna shed tears, unable to speak.
As Arjuna lay there almost devoid of life, Vyäsadeva said, “O child, what is the
cause of this sorrow? Have you accidentally slain a Brahmin or been defeated
in battle? Did you know an untouchable woman or have you fallen in some
other way from religious practices? I do not think any of this possible. You
should tell me what ails you, O son of Påthä, if you feel able.”
Regaining his composure, Arjuna knelt before the åñi. In agony he said, “O
great sage, He whose complexion resembled a dark cloud, whose eyes were like
a pair of lotus petals, has, together with the lordly Räma, left this world. At
Prabhäsa, through iron bolts created by the Brahmins’ curse, all the Vrishni
heroes have been slain. Not a single one escaped. Those mighty men killed one
another in a fit of anger.”
Arjuna broke down and wept as he thought of Kåñëa and His many friends.
The slaughter at Prabhäsa reminded him of the awful night at Kurukñetra
when Açvatthämä had slain the sleeping Päëòavas. Arjuna had lost so many of
his family members and friends at that time, and now the remainder of his
friends were gone. There was nothing left for which to live.
“O Brahmin, just see the perverse course of time. Thinking of this tragedy I
cannot find peace of mind. Kåñëa’s death is as incredible as the drying up of
the ocean, the falling down of heaven, or the splitting of Mount Himavat.
Without Him I cannot maintain my life. And there is yet another calamity
which rends my heart.”
Arjuna related how he had been unable to protect the Yadu ladies from the
robbers. “Right before my eyes, thousands of women were carried away by
robbers from the Abhiras tribe. I could do nothing. Alas, this is surely due to
Kåñëa’s absence. How can I drag on my useless existence without Him? He who
used to drive my chariot, that divine one gifted with splendor and unfading
power, that unlimited Govinda—I will no longer see Him. I am filled with
despair and my head swims. I dare not live without the heroic Janärdana. As
soon as I heard He had gone, my eyes dimmed and I could no longer see
anything. O best of men, please tell me what is best for me now, a wanderer
886

with an empty heart, bereft of my kinsmen and friends.”
Vyäsadeva replied, “Do not grieve. Everything has been ordained by the Lord.
Kåñëa allowed it to happen, although He was capable of preventing it. Indeed,
Govinda could alter the course of the universe—what then of a curse? He who
sat upon your chariot and guided you through every calamity was the allpowerful Supreme Himself. Having lightened the earth’s burden, He has now
ended His human-like pastimes. Through you and your brothers He has
achieved the work of the gods. You are crowned with success, for you have
pleased the immortal and inconceivable Keçava. Surely now you should think
of your own departure. When the hour of adversity arrives, everything is lost.
Thus one’s prowess, understanding and vision all disappear. This is due only to
the influence of irresistible time. Do not lament, O hero. The time has come
when you Päëòavas should attain the highest end. This is what I consider most
beneficial.”
Consoled by Vyäsadeva’s words, Arjuna took his permission and left for
Hastinäpura.
***
When Arjuna finished his narration, his four brothers were stunned. They
thought only of Kåñëa. None could contemplate life without Him. Tears ran
down their faces. Distraught, Yudhiñöhira said, “O best of men, we should
understand that time is cooking all creatures in a cauldron. Even the
invincible Vrishnis have been rooted out. Even Kåñëa has left. Now we should
act upon Vyäsadeva’s instructions. There is no point in remaining here.
Indeed, the dark age of Kali is already making its entrance. Just see how the
citizens are becoming sinful, driven by the influence of the age. We should
depart, for the powerful Parékñit, who is ever-protected by the Lord, is qualified
to rule the earth.”
Yudhiñöhira’s brothers agreed. They knew it was time for them to retire.
Parékñit could replace them. Yudhiñöhira conferred with the Brahmins and
decided upon a day when he would leave for the forest. When the citizens
heard of his determination, they cried out in sorrow and tried to dissuade him,
but Yudhiñöhira’s mind would not be changed. On an auspicious day, he
installed Parékñit as king, and Kåpa as his chief counselor.
The five brothers distributed wealth to the Brahmins, performed rituals in
honor of Kåñëa, and gave away heaps of gold and gems in His name. When all
887

the ceremonies were complete, Yudhiñöhira took off his royal garments and
ornaments and dressed in tree bark. His brothers followed his example. The
five of them came out of the royal palace looking like five ascetics. The people
cried in grief and were reminded of the terrible day when the brothers had
been exiled. This time, they would not return.
Ignoring the citizens’ cries, Yudhiñöhira walked toward the northern gate, his
four brothers close behind. Draupadé, seeing her husbands’ resolve, hurried
along behind them. She had never been separated from her husbands, even
when they entered the forest, and she would have died of unbearable grief had
she been left behind. After bidding her last, tearful farewells to Subhadrä and
the other Päëòava ladies, who were all given to the constant practice of
asceticism and prayer, she set her mind upon renunciation. Like her husbands,
her mind was filled with joy as she left the city for the final great journey to
the north.
Accepting simple food and water only once a day, the brothers and Draupadé
walked steadily toward the Himälayas. They spoke with no one and remained
absorbed in thoughts of Kåñëa. After many days traveling, they reached a great
lake at the foot of the mountains. As they approached the lake, they saw ahead
of them Agni’s brilliant form. The deity addressed them in a booming voice. “O
foremost of Kuru’s race, listen to my words. I am the god of fire whom Arjuna
pleased at Khäëòava. At that time I gave him the Gäëòéva. He should now
return it. Let him cast it, along with the two inexhaustible quivers, into these
waters and Varuëa will take it back.”
Arjuna bowed to Agni and took his bow and quivers from his shoulder. He had
not been able to leave them behind, but now, on Agni’s order, he threw them
into the water. Agni then disappeared and the brothers continued their
journey, seeing in the distance the cloud-covered peak of Mount Himavat.
Eventually passing that great mountain, they crossed over a desert and came at
last to Mount Meru where lay the abode of the gods. As they made their way
through the hilly region, they were joined by a dog, who stayed with them day
and night. Soon they reached the foothills of Gandhamädana Mountain,
where they had spent much of their exile. They bowed down and offered
prayers to the sacred mountain, then began their ascent.
The brothers had been walking for months, and their bodies were emaciated.
Weakened and weary, they climbed with difficulty. Suddenly, as they were
ascending a steep mountain pass, Draupadé fell to the ground and gave up her
888

life. Bhéma, who was walking immediately behind Yudhiñöhira, said, “O crusher
of enemies, although she never committed any sinful deeds, the delicate
princess has fallen to the earth. Tell me why she has been obliged to drop down
here.” Without stopping or looking back, Yudhiñöhira replied, “Although
married to all five of us, Päïcälé was always partial to Arjuna. This is why she
has fallen.”
After they climbed a little farther, Sahadeva fell and died. Bhéma again asked
Yudhiñöhira why his virtuous brother had fallen. Yudhiñöhira replied, “Gifted
with knowledge, he always considered himself without compare in wisdom. For
this reason he has fallen.”
Leaving Sahadeva where he lay, the four brothers continued upwards, still
followed by the dog. Soon Nakula, overpowered by sorrow upon seeing
Draupadé and Sahadeva die, himself fell. Once more Bhéma asked Yudhiñöhira
to explain. “Our righteous brother was the most intelligent of men. However,
he felt himself matchless in bodily beauty, and thus he has fallen.”
Arjuna was the next to fall, grief-stricken to see his brothers and Draupadé die.
In sorrow Bhéma asked Yudhiñöhira why the ever-truthful Arjuna had fallen.
“Just before the war, Arjuna had promised to kill all the Kauravas in a single
day. For failing to keep this promise, made out of pride, he has been obliged to
fall to the earth.”
The remaining two brothers and the dog continued their ascent. Before
reaching the summit, Bhéma fell. As he was lying on the ground, about to give
up his life, he asked Yudhiñöhira what had been his fault. Yudhiñöhira replied,
“O Våkodara, you were a great eater and you did not consider others while
eating. Thus have you fallen.”
Fixing his mind in yogic meditation, Yudhiñöhira went on alone. As he
approached the summit he heard a great sound fill the sky. He looked up and
saw Indra’s chariot descending toward him. “Climb onto my car, O Bharata,
and I will take you to heaven.”
Yudhiñöhira bowed to the god. “I have no desire for heaven, O Çakra, nor can I
leave my brothers and chaste wife Draupadé behind. They have all fallen on
this mountain.”
Indra assured him that he would soon see his wife and brothers in their selfsame bodies, but Yudhiñöhira was still unwilling to leave. “See here this dog,”
he said, pointing to the animal that was ever at his heels. “It has taken shelter
of me and cannot be abandoned. O great god, I will only accompany you if you
889

allow it to also come.”
Indra replied that there was no place in heaven for dogs. He told Yudhiñöhira
that there would be no sin in leaving it behind, but the Päëòava would not
agree. “It is my vow that I will never abandon one who is terrified, who seeks
my shelter, who is devoted, who is afflicted or weak, or who begs for life. I
cannot leave this creature here.”
Despite Indra’s entreaties, Yudhiñöhira would not leave the dog. Suddenly,
before Yudhiñöhira’s eyes, the animal transformed into the god of justice,
Dharmaräja. Seeing his father, Yudhiñöhira fell to the ground in obeisance.
Dharmaräja raised him up and said, “O king of kings, there are none on earth
who can display such virtue. Formerly, I examined you at the Dwaitavana, and
again today I have found you to be the greatest exponent of morality. What to
speak of the earth, there is no one in heaven who equals you. Unending
regions of celestial bliss await you, O King. Quickly, mount Indra’s car.”
Yudhiñöhira ascended Indra’s chariot. As it rose swiftly into the sky, he was
surrounded by celestial beings who praised both himself and Indra. He also saw
the godly sage Närada floating in space by his own divine power. The åñi said,
“This royal sage Yudhiñöhira has transcended the achievements of all other
kings in heaven. Covering the worlds with his fame and splendor, he has
attained the highest region in his human body. Who else has ever been known
to achieve such a feat?”
The chariot entered the heavenly planets and, as it descended into a shining
mansion, Yudhiñöhira saw Duryodhana seated on a golden throne. He turned
to Närada in surprise and the åñi said, “This king has reached heaven by virtue
of his kñatriya practices. He fought fearlessly and gave up his body in battle.
Thus he has been promoted to this abode, where he will remain for some time.”
Yudhiñöhira asked where his brothers had gone. He had no wish to remain in
heaven, being not attracted to celestial pleasures. Even on earth he had given
up his material attachments and desires for sensual enjoyment, preferring
instead the transcendental service of the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa. That service
had given him a sublime pleasure thousands of times superior to material
happiness. Yudhiñöhira looked with disdain at the heavenly opulences
Duryodhana was enjoying. His only desire was to remain in Kåñëa’s association
along with his brothers and Draupadé. Like himself, they too were devoted to
the loving service of Kåñëa, and he longed to be with them again. Duryodhana
could keep heaven, Yudhiñöhira thought. Without Kåñëa and His servants, it
890

would be no different than hell.
Indra commanded the celestials to take Yudhiñöhira to his brothers and
Draupadé. They led the Päëòava on a path away from heaven. As they
proceeded, they were suddenly enveloped by darkness. Through the gloom,
Yudhiñöhira could see wastelands covered with rotting corpses. The air was
filled with a fetid smell, and flies, wasps, and gnats flew about. A blazing fire
bounded the region. Yudhiñöhira saw crows and vultures with iron beaks, and
evil spirits with needle-like mouths. He saw a river of boiling water full of
screaming people, and another of feces and mucus. Trees with razor-sharp
leaves lined the path, which was becoming hot as Yudhiñöhira traveled upon it.
Looking around he saw men being tortured.
Astonished by what he was seeing, Yudhiñöhira asked the guides, “What place
is this? Why have you brought me to hell? I wish to see my brothers and
Draupadé.”
The messengers replied, “We have brought you here at Indra’s command, O
Bharata, according to your own desire. If you wish to return, we will leave.”
Yudhiñöhira asked to be returned to Indra, and they turned to head back. Just
as he did so, he heard voices all around him. “O King, do not leave us! By your
presence we are feeling our suffering relieved. Cool breezes blow and our minds
are made peaceful by seeing you.”
Yudhiñöhira called out, “Who are you and why do you stay here?”
“I am Bhéma!” “I am Arjuna!” “I am Nakula!” “I am Sahadeva!” the voices
called back. Yudhiñöhira heard Draupadé’s name, as well as that of
Dåñöadyumna and other virtuous kings and princes who had followed him on
earth. Shocked, he said to his guides, “What perverse destiny is this, that these
virtuous men are in hell? I do not believe my senses. Surely this is a
hallucination. Am I asleep or awake? Have I become insane or am I simply
dreaming? O celestials, hearing the voices of my brothers and friends, I cannot
leave this place. Indeed, they have asked me to stay and give them comfort.
Therefore, go back to your own abode and leave me here.”
The celestials accompanying Yudhiñöhira disappeared, leaving him to his
thoughts. He could not understand why his brothers were in hell. As he stood
in amazement, he suddenly saw Indra and the other principal gods approaching
him. By their bodily radiance the whole region was lit up. All the gruesome
sights of hell disappeared and were replaced by heavenly landscapes.
Yudhiñöhira saw that he was standing in beautiful gardens of celestial flowers
891

and blossoming trees. A cool, gentle breeze was blowing, carrying exquisite
fragrances.
Indra addressed Yudhiñöhira, “O best of men, be peaceful. Neither you nor your
brothers are in hell. Only by an act of deception have you all been shown that
region. Every king and indeed every being living in the world of men will see
hell, for none can perform only good deeds. Those whose piety is great will
receive the fruits of their sins first and then will enjoy great happiness for a
long time. Only a slight stain of sin touched you, O King, when you lied to kill
Droëa. For this you have seen hell, as have your brothers and friends. Now you
may enjoy unending happiness.”
Indra told Yudhiñöhira that by performing the Räjasüya he had earned a place
in heaven equal to that of Hariçcandra, the celebrated king of ancient times
who now shared the same opulence as Indra himself. Placing Yudhiñöhira on
his chariot, Indra took him to his assembly hall. There Yudhiñöhira saw his
brothers, exactly as he had known them, shining with splendor and surrounded
by celestials––the Maruts, Vasus, Ashvins and Rudras. Draupadé was also
there, appearing like the goddess Lakñmé herself.
Yudhiñöhira was shown how all of the warriors who had died at Kurukñetra had
attained the heavens. Karëa was residing in happiness with his father, Sürya.
Even the Kauravas had achieved auspicious lives for their performance of
religious duties.
Leading the Päëòava to a beautiful river of clear, gentle waters, Indra said,
“Here flows the Gaìgä, known in heaven as the Mandäkiné. Bathe in her
waters, O King, and you will acquire a shining celestial form.”
Yudhiñöhira entered the water and emerged with a resplendent god-like form.
All his grief and anxiety vanished. As he came out of the waters he was
honored and worshipped by the Siddhas and Cäraëas. He then saw Kåñëa
seated in Indra’s palace manifesting a four-armed form of astonishing beauty
and splendor. Arjuna was worshipping Him. When Kåñëa saw Yudhiñöhira, He
smiled and lifted a hand to bless him.
Seeing Närada nearby, Yudhiñöhira approached him and asked him how long
he and his brothers would dwell in heaven. The sage replied that by their
meritorious acts the Päëòavas had earned an almost endless stay. “But you
brothers are eternal associates of the all-powerful Lord Kåñëa. Thus wherever
He goes for His pastimes, you will also go. Indeed, for the good of all beings,
Kåñëa is forever appearing in some world to display His human-like activities.
892

Just as you cannot be without Him, so He also desires to always be with you.
Thus your stay in these regions will not be for long. It has only been to show
you the destinations of those whom you knew on earth. Pure souls like you
reside eternally with the Lord. Only by His illusory potency does it sometimes
seem otherwise. Like a magician He creates the material universe, enters it for
some time, then winds it up.”
Närada concluded that the Lord’s only business was to bring all suffering souls
back to their eternal positions as His loving servants. He only seemed to
become involved in the affairs of the world, but in truth He was always aloof.
Under illusion, men become bewildered and indulge in material pleasure,
imagining themselves independent enjoyers. In reality, they were parts of the
Supreme, dependent upon Him for everything. Actual happiness could only be
found when one once again gave up His desires to be independent of God. God
Himself, however, was obviously never influenced by His own illusion. His
appearance in the world was to free people from their misconceptions and
bring them back to Him.
“Those who are too attached to matter cannot understand this knowledge.
They must remain in mortal spheres, sometimes coming to heaven and
sometimes descending to hell. As long as one does not awaken his original,
pure consciousness, realizing his eternal spiritual nature, he is bound in the
cycle of birth and death. You Päëòavas are fixed in service to Kåñëa and are
liberated. In bringing you to the material world, the Lord simply used you as
His instruments. This is understood only by those who are free from illusion.”
Yudhiñöhira felt joy. He gazed at Kåñëa. Surely nothing in heaven could
compare with seeing Him. What then of assisting Him in a capacity as servant,
friend, and even relative? Absorbed in transcendental happiness, Yudhiñöhira
could not take his gaze from Kåñëa. What worlds awaited him now? It did not
matter. As long as Kåñëa was present, he was ready to go anywhere.
END

Appendix 1
Karëa’s Birth

893

Once the great sage Durväsä visited King Kuntébhoja. He stayed for some days
in the king’s palace and was attended by Kunté, then a young girl. Due to her
expert service and humble attitude, the sage became pleased with her. He gave
her a mantra with which she could summon any god and have him do her
bidding.
After the sage had left, Kunté was sitting alone in her room. She gazed out her
window and saw the sun rising. Suddenly, she found herself gifted with
celestial sight. She was able to see the personified form of the sun. Seeing the
effulgent and beautiful deity, her mind became attracted. She began to wonder
about the mantra. Did it actually work? Could she summon the sun-god
himself? The girl recited the mantra as she thought of Sürya. To her
amazement, he appeared before her, filling her room with brilliance. The deity,
who had a complexion like molten gold and was adorned with shining bracelets
and a diadem, smiled at the astonished maiden. “What would you have me do?”
he asked.
Kunté almost cowered before the god. “O lord, go back to the place from where
you came,” she replied in a bashful voice. “It was only childish curiosity that
made me call you. Pray forgive me for my folly.”
“O slender-waisted girl, I will return as you request, but first I must do
something for you. It is not proper that my visit should go in vain. Indeed, the
gods’ acts always bear fruit. You have desired me. I will therefore bestow upon
you a splendid child, furnished with his own armor and celestial earrings to
endow him with full power.”
Kunté’s mouth fell open in horror as the god continued. “O maiden, I will only
leave after having enjoyed you. If you do not comply with my words and gratify
my desire, then I will curse you, your father, and the Brahmin who foolishly
gave you the mantra without knowing your character.”
Sürya told Kunté that all the other gods were laughing at him to see his plight.
The girl had called him with desire in her heart and was now rejecting him. He
would not leave without giving her a son.
Kunté spoke in an imploring voice. “O great lord of rays, please go to your own
abode. Surely such an outrage is not befitting you. I am a maiden and cannot
surrender myself to a man until I am properly married. My father, mother, or
other superiors must first bestow me upon another. I will not abandon virtue.
In this world, keeping her body pure is considered a woman’s highest duty.”
Kunté again explained that it had only been childishness and naivete that had
894

made her use the mantra. She begged the god to forgive her and to leave.
Sürya would not relent. “It is because you are only a girl that I am already so
lenient. Where others might have been punished for insulting me so, I am
instead offering you the boon of a powerful child like myself. If I go without
enjoying you, I will be the object of ridicule among the celestials. Therefore,
surrender yourself to me and receive a son who will be extolled in all the
worlds.”
Afraid to commit sin, Kunté repeatedly tried to sway the god from his purpose,
but to no avail. He remained unmoved. Finally she said, “O lord of the world,
how will I be saved from sin and the world’s censure? How will the reputation
of my house be protected? It seems that my surrendering to you is an act
condemned by scripture. Please instruct me how it may be done without my
losing my chastity. Surely the virtue, reputation and, indeed, the life of all
beings rests in you. Tell me how your proposal may be consistent with virtue.”
Sürya assured her that there would be no sin in her having intercourse with
him. “How could I, who desires the welfare of all beings, cause anyone to
commit a sinful act, which leads only to suffering? Do not fear. Even after
uniting with me, you will remain a virgin. O fair-complexioned girl, you need
have no doubt.”
Assured and seeing that she had no choice, Kunté assented to the god’s request.
He at once entered her by his yogic power and, overwhelmed by his energy, she
fell senseless to her bed. The god then departed. Ten months later, Kunté gave
birth to a son as beautiful as a celestial. No one but one or two of her most
trusted servants knew of her pregnancy and of the birth.
When the child was born, Kunté saw that he was adorned with bright earrings
and a natural coat of mail. His eyes resembled those of a lion and his shoulders,
even as a newborn baby, were broad. Kunté consulted with her nurse as to what
to do with the boy. She was torn. This was her first-born son, the offspring of
the powerful sun-god, but how could she keep him? Although the deity had
assured her that she would remain a virgin, who would believe it? How could it
ever be acceptable for a maiden to have a child? Who would accept her as a
wife if she had already given birth?
Kunté finally concluded that the baby had to be cast away. He was the great
Sürya’s son. Surely Sürya would protect him. Kunté also prayed to Viñëu for the
boy’s welfare. Then, along with her nurse, she took the child in a large wicker
basket to the bank of the Ganges. She sat on the river bank gazing at the baby
895

for some time. Tears fell from her eyes and she cried out in pain as she
contemplated losing the child. Her anguished voice carried across the water.
“O my son, may all the creatures inhabiting the earth, heavens and waters
protect you. May Varuëa, god of the waters, and Pavana, god of the winds,
carry you safely away. May your powerful father, the god of shining rays, watch
over you.”
Kunté beseeched many of the gods to look after her son and prayed that he
would find a good father and mother. “What a dream she has dreamed who will
adopt you as her son,” she cried. “Blessed is that lady who will see you crawl on
the ground, your radiant face covered in dust and your dark and curling locks
strewn about. Fortunate are they who will hear your inarticulate speech and
who will see you grow to manhood, like a lion in the Himälayan forests.”
Having wept long and bitterly, Kunté at last closed the basket and pushed it out
into the flowing river. She watched as it bobbed away on the waters. Then,
supported by her nurse, she made her way back to the palace.
The basket finally came to rest in still waters near the city of Champa. There,
Adhiratha, leader of the suta tribe, had gone to the river with his wife, Rädhä.
The lady saw the basket and had it brought onto the bank. When it was
opened, the couple saw with amazement the effulgent child lying there. Rädhä
at once took the infant onto her lap and asked her husband if she could take
him home. She had been praying to the gods for a son and considered that this
baby must be a gift from them. With her husband’s permission, she brought the
child home and raised him with tenderness as her own son. They named him
Vasusena, but later he became known as Karëa and Radheya.

Appendix 2
Karëa Cursed
When Karëa attained manhood he approached Droëa in order to learn the
secrets of the brahmästra. Droëa replied, however, that the knowledge he
desired should only be given to a qualified Brahmin who had practiced vows, or
to an accomplished kñatriya who had undergone penance. “O Radheya, you are
neither. Indeed, you hail from the suta class of çüdras. I will not instruct you.”
896

Burning with anger, Karëa bowed before Droëa and left for the Mahendra
mountain, where he knew he would find Paraçuräma. When he found the sage,
Karëa bowed at his feet and said, “I am a Brahmin from Bhågu’s race. Kindly
instruct me in weaponry. I desire to know the brahmästra.”
Paraçuräma received him kindly and agreed to teach him. Karëa then lived at
the sage’s äçrama and learned many types of warfare and weaponry from him.
While residing on the heavenly mountain, he became a favorite of the many
Siddhas and Gandharvas who sported there. He would often go about with his
bow and sword, hunting game and the wild beasts.
Once, while hunting, he accidentally slew a Brahmin’s cow. Distraught, he
went at once to the Brahmin and told him what had happened. Dropping to
the ground before the sage, he said in a tearful voice, “O best of men, I have
killed your cow quite against my will and desire. Forgive me! Please allow me to
make some recompense.”
But the Brahmin, seeing his beloved cow lying dead, was filled with anger. His
face turned red and he took hold of his sacred thread, signifying his intention
to curse Karëa. “O wicked one, you deserve death for this crime. You will
suffer the fruit of your foolishness even in this life. When you finally meet in
battle with your mortal enemy, your chariot will be swallowed by the earth. As
you have carelessly cut down my cow, so will your head be cut off by your foe.
Go now, O vile man!”
Karëa tried to appease the Brahmin, but he would not relent. “My words will
not prove false,” he replied. Finally Karëa went away, hanging his head in
sorrow.
Karëa remained in Paraçuräma’s äçrama for some time, pleasing the sage by his
aptitude for learning and by his humble service attitude. Paraçuräma taught
him everything about the Brahmä weapon, as well as other powerful missiles,
such as the mighty Bhärgava astra.
One day, the sage took a walk in the woods, taking Karëa with him. After some
time, he became tired and lay down to rest on a grassy slope, placing his head
on Karëa’s lap. As the åñi slept, a large insect crawled onto Karëa’s leg and
began to burrow into his flesh. Digging deeply, the insect drank Karëa’s blood.
Not wanting to disturb his guru, Karëa did not move. He sat without showing
the least sign of pain.
After some minutes his warm blood ran onto Paraçuräma’s face and awakened
him. When he saw the eight-legged insect on Karëa’s leg, he melted it with his
897

glance. A Räkñasa suddenly rose into the sky and addressed Paraçuräma with
folded palms. “O best of ascetics, you have saved me from a hellish existence.
Formerly I lived in the higher planets, but one day I assaulted Bhågu’s wife,
who cursed me to become an insect. When I begged for mercy, he told me I
would be released from the curse when I came in contact with Räma, the son of
Jamadagni. You have rescued me. Thank you, O sage. I will now depart.”
The Räkñasa vanished, leaving the åñi glaring at Karëa. “O wretch!” he
exclaimed. “How can you be a Brahmin? No Brahmin could tolerate such pain.
Only a kñatriya has such patience. Tell me the truth––who are you?”
Trembling, Karëa replied, “O lord, I am Karëa and I have been born in the
suta race, a mixture of Brahmins and kñatriyas. Coming to you as my teacher, O
scion of Bhågu’s line, I saw you as my father. Thus did I call myself a member of
Bhågu’s family. Forgive me, for I am your humble servant.”
Paraçuräma smiled through his anger. Looking down at Karëa, who had
prostrated himself on the earth with folded palms, the sage said, “Greedy for
weapons, you have lied to me. Therefore, I say this: When you face your
greatest danger and desperately need your most powerful celestial weapon, you
will not be able to remember the mantras. Otherwise, you will be peerless in
weaponry. Now leave at once, for this is no place for one who behaves falsely.”
Karëa went shamefacedly away and later joined Duryodhana in Hastinäpura.

Appendix 3
Bhéñma’s Heavenly Origin
In ancient times there lived a king named Mahavisha. During his long life he
performed great sacrifices and, as a result, ascended to Indra’s abode at the end
of his life. Once in an assembly of the gods, with Brahmä present, Mahavisha
saw the divinely beautiful Gaìgä. As he looked at her, a gust of wind suddenly
blew away her garments. All the celestials looked away, but Mahavisha
continued to gaze at her, captivated by her beauty. For this rudeness, Brahmä
cursed him as follows: “You will again be born on earth, but you will return
here after one life.”
Mahavisha thought for a moment, remembering all the monarchs on earth.
898

Among them all he considered a king named Pratipa to be the most pious. He
therefore asked Brahmä if he might become Pratipa’s son, to which Brahmä
agreed.
Gaìgä, having seen Mahavisha’s unashamed attraction for her, left the
assembly thinking of him. As she went away she came across the Vasus, who
looked dejected. When she asked them the cause of their despondency, they
replied, “We have been cursed by the powerful Åñi Vasiñöa. Thus we must soon
take birth as men on earth. For this we are sorry.”
Gaìgä heard how the eight Vasus had tried to take from Vasiñöa his heavenly
cow, Nandini. Their leader, Dyau, had been implored by his wife to seize the
cow, which was able to give anything one desired. Dyau had assented to his
wife’s request and, with his brothers’ assistance, had stolen the cow. When
Vasiñöa discovered the theft, he was furious. Understanding by his mystic
power that the Vasus were responsible, he touched holy water and uttered his
curse.
The Vasus soon learned of the curse and went before the åñi, remorsefully
returning the cow and begging his forgiveness; but Vasiñöa said his words could
not prove false. Repeatedly requested for mercy, he finally said, “You eight
Vasus will all be born on earth, but you will be freed from the curse quickly.
Only Dyau, the chief culprit, will have to remain on earth for a full lifetime.
He will be virtuous, powerful and learned in the Vedas, but he will not beget
offspring. Indeed, he will have to abstain from the pleasures of women.”
The Vasus asked Gaìgä to go to earth as a woman and become their mother as
they did not wish to enter the womb of any human woman. When Gaìgä
asked who they would choose as their father, they replied, “There is a king
named Pratipa who will soon have a son named Çantanu. That prince is
destined to become our father.”
Gaìgä was delighted. Çantanu would be an incarnation of Mahavisha. She
smiled. “I will surely become your mother. Go where you will. We will soon
meet again.”
In due course, the Vasus fell from heaven and Gaìgä left for earth. Soon after,
Çantanu, while wandering along the banks of the Ganges, met the goddess.
Struck by her beauty, he felt his hair stand on end. Her features were flawless
and she was adorned with fine silk robes as beautiful as the filaments of lotus
flowers. His mouth dropped open and he could not take his eyes from her.
Gaìgä was also attracted to the handsome monarch, and she returned his gaze,
899

her dark eyes meeting his and sending a thrill through his body. Moving closer
to her, Çantanu said, “O beautiful one, whether you are a goddess, a
Gandharvi, a Dänava, an Asura, or an Apsarä, I beg you to become my wife.
You seem to have no protector. Allow me to become your shelter.”
Gaìgä glanced down demurely. “O King, I will become your wife and obey your
commands, but I will make one condition: you must not interfere with my acts,
whether they are agreeable or not. You must also never address me in harsh
words. If you act in this way, I will remain with you; but if you act otherwise, I
will leave immediately.”
The king hardly gave any thought to her request. “Be it so,” he replied at once.
He brought her back to Hastinäpura and the marriage ceremony was
performed that day.
Absorbed in Gaìgä’s celestial beauty, Çantanu did not notice the passage of
time. After a year together, which seemed to him like a few days, Gaìgä gave
birth to a son. But within days of the birth she threw the baby into the Ganges,
where it was swept away by the waters. Although horrified, Çantanu
remembered Gaìgä’s conditions and kept silent, not wanting to lose her.
Each year for seven years a boy was born, and each time Gaìgä took the child
to the river and cast him into the water. The king managed to restrain himself,
but when Gaìgä was about to drown the eighth child, he could take no more.
He ran after her, shouting, “Stop! O cruel woman, why are you killing our
children? Murderess of your sons, you are earning great sins by your acts.”
Gaìgä stopped by the river bank and turned toward Çantanu. “As you desire a
child, I will not kill this one. O King, take the child and raise him as your son.
He will doubtlessly bring glory to your line. But in accordance with our
agreement, I must now leave.”
Gaìgä then revealed her identity to the mystified king. She told him about
Vasiñöha’s cursing of the Vasus. “I have thus released the gods from the åñi’s
curse. This eighth child is Dyau, who must remain on earth for a full lifetime.”
Understanding the situation, and realizing that everything had been ordained
by destiny, Çantanu tried to change Gaìgä’s mind, but she was resolute. The
king then asked that she take the baby with her to the celestial regions. When
the child became a young man, he could return to earth. Gaìgä agreed.
Holding the baby close to her breast, she vanished into the river.
Çantanu returned in sorrow to his capital, Hastinäpura. He continued ruling
the people, becoming famous for his virtue. He was loved by the citizens and
900

ruled the world with justice and compassion. It was said that if he simply
placed his hand on someone, that person would immediately be relieved of all
material pains and anxiety.
One day, some years after Gaìgä had left, the king was hunting near the
Ganges. As he pursued a deer along the river bank he noticed that the river
water, which had previously been deep and flowing, had become a trickle.
Marveling, the king made his way upriver to find the cause. He soon came
across a godlike youth who resembled Indra himself. The amiable-looking boy
was holding a large bow. It seemed he had checked the river’s flow by damming
it with arrows. The king was astonished at this remarkable feat and gazed at
the youth, trying to ascertain his identity. The boy suddenly disappeared, and
the king, suspecting that it was his son, said to the river, “O Gaìgä, show me
my child.”
As soon as he spoke, the goddess rose from the waters holding the boy by his
hand. She approached the king and said, “Here is the eighth son whom we
conceived together. O great king, take him now. I have reared him carefully.
Instructed by åñis such as Vasiñöa, Shukra and Paraçuräma, he has become
proficient in all aspects of Vedic knowledge and is expert in arms and warfare.”
Gaìgä then vanished, leaving the boy with Çantanu. The king took him back
to the city, where he would later become famous as Bhéñma.

Appendix 4
Questions Posed by Dharma to Yudhiñöhira
The following questions and answers are not included in the main
text:
“What makes one learned? How does one attain an exalted status? What is
one’s second self and by what does one become wise?”
“By study of the Vedas one becomes learned. Asceticism raises one to an
exalted status. Intelligence is his second self, and serving elders makes one
wise.”
901

“What is the Brahmins’ divine attribute? What is their virtuous practice
resembling that of the pious, what is their human attribute, and what practice
of theirs resembles that of the impious?”
“Study of the Vedas is the Brahmins’ divine attribute. Their asceticism is like
the virtuous practice of the pious, death is their human attribute, and slander
by them is their impiety.”
“What is the divine attribute of kñatriyas, what is their piety and impiety, and
what is their human failing?”
“Arrows and weapons constitute their divinity, sacrifice is their piety and
abandoning the distressed their impiety. Fear is their human failing.”
“What is the Säma of sacrifice, what is its Yajur and what can it not do
without?”
“Life is the sacrificial Säma, mind is its Yajur and it is the Åg which it cannot
do without.”
Yudhiñöhira understood his actual meaning. By sacrifice he meant the spiritual
sacrifice for obtaining pure knowledge. In the objective sacrifice which one
normally performs with fire and mantras, the three Vedas––Säma, Yajur and
Åg––are required. In the subjective, spiritual sacrifice, the acquisition of true
knowledge, along with life and mind, are as necessary as the mantras of the
three Vedas are for the objective sacrifice. Particularly spiritual sacrifice
depends upon prayer, which is represented by the Åg mantras.
The Yakña went on without pause. “What is of greatest value to cultivators, to
those that sow, to those wishing for prosperity and to those who bring forth?”
“Rain is the most valuable thing for cultivators, for showers it is the seed, for
those desiring prosperity it is the cow and for those who bring forth it is the
son.”
“What person, although breathing, endowed with intelligence, respected by
the world and enjoying sensual pleasures, is nevertheless said to be not alive?”
“The person who does not satisfy the gods, guests, servants, ancestors and his
own self with offerings of sanctified food is said to be dead even though
breathing.”
“What is weightier than the earth? What is higher than the sky? What is
fleeter than the wind? And what is more numerous than grass?”
“The mother is weightier than the earth. The father is higher than the sky.
Mind is fleeter than the wind and thoughts are more numerous than grass.”
Yudhiñöhira understood that by serving the mother one was said to obtain the
902

earth and by serving the father one could rise to heaven.
The Yakña continued, “What does not close its eyes when sleeping? What does
not move after birth? What has no heart, and what swells with its own force?”
“Fish do not close their eyes when sleeping. Eggs do not move after birth. A
stone has no heart and a river swells with its own force.”
“Who is the friend of an exile, of a householder, of a sick person and of a dying
man?”
“An exile’s friend is his companion, that of a householder is his wife, the
physician is a sick person’s friend and charity is a dying man’s friend.”
“Who is the guest of all creatures? What is the eternal religion? O king of
kings, what is life-giving nectar, and what pervades this entire universe?”
“Agni is the guest of all creatures. Cows’ milk is life-giving nectar. Offering
ghee into fire sacrifices made to the Lord is the eternal religion, and this entire
universe is pervaded by air.”
“What is it that wanders alone? What is born again after its birth? What is the
antidote to cold, and what is the largest field?”
“The sun wanders alone. The moon is repeatedly born. Agni is cold’s antidote,
and the earth is the largest field.”
“What is the highest refuge of virtue? What of fame? What of heaven, and
what of happiness?”
“Liberality is virtue’s highest refuge, of fame it is charity, of heaven it is truth,
and of happiness the highest refuge is good conduct.”
“What is the soul of a man? Who is the friend given to him by destiny? What is
his chief support, and what is his chief refuge?”
“The soul of a man is his son, his wife is the friend given by destiny, clouds are
his principal support, and charity his best refuge.”
“What is the best of all laudable objects, of all sorts of wealth and of all kinds of
happiness? And what is the most important of all gains?”
“Skillfulness is the most laudable object. Knowledge is the greatest wealth.
Health is the greatest gain, and contentment is the highest happiness.”
“What is the greatest virtue in the world? What religion always bears fruits?
What is it that which if controlled never leads men to misery? And with whom
does friendship never break?”
“Abstention from harming any creature is the greatest virtue. The religion of
the three Vedas is always fruitful. The mind if controlled never leads to misery,
and friendship with the righteous never breaks.”
903

“What is it that, by renouncing, makes a man dear to others? What is it which
if given up never leads to misery? What is it which if renounced leads to
wealth, and what is it which if renounced leads to happiness.”
“Giving up pride makes one dear. Abandoning anger never leads to misery.
Desire, if renounced, makes one wealthy, and abandonment of avarice leads to
happiness.”
“For what does one give charity to Brahmins, to dancers, to servants, and to
kings?”
“One gives to Brahmins for religious merit, to dancers for renown, to servants
for their support, and one gives to kings for freedom from fear.”
“What is it that envelops the world? What prevents a thing from discovering
itself? Why are friends forsaken, and what prevents one from going to
heaven?”
“The world is enveloped with darkness. Spiritual ignorance prevents selfdiscovery. Friends are forsaken due to avarice, and connection with the world
bars one from heaven.”
“For what is a person regarded as dead? What causes a kingdom to be seen as
dead, and what makes a sacrifice dead?”
“A poor person, although living, is considered as good as dead. A kingdom
without a king is considered dead, and a sacrifice without charity is dead.”
“What is the path one should follow? What is spoken of as water, as food, and
as poison? What is the proper time for a çraddhä?”
“Following in the footsteps of the righteous constitutes the proper path. Space
is spoken of as water in the Vedic texts on cosmogony. The cow is considered
as food, as it is from milk that ghee is obtained; ghee is then used in sacrifices,
and thanks to sacrifices there is rainfall, from which we get food grains. A
request is poison. The proper time for a çraddhä is whenever a qualified
Brahmin is available.”
Yudhiñöhira was unsure if his answers were satisfying the Yakña. He looked at
him quizzically. “What is your opinion, O Yakña?” But the Yakña simply went
on placing more questions.
“What is the characteristic of true asceticism? What of self-control? What
constitutes forgiveness and shame?”
“Following one’s religious duties is asceticism. Self-control means keeping the
mind fixed in remembrance of the Lord. Forgiveness consists of tolerating
enmity, and freedom from shame means abstaining from all vile acts.”
904

“O King, what is said to be knowledge? What is tranquility? What is known as
the greatest kindness, and what is simplicity?”
“Understanding Brahman is true knowledge. A peaceful heart is tranquility.
Kindness consists of a desire for the welfare of all creatures, and simplicity
means equanimity of mind.”
“What is man’s invincible enemy? What is his incurable disease? What man is
regarded as honest, and what as dishonest?”
“Anger is the invincible enemy. Covetousness is the incurable disease. A man
who is friendly to all creatures is honest, and the cruel man is dishonest.”
“What, O great monarch, is known as ignorance? What is spoken of as pride?
What is understood to be idleness? And what is called grief?”
“Not knowing one’s religious duties is ignorance. Pride means thinking oneself
to be the doer of acts in this world, without recognizing that there is a supreme
power in control of everything. Idleness is not performing one’s religious duty,
and ignorance is grief.”
“What is known by the åñis as steadiness, and what as patience? What is said to
be the best ablution, and what is spoken of as charity?”
“Steadiness means adhering firmly to one’s religious duties. Patience is
controlling the senses. The highest ablution is to cleanse the mind of all
impurities, and charity means to protect all creatures.”
“Who is considered learned? Who is an atheist? Who is ignorant? What is
spoken of as desire, and what as envy?”
“One who knows his duties is learned. An ignorant man is an atheist, and thus
is an atheist ignorant. Desire means longing for worldly things, and envy is
nothing more than grief of the heart.”
“What is hypocrisy? What is the grace of the gods? What is called wickedness?”
“Falsely posing as a religious man is called hypocrisy. The grace of the gods is
the result of charity. Wickedness means slandering others.”
“Virtue, profit and pleasure are opposed to one another. How then can these
three co-exist?”
“When a husband and wife are happily united for the purposes of performing
religious duties, then these three can exist together harmoniously.”
“Who, O best of the Bharatas, is doomed to eternal damnation? Speedily
answer this question of mine.”
“One who summons a Brahmin for alms, but then gives nothing, is condemned
to everlasting hell. He also goes to unending hell who denies the truth of the
905

Vedas, the Brahmins, the gods and the religion of his forefathers. Also that
man who although wealthy refuses to give charity must suffer everlasting
damnation.”
“O King, tell me with certainty what makes one a Brahmin? Is it birth, good
character, learning or study of the Vedas?”
“Hear, O Yakña, O worshipable one, what are the true characteristics of a
Brahmin? It is by behavior alone that he is recognized. Birth and learning, even
knowledge of all the Vedas, are useless if there is no good character. He alone is
a Brahmin who performs his religious duties, offering sacrifices and keeping his
senses under control. Otherwise he must be considered no better than a çüdra.”
“What is gained by agreeable speech? What is gained by he who acts only after
careful thought? What does the man with many friends gain? And what does
he gain who is given to virtue?”
“One who speaks agreeably becomes dear to all. One who acts with care
obtains whatever he seeks. The man with many friends lives happily in this
life, and the virtuous man obtains happiness in the next life.”

Appendix 5
Brief Biographies of Main Characters

ABHIMANYU: The son of Arjuna and Subhadrä. Said to be an incarnation of
the moon-god Soma’s son. He was slain in the battle of Kurukñetra when just
sixteen. He married Uttarä, King Virata’s daughter, and fathered Parékñit.
ADHIRATHA: A leader of the sutas, the caste generally employed as
charioteers. He found Karëa after Kunté had cast him away in a basket and
raised him as his own son. His wife’s name was Rädhä, and thus Karëa was
known as Radheya.
AGNIVESHA: A åñi who underwent severe austerities on Mount Mahendra.
He was expert in the use of weapons, and both Droëa and Drupada studied
under him. He received the Ägneyästra (fire weapon) from the Åñi Bharadväja,
906

and passed it on to Droëa.
AKRURA: Kåñëa’s uncle and a famous Våñëi. He was a commander of the
Yädava army and also acted as one of Kåñëa’s advisors.
ALAMBUSHA: A rakshasa who fought for Duryodhana in the Kurukñetra
war. He was Baka’s brother, and bore enmity toward Bhéma because Bhéma
slew his brother. He killed Arjuna’s son Iravan, and was himself killed by
Bhéma’s son, Ghaöotkaca.
AMBA: The king of Kashi’s eldest daughter. Bhéñma abducted her from her
svayaàvara to be his brother’s bride. Having already committed herself to
Shalva, Bhéñma released her. When Shalva rejected her as a wife because she
had been touched by another, she developed an intense hatred for Bhéñma. She
worshipped Çiva and obtained a boon that she would kill Bhéñma in her next
life. She was then reborn as Çikhaëòé.
AMBÄLIKÄ: The king of Kashi’s youngest daughter. She was abducted by
Bhéñma from her svayaàvara and married Vicitravérya. Later she became
Päëòu’s mother by union with Vyäsadeva.
AMBIKÄ: Second daughter of the king of Kashi, abducted from her
svayaàvara by Bhéñma. She married Vicitravérya and, after his death, became
Dhåtaräñöra’s mother by union with Vyäsadeva.
ANGARAPARNA: A Gandharva chief; also known as Citraratha, who met
the Päëòavas when they were fleeing from Väraëävata after the burning of the
lac house.
ARJUNA: Third son of Päëòu and Kunté, begotten by Indra. He is famous as
Kåñëa’s dear friend and he heard the Bhagavad-gétä from Him. He is known by
nine other names: Dhanaïjaya (winner of wealth), Vijaya (always victorious),
Swetavahana (he whose chariot is drawn by white horses), Phälguna (born
under the auspicious star of the same name), Kiréöé (he who wears the diadem),
Bhibatsu (terrifying to behold in battle), Savyasachi (able to wield a bow with
both hands), Jiñëu (unconquerable), and Kåñëa (dark-complexioned). The
name Arjuna means “one of pure deeds.” He is said to be an incarnation of the
907

ancient sage Nara.
ASHVINI KUMÄRAS: Twin gods who act as celestial physicians. They
fathered Nakula and Sahadeva through Mädré.
ASHVATTHAMA: Son of Droëa and Kripi. When he was young, his father
was impoverished. Some of Açvatthämä’s friends, knowing that he had never
tasted milk, once gave him a cup of water mixed with flour and told him it was
milk. The boy drank it and danced in glee, saying “I have tasted milk!” His
father saw this and was cut to the quick. It was this incident that inspired him
to go to his old friend Drupada and beg. Açvatthämä is said to be a partial
expansion of Çiva.
BABRUVAHANA: Son of Arjuna and Citräìgadä, who became the ruler of
Maëipura.
BAHLIKA: Younger brother of Çantanu. He lived a long life and was an
advisor to Dhåtaräñöra. He became a commander in Duryodhana’s army during
the Kurukñetra war. He was finally killed by Bhéma.
BALARÄMA: Son of Vasudeva and Rohiëé. Said by the Vedas to be an
eternal form of the Supreme Lord who sometimes appears in the material
world to enact pastimes. More information about Him can be found in the
Bhägavata Puräëa (Çrémad-Bhägavatam).
BHARATA: A king in the dynasty of the moon-god (all kñatriyas are
descendents either of Chandra, the moon-god, or Sürya, the sun-god) who
ruled the earth for thousands of years. The earth planet has been named after
him, and it was common during the Mahäbhärata era to call his descendents by
his name. Bharata was born from the union of King Dushyanta and the
daughter of Kanva Åñi, named Shakuntala. The story of their marriage and
Bharata’s birth is recounted in the Mahäbhärata’s Adi Parva.
BHIMASENA: Päëòu and Kunté’s second son, sired by Väyu, the wind-god.
After the great war he was installed by Yudhiñöhira as crown prince. A story is
told in the Skanda Puräëa that Bhéma became a little proud after the war,
considering that it was by his own power that he had achieved success in the
908

war. All his brothers attributed their success to Kåñëa. Wanting to curb
Bhéma’s pride, Kåñëa took him on Garuòa and traveled a long way to the south,
where they came to a great lake many miles wide. Kåñëa sent Bhéma to find the
source of the lake. Bhéma ran around its perimeter, but could not discover its
source. As he ran he encountered a number of powerful Asuras. Bhéma found
himself unable to defeat them and he ran to Kåñëa for shelter. Kåñëa lifted and
threw the lake away and dispersed the Asuras. He said to Bhéma, “This lake was
contained in Kumbhakarna’s skull, the Räkñasa killed by Räma in a previous
age. The warriors who attacked you were from a race of demons who fought
with Rävaëa against Räma.” Bhéma’s pride was thus curbed.
BHÉÑMA: Son of Çantanu, known as the “grandfather” of the Kurus. Although
he never became king, he officiated at Hastinäpura as regent until Vicitravérya
was of age. He is said to be an incarnation of Dyau, the chief Vasu (see
Appendix Three). The original text of the Mahäbhärata contains an entire
Parva, the Çänti Parva, devoted to Bhéñma’s instructions on religion and
morality, which he delivered while lying on the bed of arrows.
CHITRASENA: King of the Gandharvas who taught Arjuna the arts of
singing and dancing while he was in heaven. He later captured Duryodhana,
whom Arjuna and Bhéma had released. Citrasena was also the name of a king
of Trigarta who fought with the Kauravas, and also the name of one of Karëa’s
sons.
DEVAKÉ: Kåñëa’s mother and the wife of Vasudeva, a chief of the Vrishni
clan. Details of her life can be found in the Bhägavata Puräëa.
DHAUMYA: An ascetic åñi who became the Päëòavas’ guru and guide. The
younger brother of Devala, another famous åñi.
DHRISTADYUMNA: Son of Drupada, born from the sacrificial fire. Said in
the Vedas to be an expansion of the fire-god, Agni.
DHRISTAKETU: A son of Çiçupäla, king of the Cediç, who befriended the
Päëòavas and supplied them with an akshauhini division of troops for the
Kurukñetra war. He was slain by Droëa. After the war, his sister married
Nakula. He was said to be one of the celestial Viçvadevas incarnating on earth.
909

DHÅTARÄÑÖRA: The blind son of Vyäsadeva, born of Ambikä after the
death of her husband, Vicitravérya. He became king in Hastinäpura after
Päëòu retired to the forest. He was the father of the Kauravas. In the
Bhägavata Puräëa it is said that, after practicing yoga, he achieved liberation,
merging into the Supreme Brahman at the end of his life.
DRAUPADÉ: Daughter of Drupada, king of Païchäla, and wife of the five
Päëòavas. In her previous life she was an ascetic woman named Nalayani who
received a boon from Çiva that she would have five husbands in her next life.
The epitome of womanly skills, she once gave advice on how to serve a
husband to Satyabhämä, one of Kåñëa’s principal wives. She was said to be an
expansion of the Goddess Lakñmé. Also known as Päïcälé.
DRONA (DRONACHARYA): The Kurus’ martial teacher. The sage
Bharadväja once caught sight of the Apsarä Ghrtachi and, as a result, semen
fell from his body, which he caught in a pot. Droëa was later born from that
pot. He was taught by Agniveçya and Paraçuräma. Said to be an expansion of
Båhaspati, the celestial seer and preceptor of the gods.
DRUPADA: King of the Païchäla province in Bharata. He was a staunch ally
of the Päëòavas, respected as the senior most king among their allies. He
formed an enmity with Droëa after the latter had come to him for charity and
had been refused. Droëa finally killed him in the Kurukñetra war. Drupada was
also known as Yajnasena, and is said to be an expansion of the celestial Maruts.
DURVÄSÄ: A powerful åñi famous for his quick temper. The Puräëas and
Mahäbhärata contain many stories about Durväsä. He is particularly famous
for having granted Kunté the boon that she could summon any god to do her
will, which resulted in the births of the Päëòavas from five principal deities.
He is said to be an expansion of Çiva.
DURYODHANA: Eldest of Dhåtaräñöra’s sons and leader of the Kauravas.
From childhood he formed an enmity with the Päëòavas, which later resulted
in the Kurukñetra war. He was killed by Bhéma and went to the heavenly
planets as a result of his adherence to kñatriya duties. He was said to be an
expansion of Kali, the god presiding over the dark age.
910

DUSHASHANA: Duryodhana’s eldest brother and one of his inner circle of
close advisors. He grievously offended Draupadé and the Päëòavas, and as a
result Bhéma vowed to kill him and drink his blood. He did so during the great
war.
EKALAVYA: Son of Hiranyadhanu, a Niñadha tribal chief. He became quite
skilled in archery by worshipping Droëa, but he was ultimately cursed by him.
He was killed by Kåñëa.
GANDHARI: Daughter of the king of Gandhara, who became Dhåtaräñöra’s
wife. Having once pleased Vyäsadeva by her service, she was blessed by the
sage that she would have one hundred sons. After marrying the blind
Dhåtaräñöra, she covered her own eyes with a cloth for the rest of her life. She
is thus famous as one of the most chaste ladies in Vedic history. She died in the
forest with her husband and Kunté.
GAÌGÄ: A goddess who appears in this world as the river Ganges. She was
Bhéñma’s mother (see Appendix Three). Her origin is described in various
Vedic texts, including Bhägavata Puräëa and Rämayana. The river water
descends from the spiritual world after touching Lord Viñëu’s foot and is thus
considered sacred.
GHATOTKACHA: The son of Bhéma and the Rakshashi Hiòimbé. He became
a leader of the Räkñasas and assisted the Päëòavas in the Kurukñetra war.
Karëa killed him with Indra’s celestial Çakti weapon.
INDRA: King of the gods, also known as Purandara and Çakra. The Vedas
contain numerous stories about this deity, who became Arjuna’s father.
JARÄSANDHA: King of Magadha and a powerful enemy of Kåñëa. His father,
Båhadratha, once approached a sage to seek a blessing to have a son. The sage
gave him a mango, which the king divided into two, giving half to each of his
wives. They each gave birth to half a child, and the king threw away the
halves. A Rakshashi named Jara later found the two halves and joined them
together, whereupon the body came to life. The child was then named
Jaräsandha, meaning ‘joined by Jara.’ The Bhägavata Puräëa describes the
911

history of his inimical relationship with Kåñëa. He was killed in a wrestling
match with Bhéma.
JAYADRATHA: King of Sindhu who married Dhåtaräñöra’s daughter Dushala.
When he was born, a heavenly voice announced that he would be a powerful
warrior but would be beheaded by an enemy of unparalleled strength. His
father, Vridhakshetra, then cursed whomever would cause his son’s head to fall
to the ground to himself die, his own head shattering into a hundred
fragments. He was killed by Arjuna at Kurukñetra.
KAÀSA: Maternal uncle of Kåñëa who usurped the throne from his father,
Ugrasena. He was killed by Kåñëa. Details of his life are found in the
Bhägavata Puräëa.
KARNA: Firstborn son of the Päëòavas’ mother Kunté from her union with
the sun-god (see Appendix One). He became the chief support and best friend
of Duryodhana, who made him king of Aìga. He was killed by Arjuna at
Kurukñetra and went to the sun planet. Other names of Karëa include
Vasusena, Vaikarthana and Radheya.
KRIPA (KRIPACHARYA): Son of the sage Saradvan, who was once
practicing asceticism in the forest when he saw the Apsarä Janapadi. He passed
semen, which fell into a clump of reeds, and a boy and girl were born from it.
They were named Kåpa and Kripi. They were found and brought to Çantanu,
who was later told of their origin by Saradvan. Kåpa was taught Dhanurveda,
the martial arts, by his father, and he became one of the Kurus’ martial
teachers. He survived the Kurukñetra war and counseled the Päëòavas when
they ruled the world. Later, they appointed him preceptor of their grandson,
Parékñit.
KÅÑËA: Said by the Vedas to be God, the Supreme Person, who is the origin
of all other incarnations of the Godhead such as Viñëu and Näräyaëa. The
Bhägavata Puräëa contains extensive descriptions of His qualities and
activities. He spoke the Bhagavad-gétä to Arjuna at the beginning of the
Kurukñetra war.
KRITAVARMA: A chief in the Yadu dynasty. A devotee of Kåñëa, he was the
912

commander of the Yadu army. Kåñëa offered the army to Duryodhana for the
Kurukñetra war, and thus they and Kåtavarmä fought against the Päëòavas.
Kåtavarmä survived the war, but was later killed at Prabhäsa during a
fratricidal quarrel among the Yadus.
KUNTÉ: The Päëòavas’ mother. She was the sister of Vasudeva, Kåñëa’s father.
Her own father, Surasena, had given her as a baby to his close friend King
Kuntébhoja, who had no children. She was named Prtha at birth, but became
better known as Kunté after being raised by Kuntébhoja.
KURU: Ancient king and founder of the Kuru dynasty (see family tree in
Appendix Four). Due to his performance of sacrifice and asceticism at the site,
the place known as Kurukñetra, named after Kuru, is considered sacred.
KUVERA (VAISHRAVANA): God of riches and one of the four universal
protectors or Lokapälas. Known as the celestial treasurer.
MARKENDEYA: An ancient åñi said to have lived through thousands of ages.
The Mahäbhärata contains many stories about him.
NAKULA: One of the twin sons of Päëòu and Mädré, begotten by the twin
Açviné gods. He was a maharatha warrior renowned for his expertise with a
sword. He conquered the western regions of Bharata, before Yudhiñöhira’s
Räjasüya sacrifice. Along with Draupadé, he married a princess of Chedi
named Karenumati.
NÄRADA: A celestial sage also known as Devarshi, or the åñi among the gods.
He is famous as a devotee of Kåñëa and frequently assists Him in His pastimes
on earth. The Vedas contain innumerable references to Närada’s activities and
teachings.
PANDU: Father of the Päëòavas born to Vicitravérya’s widow queen Ambälikä
by the grace of Vyäsadeva.
PARÄÇARA: A powerful åñi, grandson of Vasiñöa, who fathered Vyäsadeva by
conceiving him with Satyavaté when she was still a maiden. Once Satyavaté
ferried the sage across a river and he was attracted by her beauty. He asked if
913

he could have union with her, promising that by his mystic power she would
not lose her virginity. She agreed and they united on an island in the middle of
the river, which Paräçara shrouded from view by creating volumes of mist.
Vyäsadeva was immediately born and grew at once to manhood.
PARAÇURÄMA: A åñi said to be an empowered incarnation of Viñëu. He is
famous for having annihilated all the kñatriyas of the world after his father,
Jamadagni, had been killed by a king named Kartavirya. An expert in the
Vedic military arts, he was the martial teacher of Bhéñma, Droëa and Karëa.
The Mahäbhärata contains various stories about his exploits.
PARÉKÑIT: Posthumous son of Abhimanyu, the Päëòavas installed him as
king in Hastinäpura when they retired. He was named Parékñit, meaning ‘the
examiner’, as the Brahmins said he would come to examine all men in his
search for the Supreme Lord, whom he saw while still an embryo in his
mother’s womb. He became famous as the hearer of the Bhägavata Puräëa from
the sage Çukadeva Gosvämé.
SAHADEVA: The youngest Päëòava. One of the two twin sons of Mädré
fathered by the Açviné gods. He conquered southern Bharata before
Yudhiñöhira’s Räjasüya sacrifice. Famous for his perceptive powers and
intelligence, he was appointed as Yudhiñöhira’s personal advisor after the
Kurukñetra war. Besides being married to Draupadé, he married a princess of
Madra named Vijaya.
SAÏJAYA: Dhåtaräñöra’s charioteer and secretary. Although he belonged to
the suta caste, he was a spiritually advanced disciple of Vyäsadeva, who gave
him the power to see the events during the Kurukñetra war. Consequently, he
narrated all the battle scenes to Dhåtaräñöra.
SATYAKI: A Våñëi hero who became Arjuna’s martial disciple. He was a close
friend of Kåñëa. A powerful maharatha, he fought for the Päëòavas at
Kurukñetra, surviving both the war and subsequent massacre of sleeping
soldiers by Açvatthämä. He died at Prabhäsa during the fratricidal battle
among the Yadus.
SHAKUNI: Son of King Suvala and brother of Gändhäré. Acted as close
914

confidant and mentor to Duryodhana. Although a powerful kñatriya, he
preferred cunning and underhanded methods to open combat. Said to be an
expansion of the deity presiding over the Dväpara age (third in the cycle of
four ages), he was slain at Kurukñetra by Sahadeva.
SHALVA: King of Saubha. He fought Bhéñma for Amba’s hand after Bhéñma
kidnapped her from her svayaàvara. Due to his strong friendship with
Çiçupäla, whom Kåñëa killed, he became Kåñëa’s enemy. He attacked Dwärakä
in the huge airplane he had received from Çiva. Said to be an incarnation of
the Asura Ajaka, Kåñëa killed him.
SHALYA: Ruler of Madra and brother of Päëòu’s second wife Mädré.
Although the Päëòavas’ friend, and having a particular friendship with
Yudhiñöhira, he was tricked by Duryodhana into fighting for the Kauravas at
Kurukñetra. Said to be an incarnation of the Daitya Samhlada, Yudhiñöhira
killed him in the war.
ÇANTANU: Great grandfather of the Päëòavas and Kauravas, and Bhéñma’s
father from his union with Gaìgä (see Appendix Three). After retirement, he
went to Mount Archika in the Himälayas and practiced asceticism, finally
attaining liberation. It is said in the Bhägavata Puräëa that his elder brother,
Devapi, still lives on earth in a place called Kalapa, awaiting the
commencement of the next Satya-yuga (golden age) when he will become king.
SHIKHANDHI: Son of Drupada and a reincarnation of Amba. He was born as
a woman and later became a man by the grace of a Yakña named Sthunakarna.
Remembering his enmity from his previous life, he vowed to kill Bhéñma. It was
due to him that Arjuna was able to approach and finally slay Bhéñma.
Açvatthämä killed him during the night slaughter of the sleeping Päëòava
warriors.
SISHUPALA: King of Chedi and an avowed enemy of Kåñëa. The Bhägavata
Puräëa describes his previous existence as Jaya, a gatekeeper in the spiritual
Vaikuëöha world. Due to a curse, he and his brother Vijaya had to take birth in
the material world for three lives as demons (his other two incarnations were
Hiranyaksha and Rävaëa). Kåñëa killed him at Yudhiñöhira’s Räjasüya
915

sacrifice.
SUBHADRA: Kåñëa’s sister, said to be an incarnation of Yogamäyä, the Lord’s
personified spiritual energy. Her birth is described in the Bhägavata Puräëa.
She married Arjuna and they had a son named Abhimanyu. Unlike her cowife Draupadé, no details are given in the original text about how she ended
her life.
SUSHARMA: King of Trigarta and brother of Duryodhana’s wife, Bhanumati.
He led a huge army and concentrated on fighting Arjuna during the
Kurukñetra war, having taken a vow to kill him. He was slain by Arjuna.
ULUPI: Daughter of the Näga king Kauravya, who became Arjuna’s wife.
They had a son named Iravan, who was killed at Kurukñetra. She married
Arjuna during his one year exile from Indraprastha, only spending one day
with him after their wedding. She was reunited with him in Hastinäpura after
the war.
UTTARA: A princess of Virata whom Arjuna taught dancing during his final
year of exile. She married Abhimanyu and their son was named Parékñit.
VASUDEVA: Kåñëa’s father, after whom Kåñëa Himself is named. Details of
his life and previous births are given in the Bhägavata Puräëa.
VIDURA: Son of Vyäsadeva and a palace maidservant. He was said to be an
expansion of Yamaräja, the lord of justice. Once a åñi named Mandavya was
mistaken for a robber. The king arrested and punished him by having him
pierced by a lance. The sage later went to Yamaräja and asked why this had
happened and was told that in his childhood he had pierced an insect with a
blade of grass. Hearing that he had received punishment for a mistake made
when he was still an ignorant child, the sage cursed Yamaräja to take birth on
earth as a çüdra. Thus he became Vidura.
VIRATA: King of Matsya, where the Päëòavas spent their final year in exile.
He joined with the Päëòavas in the Kurukñetra war, bringing an akshauhini
division of warriors. Droëa killed him in the battle. He was said to be an
expansion of the celestial Maruts.
916

VYÄSADEVA: The sage who authored the Mahäbhärata. Born from the
union of Paräçara Åñi and Satyavaté, he is known as Dwaipayana because he
was born on an island (see Paräçara). He compiled the Vedas and is said to be
an empowered incarnation of Viñëu. His son’s name is Çukadeva, the famous
reciter of the Bhägavata Puräëa.
YADU: Ancient king and founder of the Yadu dynasty, in which Kåñëa
appeared (see family tree in Appendix Four). Details of Yadu’s birth and life
are given in the original text of the Mahäbhärata and also the Bhägavata
Puräëa.
YUDHIÑÖHIRA: Eldest Päëòava, born from the union of Kunté and the god
Dharma. He performed a Räjasüya sacrifice which established him as world
emperor. Famous for his adherence to virtue and truth, he is also known as
Dharmaräja, as well as Ajätaçatru, which means “one who has no enemies.”
After the war he ruled the world for thirty-six years and was succeeded by
Parékñit.
Author’s Note

Author’s Note
As I stated in my Introduction, I have tried my best to remain faithful to the
original text of the Mahäbhärata, working mainly from Çré Manmatha Dutt’s
translation (the Calcutta edition of the northern manuscript). I am most
grateful to that scholar for producing his excellent text. Of course, after five
thousand years and at least as many retellings, one would expect there to be
variations in the details of the story. The reader may thus have heard other
details. Still, I think it is fair to say that the central story is common to almost
all versions.
One of my main aims was to make the work accessible without losing the
spiritual message, a message given its fullest expression in the Bhagavad-gétä. I
would recommend everyone to read the complete text of Bhagavad-gétä; I have
917

presented it only in an abbreviated form in this book. My own references to
the Bhagavad-gétä text were taken from the translation with elaborate purports
by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami (Bhagavad-gétä As It Is).
In parts, I found the Mahäbhärata translations in conflict with the Bhägavata
Puräëa, and in such cases I deferred to the Puranic version (again I used as my
reference Bhaktivedanta Swami’s translation, published as Çrémad
Bhägavatam). The Mahäbhärata is a Vaiñëava text, intended to give us a better
understanding of—and attraction for—the Supreme Lord, particularly in His
original form as Kåñëa. The Bhägavata Puräëa deals specifically with the Lord’s
many incarnations, culminating in a description of Kåñëa’s pastimes on earth. I
was concerned to properly present this aspect of the Mahäbhärata, and
therefore felt the Bhägavata Puräëa’s version would be best. The differences
are minimal, however, and occur mainly in the final chapter.
As with Rämayana, my earlier work, I have used the omniscient voice. This is
also how the original is presented. The book was first written by the Åñi
Vyäsadeva, who is said in the Bhägavata Puräëa to be the “literary
incarnation” of God. He was specifically empowered by the Lord to compile
the Vedic literature. Even now he is said to be still residing somewhere in the
Himälayas, practicing asceticism.
In order to keep the story flowing I have abridged some sections and omitted
others. For example, there are lengthy narrations unrelated to the story of the
Päëòavas, such as the famous tale of Savitri. I omitted such sections. Perhaps
in a later work I will present these stories separately. There is also one
complete and lengthy parva devoted to Bhéñma’s instructions (Çänti parva)
delivered on the bed of arrows. I have also omitted that. His instructions
formed two full books in my translation, worthy itself of a separate study.
This is not an academic work. I have tried to present the original as
transparently as possible but, inevitably, in presenting the story I comment on
the characters and action. I pray that by the grace of the great saints in our
disciplic succession, which descends from Vyäsadeva, my perspective has been
consistent with his intended meaning.
I hope in my attempt to share Mahäbhärata with others I have not unwittingly
offended anyone. I am open to hearing from my readers; and if any errors are
found, then I will correct them in future printings.
Thank you for reading the book. I hope you found it enjoyable.

918

And after three months had passed away, in the fourth,
the grand festival in honour of the divine Brahma which was celebrated with
pomp in the country of the
Matsyas, came off.
The Mahabharata
by Kisari Mohan Ganguli [1883-1896]
i

919

