R. K. NARAYAN (1906-2001) was one of the most prominent Indian novelists of the twentieth
century. His works include Mr. Sampath—The Printer of Malgudi, Swami and Friends, Waiting for
Mahatma, and Gods, Demons, and Others, all published by the University of Chicago Press.
WENDY DONIGER is an American Indologist and the Mircea Eliade Distinguished Service Professor
of the History of Religions in the Divinity School of the University of Chicago. She is the author of more
than thirty books.
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637
The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London
© 1978 by R. K. Narayan
Foreword © 2013 by the University of Chicago
All rights reserved. Originally published 1978 by the Viking Press.
University of Chicago Press edition 2000 and 2013
Printed in the United States of America
22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13                                                                                1 2 3 4 5
ISBN-13: 978-0-226-05165-9 (paper)
ISBN-13: 978-0-226-05747-7 (e-book)
DOI: 10.7208/chicago/9780226057477.001.001
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Narayan, R. K., 1906-2001.
The Mahabharata : a shortened modern prose version of the Indian epic / R. K. Narayan ; foreword
by Wendy Doniger.
pages. cm.
ISBN 978-0-226-05165-9 (pbk. : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-0-226-05747-7 (e-book)
1. Hindu mythology—Fiction.                                                                                  2. Hindu gods—Fiction.   3. Mahabharata—Adaptations.   I. Doniger,
Wendy.   II. Title.
PR9499.3.N3M3 2013
823'.912—dc23
2013005614
This paper meets the requirements of ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992 (Permanence of Paper).

The Mahabharata
A Shortened Modern Prose Version of the Indian Epic
R. K. Narayan
Foreword by Wendy Doniger
WITH DECORATIONS BY R. K. LAXMAN
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS
Chicago & London

Also by R. K. Narayan
NOVELS OF MALGUDI
Swami and Friends
The Bachelor of Arts
The Dark Room
The English Teacher
Mr Sampath—The Printer of Malgudi
The Financial Expert
Waiting for the Mahatma
The Guide
The Man-Eater of Malgudi
The Vendor of Sweets
The Painter of Signs
A Tiger for Malgudi
Malgudi Days
Talkative Man
The Ramayana
The Mahabharata
The World of Nagaraj
STORIES
A Horse and Two Goats
An Astrologer’s Day and Other Stories
Lawley Road
Under the Banyan Tree and Other Stories
The Grandmother’s Tale and Selected Stories
MEMOIRS
My Days
TRAVEL

My Dateless Diary
The Emerald Route
ESSAYS
Next Sunday
Reluctant Guru

CONTENTS
Foreword by Wendy Doniger
Introduction
List of Characters and Places of Action in the Story
Generation Tree
1. The Eighth Baby
2. Enter—the Players
3. House of Joy—and Ashes
4. Bride for Five
5. Uncle’s Gift
6. City of Splendour
7. Stakes Unmatched
8. Wanderings
9. Hundred Questions
10. Servitude
11. Warning Shots
12. War or Peace?
13. Action
14. Hesitant Hero
15. Delirium of Destruction
16. Victory and Sorrow
17. Epilogue
Notes
Glossary

FOREWORD
Poets have told it before, and are telling it now, and will tell it                 What is here, about piety, profit,
and pleasure, is found elsewhere, but what is not here is nowhere else.
Mahabharata (1.1.23 and 1.56.33)
THUS THE MAHABHARATA DESCRIBES itself as unlimited in both time
and space. Its enormous scope poses two big problems that anyone who tries
to translate the Mahabharata must confront: choosing the parts to translate,
and finding the words to convey the unique spirit of the text. R. K. Narayan
succeeds in solving both of these better than any of the dozens of writers who
have dared to take on the task.
As for the choice, the Mahabharata is not only dauntingly large, as
Narayan points out in his own excellent introduction to the first edition of this
volume; it also refuses to stand still long enough for anyone to take an
accurate picture of it. Although the text was preserved both orally and in
manuscript, it is so extremely fluid that there is no single Mahabharata; there
are hundreds of Mahabharatas—hundreds of different manuscripts and
innumerable oral versions. A. K. Ramanujan once remarked that no Indian
ever hears the Mahabharata for the first time; others have described it as a
work in progress or a living library that does not belong in a book. There is a
soi-disant  critical  edition  of  the  Mahabharata,  with  an  apparatus  of
“interpolations” longer than the text itself, but that edition has not been able
to defend its claim to sit alone on the throne of the urtext. (For instance, the
story of the poet Vyasa dictating the Mahabharata to the god Ganesha, which
everyone who knows anything about the Mahabharata knows is a part of it,
did not pass the manuscript muster of the critical edition; Narayan tells this
story in his introduction, but not in the text.)
The Mahabharata flits back and forth between Sanskrit manuscripts and
village  storytellers,  each  adding  new  bits  to  the  old  story,  constantly
reinterpreting it. Narayan is therefore just doing, and doing very well, what
others have done for centuries—selecting certain parts of the great text to
retell in his own words. One of the fault lines along which others have made
such a selection is between the basic linear plot (the tale of the five heroes,
the Pandava brothers, and the great war that they fight against their cousins)

and the nonlinear blocks of mythology and philosophy that constitute a major
part of the Mahabharata. Earlier European scholars regarded these parts of
the text as irrelevant interpolations, presumably made by devout Brahmins
who didn’t mind spoiling a good secular story with their pedantic and self-
serving religious rants. But none of this is true: the plot is not secular, to
begin with, as the gods are caught up with it at every moment; nor are the
myths and philosophical arguments extraneous to it. Indeed, for a Hindu
reader (or listener), the myths and debates (including such things as the
Bhagavad Gita) are the heart of the matter, framed and illustrated by the plot;
as Narayan puts it, “In a sense, these could be termed ‘asides,’ but no reader
of The Mahabharata would miss any part of it.” To cut these “asides” would
be like cutting all the arias out of a Verdi opera to make it easier to follow
the action of the plot. Narayan brilliantly integrates all the levels of the text,
constantly enriching the central plot with an awareness of its mythological
and philosophical resonances. Right at the beginning, he tells the tangled tale
of the ancestry of the heroes by concentrating on the supernatural intervention
of the river Ganges and the subsequent employment of gods as biological
parents of the sons of the impotent king Pandu—the five legitimate Pandavas
and the illegitimate Karna, the dark, tragic figure of the Mahabharata.
Narayan claims to be translating the Sanskrit version of the text, and for
the most part he does, though he spells the names of some characters as they
would have been familiar to him from his Tamil-speaking childhood rather
than from the Sanskrit text (Kunthi instead of Kunti, Satyavathi for Satyavati,
etc.). But occasionally he reworks the Sanskrit version of a story in ways that
reflect the uneasiness of the later tradition, its inability, or unwillingness, to
deal with some of the less admirable attitudes of the ancient text. For
instance, there is an episode in which the enemies of the Pandavas plan to
kill them (and their mother) by trapping them all in a highly flammable house
and setting fire to it; the Pandavas, learning of this plot in advance, dig a
tunnel through which they will escape when the fire is set. In the Sanskrit
text, they invite a low-caste tribal woman and her five sons to the house, get
them drunk, and leave them there when they set the fire and escape through
the tunnel, so that their enemies find the six corpses and think that the
Pandavas have perished in the fire. The total indifference to the fate of the
low-caste tribals on the part of the Pandavas—and, indeed, on the part of the
narrator of the text—has become, in recent years, a point of embarrassment to
contemporary Hindus sensitive to the injustices of the caste system. In

Narayan’s retelling, the only person the Pandavas purposely trap in the house
is the wicked architect who designed it to kill them; yet afterward people
think the Pandavas perished because “the charred remains of a woman and
her five sons had been discovered,” and we never learn anything more about
how those six people got there. Here, and elsewhere, Narayan nimbly
sidesteps some of the more controversial social issues.
Another delicate point in the story is the fact that the princess Draupadi is
married to all five of the Pandavas; Hindu culture at that time allowed a man
to have many wives, but a woman could have only one husband. The Sanskrit
text justifies this irregularity at first by saying that, when Arjuna (one of the
five brothers) won Draupadi in a contest and returned home with her and
with his brothers, he announced to his mother, “Look what we found!” and,
without looking up, she replied, like any mother, “Share it among you.” Not
satisfied with this rather thin excuse, the Sanskrit text goes on to say that all
five Pandavas are really incarnations of the god Indra, and Draupadi the
incarnation of the goddess of Prosperity, Indra’s wife. And then it offers a
third explanation:
The daughter of a great sage longed in vain for a husband; she pleased the god Shiva, who offered
her a boon, and she asked for a virtuous husband. But she asked again and again, five times, and so
Shiva said, “You will have five virtuous husbands.” She objected, saying that it is against the law for a
woman to have more than one husband, for then there would be promiscuity; moreover, her one
husband should have her as a virgin. But Shiva reassured her that a woman is purified every month
with her menses and therefore there would be no lapse from dharma in her case, since she had
asked repeatedly for a husband. Then she asked him if she could be a virgin again for each act of
sexual union, and he granted this, too. [1.189.42-8]
When Narayan comes to this sensitive point, he subtly strengthens the first
argument by having Arjuna say (“wanting to sound lighthearted”), “Mother,
come out, see what bhiksha we have brought today”—thus making Arjuna in
part responsible for the misunderstanding by misrepresenting his wife as
bhiksha, alms won by begging. But Narayan, like the Sanskrit text, also
reaches for a stronger justification, and, omitting the second excuse (the five
incarnations of Indra), strengthens the third excuse by telling, in place of the
tale of the impatient virgin, a story that is not a part of the Sanskrit tradition
at all but a well-known Tamil story as well as the subject of a 1936 Tamil
film, Nalayani. Narayan’s version occupies two full pages, but could be
summarized thus:
Draupadi in her previous life was called Nalayani and was married to a cantankerous, leprous sage
named Moudgalya. She was utterly devoted to him for many years. One day he told her that he was

in fact young and handsome and well, but had assumed his leprous form to test her; and now he
would grant her any boon. She asked him to make love to her as five men in five forms; he did, and
they spent years in blissful union. She never tired of it, but he did; he told her of his intention to retire
into loneliness and introspection. Still unsatifisfied, she begged Shiva for a husband, over and over, and
so he granted her five husbands.
In fact, Narayan leaves out the more lurid details of some versions of the
Tamil story, such as the one in which, one day, one of Moudgalya’s leprous
fingers falls off into her food, and Nalayani continues eating the rice without
displaying any revulsion. In Narayan’s version, Shiva does not appear, and in
place of the god’s boon the sage curses Nalayani to have, in her next life,
five husbands to quench her desire. Just as the Sanskrit text cobbled together
three different justifications of Draupadi’s polyandry, so Narayan picks from
his knowledge of several more Tamil versions the two that best suit his own
vision of the text.
That vision is limited to events in which the Pandavas appear, but it does
include some of the episodes that might be listed among the disposable
mythological and philosophical “asides”—as long as they involve the central
characters. Thus Narayan devotes two pages to a summary of the Bhagavad
Gita, because it is a conversation between Arjuna and the incarnate god
Krishna. And he includes five pages of the famous metaphysical riddles of a
goblin, because Yudhishthira, the eldest of the five Pandavas, is the one the
goblin  tests.  When  the  goblin  asks,                                                                        “What  is  the  greatest  mystery?”
Yudhishthira replies, “Day after day and hour after hour, people die and
corpses are carried along, yet the onlookers never realise that they are also
to die one day, but think they will live for ever. This is the greatest wonder of
the world.”
Narayan’s telling follows the Sanskrit text in treating Krishna as a mortal
prince who is nevertheless, at times, clearly aware of his divinity, such as in
the Bhagavad Gita. Krishna shifts back and forth between divinity and
mortality in the Sanskrit text, and Narayan captures this ambiguity beautifully.
When Krishna is sent to the enemy camp to make a final attempt to avoid the
Armageddon that does, in fact, take place, he behaves like a mortal prince
and is treated like one; Yudhishthira expresses concern for his safety: “I feel
nervous to let you go into their midst. They may harm you.” But then Narayan
adds, “Krishna, who was, after all, a god and confident of himself, said,
‘Don’t worry about me.’” When Krishna sets out, the weather is literally
ominous: thunder comes out of a clear sky, rivers reverse their direction,
trees  are  uprooted.  But  Narayan  remarks,                                                                   “However,  where  Krishna’s

chariot passed, flowers showered down and a gentle cool breeze blew.” He
selects the precise details to keep the mortal/immortal tension in Krishna
alive throughout the book.
Narayan tells the stories so well because they’re all his stories, like the
tale of Nalayani, stories he never heard for the first time (to use Ramanujan’s
criterion). He doesn’t have to look them up in a book. And he tells them well
because he is a novelist of the first water. He is what William Butler Yeats,
who translated the ten principal Upanishads with Shree Purohit Swami in
1938, might have been had he also known Sanskrit. Narayan really does
know the texts, and the scholarship of the texts, and at the same time he is
such a fine novelist, such a great storyteller. He is the ideal person to tell this
great story.
Wendy Doniger
Mircea Eliade Distinguished Service Professor of the History of Religions in
the Divinity School; also in the Department of South Asian Languages and
Civilizations, the Committee on Social Thought, and the College
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO, OCTOBER 2012

INTRODUCTION
THE ORIGINAL COMPOSITION in the Sanskrit language runs to one
hundred thousand stanzas in verse, thus making it the longest composition in
the world: in sheer quantity eight times longer than The Iliad and The
Odyssey put together. A great deal of scholarly research, based on internal
evidence, cross references, and astronomical data occurring incidentally in
the texts, has gone on for years in order to reach a conclusion in regard to the
authorship and date of this epic. There can, however, be no such thing as a
final statement on the subject. However, a few salient points have emerged
from all the research.
The nucleus of the story in some form, perhaps a ballad, was known in
1500 B.C. The tension between two branches of a ruling family of the warrior
caste, the ups and downs in their fortunes, and a mighty battle that ensued to
settle the question of supremacy were familiar facts long before the Christian
Era. The geographical locations, such as Hastinapura and Kurukshetra, are
still extant in the northern-most part of India. Commemorative festivals are
still being celebrated there in certain seasons, associated with the characters
in the tale. “The Pandavas were exiled here . . .” or “. . . lived in these
forests . . .” and so forth.
This tale of heroism, persecution, and intrigue must have passed into
ballads or similar modes of popular entertainment. Out of these the first
version of the epic was composed, consisting of twenty-four thousand
stanzas,  the  authorship  being  attributed  to  Vyasa.  Now,  once  again,
speculation and doubt begins to grow around the name “Vyasa”. While
ninety-nine percent of our public would accept the name and venerate him
without question as an immortal, inspired sage, research-minded scholars
have their own doubts and speculations. They explain that “Vyasa” could be
a generic title, and that there could have been at different stages of the epic’s
life several others who must have assumed the name for the purpose of
composition. Speaking for myself, I would rather accept the traditional
accounts. The conclusions of cold, factual research seem like “catching the
rainbow with one’s fingers,” to quote a line from the epic itself.

Vyasa’s epic was originally entitled Jaya, which means triumph or victory.
When the vision of it came to him through the grace of Brahma, the Creator,
Vyasa needed someone to take it down as he recited it. Ganesha, the god with
an elephant head, accepted the assignment on one condition—that there
should be no pause in the dictation. The author accepted this condition,
provided that Ganesha realized and understood the meaning of every word
before putting it down in writing.
Vyasa kept up his dictation at a breathless speed, and Ganesha took it
down with matching zest. When, at one point, his stylus failed, he broke off
one of his tusks and continued the writing. The composer, whenever he found
his amanuensis outrunning him, checked his speed by composing, here and
there, passages—terse, packed and concentrated—which would force him to
pause to get at the meaning. There are thus several passages in The
Mahabharata which convey layers of meaning depending upon the stress and
syllabification while reciting them aloud.
Jaya became Bharata at the next stage, when Vysampayana, who had
listened to the original narrative from Vyasa himself, conveyed it to an
assembly  of  listeners  at  the  court  of  Janamejaya.  The  work  acquired
considerable volume at this stage, swollen to about fifty thousand stanzas.
Much later, it was narrated again at another assembly of sages in a forest, this
time by one Sauti, who had heard it at Janamejaya’s court.
Sauti is a great traveller and arrives at the ashram of a sage named
Saunaka,  set  in  deep  woods,  where  a  number  of  sages  are  gathered
reposefully after a prolonged performance of certain rites and sacrifices for
the welfare of humanity. While they are resting thus, Sauti walks in—a
wayfarer. As prescribed by the code of hospitality, the sages offer him
shelter and rest, and seat him comfortably. When the formalities are over, and
when they feel certain that their guest has rested and overcome the fatigue of
travel, they ask, “O guest, where are you coming from? What strange and rare
experiences have you undergone and what places and men have you seen?”
Sauti answers, “I visited the holy land of Kurukshetra where was fought
the eighteen-day war between the Pandavas and their cousins, the Kauravas,
and where the ground was washed in blood. I visited it after I had heard the
tale narrated by Vysampayana at the great Serpent Sacrifice*1 performed at
Janamejaya’s court.” And Sauti’s narrative acquired further quantity and
quality at this stage.

At  other  unspecified  times,  additions  were  made  by  each  narrator.
Episodes, philosophies, and moral lessons were added until the epic came to
its present length of one hundred thousand stanzas. In this form, about A.D.
400, it came to be known as The Mahabharata, maha being a prefix
indicating greatness.
Scholars have worked hard to identify the recensions, alterations, and
additions, and definitive editions are available indicating the changes from
the original versions. It is a controversial field, but the main story is
accepted on all hands and beyond all argument: once upon a time in ancient
Hastinapura lived a royal family—with five brothers of divine origin on one
side, and their one hundred cousins on the other, at war with each other. This
framework is filled with details and lines of the finest poetic values in
Sanskrit. Of its literary and other values, here is a summary as the author
himself declared it:
When Vyasa had the epic all complete in his mind, he invoked Brahma, the
Creator, and explained, “I have composed a poem which is vast. Therein are
revealed the mystery and the subtleties of the Vedas and Upanishads;
descriptions of creeds and modes of life; the history of past, present, and
future; rules for the four castes; the essence of the Puranas, of asceticism, and
rules for the acolyte; the dimensions of the sun, moon, and stars; a description
of the four yugas; a definition of charity, the subject of the incarnation of
souls for specific purposes; the sciences and the healing of sickness; also a
description of places of pilgrimage, of rivers, mountains, and forests, and of
heavenly cities and palaces; the art of war; descriptions of different nations,
their languages, and their qualities; and of the all-pervading universal spirit.”
And at this stage Brahma said, “Call on Ganesha. He is the one fittest to take
down your poem as you recite it.”
The Mahabharata consists of eighteen parvas (or parts), as many volumes
by the present measure of production. Being a work dependent on oral report,
there is naturally much repetition, perhaps for the benefit of a listener who
might have missed a piece, as the narration goes on day after day. In this
method of narrative a character reporting elsewhere on a situation which the
reader already knows, gives again a complete account to his listener. The
epic form is detailed and leisurely, and the technique of narration is different
from what we are used to. There is an unhurrying quality about it which gives
it stature. To point a moral, a complete, independent story of great length and
detail may be included, a deviation from the mainstream which can run to

several hundred pages. Thus, we have in The Mahabharata the well-known
legends such as Harischandra, Nala, and Savitri, Yayati, Draupadi (presented
here in an adapted form), Shakuntala, and Sibi, which are included in my
previous book, Gods, Demons, and Others.
Another factor which swells The Mahabharata is philosophic discussion
—discourses on life and conduct which one or another of the sages expounds
—sometimes running to several hundred lines at a time. The Bhagavad Gita
is an instance of such a situation. When the opposing armies are ready to
attack each other, Krishna reveals and elaborates (in eighteen chapters) the
Gita philosophy.
Great edicts in the text often center round the duties of a king or a
commoner. Thus we have a whole parva, or part, called Santhi, a full
volume in which Bhishma, while dying, discourses on the duties of a king for
the benefit of Yudhistira. This is followed by Anusasana, another complete
book, which is equally voluminous, detailing the importance of rituals,
worship, and their proper performance. In a sense, these could be termed
“asides,” but no reader of The Mahabharata in India would miss any part of
it.
Although this epic is a treasure house of varied interests, my own
preference is the story. It is a great tale with well-defined characters who
talk and act with robustness and zest—heroes and villains, saints and kings,
women  of  beauty,  all  displaying  great  human  qualities,  super-human
endurance, depths of sinister qualities as well as power, satanic hates and
intrigues—all presented against an impressive background of ancient royal
capitals, forests, and mountains.
The actual physical quantum of the epic is staggering. If only a single word
could be used to indicate the gist of each stanza, the total length of such a
sampling would still run to one hundred thousand words. I have omitted none
of the episodes relevant to the destinies of the chief characters. I have kept
myself to the mainstream and held my version within readable limits.
For a modern reader in English, one has necessarily to select and
condense. I have not attempted any translation, as it is impossible to convey
in English the rhythm and depth of the original language. The very sound of
Sanskrit has a hypnotic quality which is inevitably lost in translation. One
has to feel content with a prose narrative in story form.

For me, the special interest in this work is the role the author himself plays
in the story. Vyasa not only composed the narrative, but being aware of the
past and future of all his characters, helps them with solutions when they find
themselves  in  a  dilemma.  Sometimes  he  may  see  into  the  future  and
emphasize the inevitability of certain coming events, making his heroes
resign themselves to their fate.
In this way, at a moment when the Pandavas are all happily settled at
Indraprastha, Vyasa hints to Yudhistira that he will be the total destroyer of
their clan and race thirteen years hence. Yudhistira accepts this news with
terror and resignation, stating,                                                   “We cannot change the circumstances that
destiny decrees. But I shall do nothing to provoke anyone in any manner and
practise absolute non-violence in thought, word and deed. It is the only way
to meet the decrees of Fate.” This episode comes long before the gambling
match which leads to the Pandavas’ ruin. When the invitation to gamble
comes, Yudhistira accepts it, in addition to his own partiality for the game, as
a part of his policy not to displease others. When others argue fiercely with
him on any matter, he always answers them with gentleness and calm.
Earlier in the story, when the Pandavas wander without aim, they are
directed by Vyasa to go to Ekavrata and then on to Panchala, where they are
destined to find their bride. Throughout, the author lives with his characters,
and this is the greatest charm of this work for me. Vyasa’s birth itself is
explained at the beginning of the epic. He was conceived in a ferry by his
virgin mother, who later begot by Santanu the two brothers, the widows of
the younger brother becoming pregnant through Vyasa’s grace, and giving
birth to Dhritarashtra and Pandu, whose sons in turn become the chief figures
of The Mahabharata.
R. K. NARAYAN
Mysore, 1977

LIST OF CHARACTERS AND PLACES OF
ACTION IN THE STORY
(If not otherwise indicated, the “a” is broad, as in “ah”; the “th” is a soft “t”
as in “thyme”; the “u” is “oo” as in “cool”; the “i” is “ee” as in “seen.”)
AGNI (ag′ nee): God of Fire.
AMBA (am′ ba): Princess, sister of Ambika and Ambalika, who was
transformed into Sikandi, a male warrior.
AMBALIKA (am ba′ lee ka): wife of Vichitravirya.
AMBIKA (am′ bee ka): wife of Vichitravirya.
ARJUNA (ar′ joo na): third son of Kunthi.
ASWATHAMA (as wat ta′ ma): son of Drona.
ASWINS (as′ wins): twins, minor gods.
BAKASURA (ba ka′ soo ra): a demon.
BHARADWAJ (ba ra dwaj′): a sage, father of Drona.
BHIMA (bee′ ma): second son of Kunthi.
BHIMASENA (bee′ ma say′ na): same as Bhima.
BHISHMA (beesh′ ma): Devavratha′s later name,
BRIHANNALA (bri ha′ na la): Arjuna′s assumed name in Virata.
CHITRANGADA (chee tran′ ga da): son of Santanu by Satyavathi.
DEVAVRATHA (day va′ vra ta): son of Santanu.
DHANANJAYA (da nan′ ja ya): another name for Arjuna.
DHARMARAJA (dar ma ra′ ja): Yudhistira.
DHAUMYA (dowm′ ya): Yudhistira′s chief priest.
DHRISHTADYUMNA (dri′ shta dyoom′ na): son of Drupada.
DHRITARASHTRA (dri ta rash′ tra): son of Ambika and Ambalika through
Vyasa.
DHURVASA (door va′ sa): a sage known for his quick temper.
DRAUPADI (drow′ pa dee): wife of the Pandava brothers; also called
Panchali or Yajnaseni.
DRONA (dro′ na): a teacher of military science and art to the sons and
nephews of Dhritarashtra.
DRUPADA (droo′ pa da): King of Panchala.

DUSSASANA (doo sa′ sa na): second son of Dhritarashtra.
DURYODHANA (door yo′ da na): eldest son of Dhritarashtra.
DWAITA (dwi′ ta)
DWARAKA (dwa′ ra ka)
EKAVRATA (ay ka′ vra ta)
GANDHARI (gan da′ ree): wife of Dhritarashtra.
GANGA (gan′ ga): Santanu′s first wife.
GHATOTKACHA (ga tot′ ka cha): Bhima′s demon son.
HARI (ha′ ree): one of Krishna′s names.
HASTINAPURA (ha stee na′ poo ra)
INDRA (een′ dra): Chief of the Gods.
INDRAPRASTHA (een′ dra pra′ sta)
JANAMEJAYA (ja na ma jay′ ya): son of King Parikshit.
JAYADRATHA (ja ya′ dra ta): ruler of Sindu, and son-in-law of
Dhritarashtra.
KAMYAKA (kam′ ya ka)
KARNA (kar′ na): son of Kunthi before she married Pandu.
KHANDAVAPRASTHA (kan′ da va pra′ sta)
KICHAKA (kee′ cha ka): General of Virata′s army and brother of the Queen.
KRIPA (kri′ pa): another guru of the young men at the court of Dhritarashtra.
KRISHNA (kreesh′ na): eighth incarnation of Vishnu.
KUNTHI (koon′ tee): wife of Pandu.
KURUKSHETRA (koo ru kshay′ tra)
MADRI (ma′ dree): wife of Pandu.
MATSYA (mat′ sya)
NAKULA (na′ koo la): one of the twins born to Madri.
NARADA (na′ ra da): a sage constantly on the move between all the worlds.
PANCHALA (pan cha′ la)
PANCHALI (pan cha′ lee): Draupadi or Yajnaseni; wife of the Pandava
brothers.
PANDAVA (pan′ da va): generic title of the five brothers, sons of Pandu.
PANDU (pan′ doo): son of Ambika and Ambalika through Vyasa.
PARASAR (pa ra′ sar): a sage who begot Vyasa through Satyavathi before
she married Santanu.
PARIKSHIT (pa ree′ ksheet): successor of Yudhistira and son of Abhimanyu.
PARTHA (par′ ta): another name for Arjuna.
PARISHTA (pa ree′ shta): a king, father of Drupada.

PUROCHANA (poo ro′ cha na): an architect in the service of Duryodhana.
RADHE (ra′ day): foster-mother of Kama.
SAHADEVA (sa ha day′ va): one of the twins born to Madri.
SAKUNI (sa′ koo nee): uncle of Duryodhana.
SALYA (sal′ ya): a king, father of Madri, the second wife of Pandu.
SANJAYA (san′ ja ya): a commentator and a companion of Dhritarashtra.
SANTANU (san′ ta noo): King of Hastinapura.
SATYAKI (sat′ ya kee): Krishna′s companion and charioteer, and supporter
of Pandavas.
SATYAVATHI (sat ya′ va tee): daughter of a fisherman, second wife of King
Santanu.
SAUTI (sow′ tee): narrator.
SIKANDI (see kan′ dee): Amba.
SURYA (soor′ ya): the Sun God.
SUSURMAN (soo soor′ man): King of Trigarta.
SUVALA (soo′ va la): another name for Sakuni.
UPAPLAVYA (oo pa′ pla vya)
UTTARA (oot′ ta ra): son of Virata.
UTTARAI (oot′ ta ri): daughter of Virata; wife of Abhimanyu, the son of
Arjuna.
VARUNA (va roo′ na): God of Rain.
VARANAVATTA (va′ ra na vat′ ta)
VAYU (va′ yoo): God of Wind and Energy.
VASISHTA (va see′ shta): a sage.
VICHITRAVIRYA (vee chee′ tra veer′ ya): son of Santanu by Satyavathi.
VIDURA (vee′ doo ra): son of Ambika and Ambalika through Vyasa.
VIKARNA (vee kar′ na): Dhritarashtra′s son, who crossed over to the
Pandava camp.
VIRATA (vee ra′ ta): King of Matsya.
VISHNU (veesh′ noo): the Supreme God.
VYASA (vya′ sa): son of Parasar and composer of The Mahabharata.
VYSAMPAYANA (vi sam pa′ ya na): narrator.
YAJNASENI (ya gya say′ nee)
YAMA (ya′ ma): God of Death and Justice.
YUDHISTIRA (yoo dee′ stee ra): eldest son of Kunthi.

GENERATION TREE

This work opens the eyes of the world blinded by ignorance. As the sun
dispels darkness, so does Bharata by its exposition of religion, duty,
action, contemplation, and so forth. As the full moon by shedding soft light
helps the buds of the lotus to open, so this Purana by its exposition
expands the human intellect. The lamp of history illumines the ‘whole
mansion of the womb of Nature.’
—Vyasa

1   The Eighth Baby
SANTANU WAS THE RULER of an ancient kingdom with its capital at
Hastinapura*1. One day while out hunting, he came upon a lovely maiden by
the river and fell in love with her. He announced himself and asked, “Will
you be my wife?” Being equally attracted to him, she said, “Yes, but listen
carefully to what I say now. When I am married, I must be absolutely free to
do what I like. At no stage should you ever question my action. I’ll stay as
your wife only as long as you observe this rule.” Santanu accepted the
condition wholeheartedly and they were married.
In due course, she brought forth a baby, and as soon as it could be lifted,
drowned it in the river. Santanu was shocked and bewildered, but could ask

no questions. The next child was also promptly drowned, and then another
and another. As soon as it was born, she carried off every child to the river
and returned to the palace with a smile of satisfaction. Her husband never
referred to this monstrous habit of hers for fear that she might leave, since in
all other respects she proved a splendid wife.
When the eighth child came and she got ready to dispose of it, he followed
her. Unable to control himself any more, he cried, “This is too horrible. Stop
it!”
She replied calmly, “Yes, I will spare this child, but the moment has come
for us to part.”
“Oh, tell me why, before you go.”
So she explained, “Know me now as Ganga, the deity of this river. I took
human form only in order to give birth to these eight babies, as ordained. I
married you because you were the only one worthy of fathering them. The
children are the eight vasus.*2 In their past life, for the sin of stealing Sage
Vasishta’s rare cow, Nandini, they were cursed to be born on earth. On
appealing, seven of them were permitted to leave their physical bodies soon
after birth and return to heaven. However, the eighth member among them,
who had arranged the whole expedition to satisfy the whims of his wife, and
who had actually stolen the cow—the one I am holding now—is to continue
his existence on earth as a man of brilliant accomplishments, but condemned
to a life of celibacy.”
After these explanations Ganga said, “I’ll take this child with me now, but
restore him to you later.”
His desperate questions,                                                           “Oh, when? Where?” were ignored as she
vanished with the child into the river.
Years later, once again at the same spot, the King was accosted by Ganga
and presented with their son, now grown into a youth. She said, “I have
brought him up with care. Now he can go with you. He is named Devavratha.
He has mastered all the Vedas under Sage Vasishta himself; he will be a great
warrior, an expert in the use of astras, and endowed with rare mental and
spiritual qualities. Take him home.” At this, she vanished.
King Santanu returned to the palace a very happy man, and installed the
youth as the heir apparent.
Four years later, King Santanu, following a deer while hunting, came upon
a beautiful maiden in the woods and was once again love-stricken. “Who are

you? Why are you here?” he asked.
She answered, “I am the daughter of a fisherman. I help my father to ferry
pilgrims across the river.”
The King sought her father and asked, “Will you permit us to marry?” He
agreed readily but added, “On the condition that the son born to her will be
your successor.” The King could not accept this and returned to the palace
frustrated.
In the days that followed, the young Prince Devavratha, noticing his
father’s melancholic state, enquired, “What’s troubling your mind?”
The King replied, “I am worried about the future, or rather the future of
our dynasty. You are my only son. If any mishap befalls you, our dynasty will
come to an end. The scriptures say that having an only son is like having no
son. You are at all times engaged in the exercise of arms and you will be a
great warrior, but how can one prophesy a warrior’s end?”
The Prince was bewildered by his father’s statement and sought an
explanation, privately, from their minister. The minister explained that the
King desired to marry the fisherman’s daughter, but that he felt unable to
accept the man’s condition. Devavratha visited the fisherman at his hut and
assured him that when the time came, his daughter’s issue would succeed to
the throne. The fisherman, being too far-sighted, had a further misgiving, and
asked, “Who will be my grandson’s successor?”
“Well, naturally, his son,” said Devavratha. “Perhaps you fear that if I
marry, my sons will be rivals to your daughter’s progeny. I hereby promise
that I’ll live and die a bachelor. This is a firm vow.”
The fisherman was pleased. Devavratha—who from that time came to be
known as Bhishma, meaning “one of firm vow”—addressed the girl, “Now
get into the chariot, please. You will be my mother henceforth.”
Satyavathi,  the  daughter  of  the  fisherman,  bore  the  King  two  sons,
Chitrangada and Vichitravirya. Chitrangada succeeded Santanu, but he was
killed in a battle with a gandharva king. His brother, Vichitravirya, who was
still young, was installed as his successor, with Bhishma acting as a regent at
the request of Satyavathi herself.
Bhishma, anxious not to let the family become extinct, waited for a chance
to  find  a  bride  for  his  ward.  When  the  ruler  of  Kasi  announced  a
swayamwara for his three daughters named Amba, Ambika, and Ambalika,
he presented himself at that court, where many princes from far and near had
assembled to catch the eye of the beauties. At a crucial moment, Bhishma

rose and announced, “Of the several forms of choosing a bride, as the sages
have mentioned, the noblest is that in which a maiden is acquired by force
from amidst a valiant gathering such as this.” Thus saying, he seized the three
girls before anyone could understand what was happening and, pushing them
into his chariot, sped away, pursued by the outraged princes and the father of
the girls. He fought his pursuers off and arrived at Hastinapura with the girls
intended for his half-brother, Vichitravirya.
When the date for their wedding was settled, the eldest of the sisters,
called Amba, said, “I cannot marry your brother, as my heart is already set on
the King of Salwa and I cannot consider anyone else.”
Bhishma admitted her objection and sent her away to Salwa as she
desired.*3 Ambika and Ambalika were married to Vichitravirya and they
lived a happy life for seven years, when Vichitravirya contracted a wasting
disease and died without issue.
At this, Satyavathi pleaded with Bhishma, “Under certain circumstances,
one could perpetuate one’s line through the widows of one’s brother. The
shastras permit it. Please save these girls from ending their lives as barren
women. Our race should continue.”
Bhishma replied, “Order me to do anything else, I will obey you. I cannot
break my vow of celibacy.”
Satyavathi sounded desperate as she said, “There will be no one to offer
our ancestors the funeral cake, no one to perform their annual ceremonies on
the days of remembrance. Save our ancestors. By your good deeds, you must
help them attain their proper regions in the next world. I’m your mother; you
must obey my order. Raise children on these two lovely daughters-in-law of
mine. Ascend the throne yourself and rule Hastinapura. It rests upon you now
to see that the Kuru**4 clan does not perish at this point. You owe a duty to
our ancestors and to the future generations.”
“No, no, no,” Bhishma cried. “I cannot violate any of my vows, even if
you sanction it. You must think of some other means.”
Satyavathi just repeated, “You are adamant. It will be a great solace to
those two girls, now plunged in sorrow, to have children.”
Bhishma said, “Once a vow is made, it’s eternal. It cannot be modified or
given up. There must be other remedies. Let us think it over.”
After further consideration, another proposal occurred to Satyavathi. She
turned to Bhishma, “Now listen to this story and tell me if it seems proper to
you. Years ago, I was in the habit of ferrying people across the river and

once my passenger happened to be an eminent rishi, Parasar. When I was
rowing him across, he looked passionately at me and spoke words of love,
whereupon I trembled with fear. I was afraid of being cursed by him if I
repulsed his advances, and of my father’s fury if ever he should come to
know of any misconduct on my part. I pleaded with the sage, ‘I was born of a
fish mother and an odour of fish always clings to me.’
“‘I am aware of your origin,’ he said, ‘how you came to be conceived in
the womb of a fish. Your real father was a gandharva who, while flying
across the river, spilled his seed, which entered the fish while it was looking
up. Thus you were conceived and, when born, the fisherman adopted you.
The odour of fish clings to you because of your origin, but I will dispel it.’
By his magical powers, he not only rid me of my lifelong fish odour, but
endowed my person with a perpetual fragrance!”
“Yes, my father told me that the first time he was drawn by a fragrance
pervading the woods, and following it, reached you.”
“In return for this favour, I surrendered to the sage’s embraces, the rishi
having caused a fog to arise and envelop us so that we might remain
unobserved. The rishi said, ‘Stay on that island and give birth to your child;
thereby your virginity will not be considered lost.’ Thus was Vyasa born. He
is a sage and a savant, and I have his promise to come to me when I need
him. I can summon him by thought. In a sense and as a matter of fact, he is my
eldest son. If you approve, I will summon him.”
Bhishma replied, “You know best.”
She thought of Vyasa and he arrived at once. Satyavathi explained their
predicament to him and begged him to perpetuate their race through her
daughters-in-law. He agreed, but asked for a year’s time to make himself
presentable, as he was going through a period of penance and was hardly in a
state to approach women. But Satyavathi brushed aside his reservations and
left him no choice in the matter.
Vyasa ordered, “Let the girls be prepared; I will come back.”
Satyavathi  directed  her  first  daughter-in-law,  Ambika,  to  dress  and
decorate herself and wait in her bedchamber. When Vyasa came to her, the
girl was repelled by his appearance, clothes, complexion, hirsuteness, and
uncleanliness. She went to bed with him with her eyes tightly shut.
Subsequently, Vyasa declared to Satyavathi, “A beautiful child will be
born to Ambika. He’ll rule this country, but he will be blind since Ambika
shut her eyes during conception.”

Thereupon Satyavathi induced him to come again and offered him her
second daughter-in-law, Ambalika. The girl, decorated and dressed, waited
in bed, but at the approach of Vyasa, she turned pale with fright.
Vyasa told Satyavathi later, “The child born to Ambalika will be brave
and distinguished but will be pallid.”
Satyavathi  persuaded  Ambalika  to  give  herself  another  chance  after
begging Vyasa to make a third visit. When Vyasa arrived, Ambalika dressed
her maidservant appropriately and substituted her in her bed. The servant
was bold and responsive, which pleased Vyasa, and hence the child born of
this union was normal.
The eldest son, blind from birth, was named Dhritarashtra. The second,
owing to his pallor, was named Pandu; and the third child born to the servant
maid, who was normal in every way, was named Vidura, whose wisdom,
judgement, and courage in speech and action, have made him an outstanding
character in the story of The Mahabharata, which may be said to begin with
these three personalities.
Dhritarashtra grew up under the care of Bhishma, who found him a
suitable bride when he attained manhood—the Princess of Gandhara, called
Gandhari. In order to share her husband’s blind condition, she spent the rest
of her life with eyes bandaged tight. However, owing to his handicap,
Dhritarashtra surrendered his authority to his younger brother, Pandu, who
had two wives called Kunthi and Madri.
Pandu’s enthronement received all-round approval. He proved to be
valorous and just, and enhanced the prestige and power of the Kuru clan by
subjugating their neighbouring kingdoms. After these martial exertions, Pandu
sought relaxation in a retreat amidst a forest of Sal trees on the southern
slopes of the Himalayas.
One day while hunting, Pandu killed a deer, which was engaged in love
play with its mate. Before dying, the deer—actually a celestial being—
uttered the curse, “Your end will come at a moment when you attempt to unite
with your wife.” Thus was an irrevocable celibacy imposed upon Pandu. He
became unhappy and planned to renounce the world. To die without issue,
never to approach his wives again, seemed terrible.
At this juncture, Kunthi explained to him a blessing conferred on her by
Sage Dhurvasa when she was young. Dhurvasa was a quick-tempered man,
but Kunthi managed to please him by her ministrations when he visited her
parents. He blessed her, “May you be the mother of godly children,” and

taught her a mantra with which she could invoke any god of her choice and
enjoy his company. Dhurvasa had a seer’s vision and realised that she would
need this help in the future. After he left, she became curious about the
privilege conferred on her, and invoked Surya, the Sun God, by uttering the
mantra. He stood before her in all his glory and asked, “What is your
desire?”
“No, no, nothing,” she stammered. “I was only . . . playing                        ” She
prostrated herself before him and begged, “Forgive me, please go, forgive
me.”
“Did you not know that you should not play thus; and that a mantra is not to
be trifled with?”
She stood speechless, petrified with fear, whereupon the god took her in
his arms and caressed her and left after a prolonged dalliance. A child was
born of this union, his future indicated by the fact that he was born encased in
armour and wearing large earrings. The child was named Kama.
To avoid a scandal, Kunthi placed the baby in a basket and floated it down
the river. It was picked up by one Radhe, the wife of a charioteer, who dwelt
on the river bank. The foundling was viewed as a godsend and cherished by
the couple.
On hearing this story, Pandu said, “The gods have blessed you thus for
fulfilling a divine purpose. The curse on me debars fatherhood for the rest of
my life. But you could be a unique and blessed mother. Don’t let time run out.
Prepare yourself to invite and receive the gods. First pray to Yama, the God
of Death and Ultimate Justice. He is the most judicious among the celestial
beings. The son born to him will always lead our Kuru race along the right
path at all times.”
Kunthi prepared herself in her chambers, meditated upon Yama, and
uttered  the  mantra  which  she  had  already  experimented  with.  Yama
responded to her invocation, and this being her second effort, she knew how
to conduct herself before a god. Thus came her first born. A heavenly voice
announced at the time of his birth, “The child will be the best of men, truthful
in thought, word, and deed, and also blessed with strength and courage. He
shall be named Yudhistira, which means one unflinching in war.”
Pandu induced Kunthi to pray for a second son. “A kshatriya’s life cannot
be complete, except with possession of physical strength. So now pray for a
son endowed with extraordinary strength.” Kunthi invoked Vayu, the God of

Wind, and got a child so strong that when he rolled off his mother’s side he
caused a minor earthquake. The child was named Bhimasena.
After this Pandu once again thought, “We must have a warrior in our family
whose prowess at arms should be unmatched.” After a full year’s penance
observed by both himself and Kunthi, they prayed to Indra, the Chief of Gods,
who had great endowments. When Kunthi gave birth to a son, a heavenly
voice said,                                                                         “This son will be unmatched in energy, wisdom, and the
knowledge of weapons; he will wield with ease every kind of weapon and
subjugate all his enemies and bring fame to the race of Kurus.” This child
was named Arjuna.
After this Kunthi declined to bear any more children, although Pandu was
eager for more. Madri, his second wife, also pleaded at this time that she
should not be left barren, while Kunthi had three children. Pandu appealed to
Kunthi to impart the mantra to Madri. Invoking the gods Aswins, she
conceived and brought forth the brilliant twins Nakula and Sahadeva. These
five brothers came to be known as the Pandavas.
Meanwhile, Gandhari had borne a hundred sons by Dhritarashtra, the blind
King, the eldest being Duryodhana, the second Dussasana, and so on. These
set themselves up as enemies of the Pandavas all their life, and The
Mahabharata may be said to be a tale of conflict between the two groups
that never ceased except with death.
Pandu’s end came on rather suddenly. One day, going into the woods in the
company of Madri, he was overcome by the spirit of the hour and the mood
of the spring, with tender leaves on the trees, and colourful blossoms, and the
cries of birds, and the stirrings of animal life all around. Unable to resist the
attraction of Madri at his side, he seized her passionately, in spite of her
reminder of the curse, and died during intercourse. Entrusting her twins to the
care of Kunthi, Madri ascended the funeral pyre along with her husband and
ended her life.

2   Enter-the Players
FROM THE SYLVAN RETREAT where Pandu had spent his later days, after
his death, Kunthi came to Hastinapura with her five children to live under the
care of Dhritarashtra and Bhishma. Dhritarashtra, at this stage at least,
treated alike the one hundred sons born to his wife and the five of his
brother’s  sons.  They  were  nourished,  educated,  and  trained  without
partiality.
The  children  played  all  day  among  themselves,  but  at  every  game
Bhimasena teased and played pranks on his cousins. Duryodhana gradually
began to feel irritated when he found himself the butt of these pranks and
practical jokes. When he walked or ran, Bhimasena tripped him from behind;
when he climbed a tree, Bhima would seize its trunk in his mighty grip and
give it a shake till the other fell off his perch. At a later stage, Duryodhana
began to feel that existence would be impossible with his cousins around.
Through his accomplices, he made a few attempts to get rid of them,
especially Bhima, who was drugged, poisoned, trussed up, and thrown into
the river. But Bhima managed to overcome the effect of the drug, neutralised
the poison, and floated up from the depths of the river.

When Bhishma appointed a guru to train the young men in the use of arms,
Duryodhana noticed with bitterness that the master was paying special
attention to Arjuna. The guru, called Drona, was of brahmin origin and,
unusually for a brahmin, was an expert in warfare and the science of
weapons. He coached his pupils with great sincerity and made them all
versatile fighters. He also trained his only son, Aswathama, with special
care.
In addition to what he was directly taught, Arjuna watched unseen all those
special lessons Aswathama was given by his father and absorbed them also.
Arjuna soon became adept in wielding the sword, the mace, and the lance, or
in hitting the mark with his arrow, however difficult the target might be. He
fought with equal ease on foot, horseback, or chariot; single-handed he could
engage a vast number in combat. In addition to these skills, he could
effectively send out astras, missiles propelled by mystic incantations. Thus
he could perform what seemed miracles with his bow and arrow.
One day, to test his pupils, Drona mounted an artificial eagle on a tall pole
and told them to try to sever its head from its body when he gave the order.
First he said, “Tell me each of you all that comes within your sight when you
take aim.” He started with Yudhistira, who explained, “I see you and that tree
and the branches                                                                 ”
Drona shook his head and cried, “Stop, stop; next.” The next also gave an
account of all that came within the range of his vision. Finally he summoned
Arjuna and asked, “What do you see?”
“A bird above.”
“How much of it?”
“Only its head.”
“What part of the head?”
“The forehead.”
“What part of the forehead?”
“The centre.”
“Shoot,” Drona ordered, and Arjuna brought down the head of the bird
neatly. Drona hugged him with joy. “This indeed is marksmanship!”
Arjuna had an occasion to prove again his extraordinary gift. Once, when
bathing in the river, Drona’s thighs were caught in the jaws of a crocodile.
Arjuna immediately shot five arrows into the river and sliced up the monster
into fragments. For this service, Drona imparted to him the secret of
employing a very special weapon. But he warned him, “If hurled against an

inferior foe, it might burn up the entire universe; keep it with care. If you
encounter a supernatural foe, you may use it without any thought. With this
weapon in your hand, no one in the world can ever conquer you.”
Bhima and Duryodhana were experts in wielding the mace for offence and
defence. Aswathama was an expert in several branches of arms, the twins in
handling the sword. Yudhistira was unexcelled as a chariot fighter (one who
could move his chariot for attack and counter-attack in a battle and fight in
motion). At last Drona reported to King Dhritarashtra, “Your sons have
completed their training. They have nothing more to learn. Now, we must
arrange an exhibition of their skills. Let there be a public ceremony, which
the citizens may witness.”
On a vast ground, galleries and pavilions were built for the spectators
around a spacious arena. On a chosen day, invitations were sent out far and
wide. The King, along with his wife and members of the royal family,
occupied special seats. Many princes from the neighbouring countries were
also present. Drona, clad in white, entered the arena and formally announced
to the public the names and accomplishments of his pupils, presenting them
one by one. A commentator, Sanjaya, sat beside Dhritarashtra and narrated in
detail  everything  he  witnessed  on  the  arena.                                 “Now,  here  they  come.
Yudhistira enters on horseback, leading the rest. His younger brothers, in the
order of their rank and age, are giving a display, each bearing his favourite
weapon in hand. It is really wonderful. Ah! The spectators are excited and
now you can hear their shouts. Ah, some are averting their heads for fear that
the arrows may fall on them, but the arrows fly with such precision that they
fall within an inch of those in the front rows. Well done! Well done               What
grace and agility! Now their guru approaches each one of them to bless them
publicly. He looks so happy . . .” Dhritarashtra listened to this account
enthusiastically at first, but later rather coldly asked, “What about my sons?
You have said nothing about them.”
“Yes, yes, they are there, also resplendent, perhaps waiting for their turn.”
“You say nothing about Duryodhana.”
“Oh, he is just entering with his mace held high and Bhima faces him,
swinging his mace like a wild elephant raising its trunk                           Duryodhana is
surrounded by all his brothers. He looks like the red planet studded around
with stars; his face is flushed with anger and if they clash with their maces it
will be an unbearable spectacle. But Aswathama stands upright in the midst

of your sons . . . he moves with ease and confidence between the clashing
mountains. He has been asked by his father, Drona, to restrain Bhima and
your son and separate them.
“Arjuna is at the centre of the stage                                            Oh, he has mastered the astras,
and the mantras that charge them with power. Now with one arrow he has
created fire; now water, air, and storm. Don’t you hear? Now clouds, now
land, he has created mountains around, and now when he employs another
weapon, all of them vanish. Now on a chariot, now on foot, so dexterous and
fast. Now he discharges twenty shafts into the hollow of a bull horn,
suspended overhead and swinging in the wind. Marvellous feats . . .
marvellous feats                                                                 His master sheds tears of joy. Arjuna pauses only to
receive the pat on his back.”
Nearly at the close of Arjuna’s grand performance, when the public
excitement was dying down and the musical instruments became silent, there
arose at the gate a sudden uproar. A warrior, hitherto unnoticed, clad in a
mail coat, brilliant looking and wearing earrings, stood throwing challenges
in a thundering tone. It was Kama, whom no one had seen before except
Kunthi, when she had floated him down the river as an infant. Being the
offspring of the Sun God, he had a radiant personality, and people began to
look at each other and ask, “Who is this youth? Who is this?”
The warrior threw a casual, indifferent salute in the direction of Drona and
the other elders and proclaimed, “I can do all that Partha*1 has done and
more.” With Drona’s permission, he repeated every act that Arjuna had
performed. This delighted Duryodhana, who hugged him, happy at finding a
rival to Arjuna, and promised, “Your wish will be fulfilled whatever it may
be. Live with us and be one of us. Treat all that we have as yours.”
Kama replied, “I accept your friendship without hesitation. I have only one
small desire, help me attain it—to engage Arjuna in a single combat.”
“Go on, with our blessings,” said Duryodhana. “We know that you will
place your feet on the head of your foe, whoever he may be.”
Arjuna felt stirred by this dialogue. “You are an intruder, you have come
unasked,  unceremoniously,  and  I  will  give  you  just  the  treatment  any
impudent intruder deserves.”
“This arena is a public one,” retorted Kama. “I have as much right to be
here as anyone else. A true kshatriya has no need to waste his time in words,
like the feeble ones of other castes who exhaust themselves in futile

arguments. If you have learnt to hold a bow and arrow, let that speak and you
will get my immediate answer!”
Now the parties were falling into definite groups, the Pandava brothers
surrounding Arjuna on one side, Duryodhana on the opposite side, with
Drona, Vidura, and the other elders uncertainly in between. When they faced
each other thus, Kunthi—who by certain marks now recognized Kama as her
son—swooned away at the prospect of the brothers attacking each other.
Kunthi was revived with a sprinkling of sandal paste and rose water by
Vidura, who knew Kama’s antecedents.
Arjuna, being the son of Indra, the Lord of Cloud and Thunder, was
protected by that god, who sent down clouds and mist to obscure Arjuna’s
presence. Kama, being the son of the Sun God, was bathed in bright light and
stood exposed, a perfect target for an archer. At this moment, Kripa, a master
of the science of war and a guru for Dhritarashtra’s children, addressed
Kama. “O warrior, please tell us the names of your father and mother and the
name of the royal line you come from. After you mention it, this warrior
Arjuna will decide whether to fight or not. He is the son of a King, and you
realise that sons of kings will not stoop to fight with men of lesser breed.”
At this Kama’s face fell. He could not satisfy the formalities of lineage. He
stood dumb.
Duryodhana interrupted. “At this very moment, I am installing him as the
King of Anga, for which I have the authority.” He hurriedly summoned the
priests to the arena, went through the ceremony of a coronation, and
proclaimed Kama the King of Anga, while the gathering watched in wonder.
He then addressed Arjuna, “Now here is the King, he has no objection to
engaging you in combat, mere Prince that you are. You see the royal umbrella
held over him.”
But no actual combat ensued. The duel was mostly verbal, as Bhima came
forward to question Kama’s kingly status. “I noticed, a little while ago, the
driver of the chariot coming down to hug and cheer him. He is no eminent
charioteer, as one might have on a battlefield, but an ordinary suta who whips
horses and drives his master from place to place. This fellow is this instant
dubbed King, but he is no more than the son of a driver. Go, go, you fellow,
your hand is made to crack a whip, not to lift a sword or a bow.”
Duryodhana argued back, “Karna is not only the King of Anga, but can
easily be the ruler of the whole world. He will be equal to five of you or

more at any time. If anyone resists this claim, let him ascend his chariot and
bend his bow, employing both his hands and feet.”
There were confused murmurs in the crowd, some approving, some
disapproving. At this moment the sun set and since there could be no combat
after sunset, the assembly dispersed. Duryodhana, clasping Karna’s hand, led
him through a path of lamps lit especially for him.
Presently, Drona gathered all his pupils and announced, “The time has
come to demand of you my fee for the training and guidance I have given you.
I have waited for this occasion all my life.”
When they all assured him that they would give him whatever he asked, he
just said, “Now you must march on Panchala, seize their King, whose name
is Drupada, and bring him prisoner before me. If you succeed in this effort,
you will have fulfilled my lifelong ambition.”
Without asking for any word of explanation, they assured him, “We will set
out this minute.”
“Yes, but listen first to this story,” explained Drona. “When I was young, I
lived with my father, Bharadwaj, who was a great teacher. He trained me so
that I could be a teacher in my time, and if you have learnt anything now, it is
all what he had taught me originally. My classmate at that time was the son of
one Prishta, who came every day to our hermitage to study in my company
and then play with me. We were good friends. When Prishta died, my friend
succeeded to the throne. He bade me farewell, and assured me not to hesitate
if I needed his help at any time. When my son Aswathama was born, my
father was no more and I had a difficult time. When the child cried for milk
and I could not get it for him, I felt desperate, and I thought of visiting my
friend to ask for a cow. His guards at the palace gate stopped me. I then
ordered them to go in and announce to the Prince—as I had known him—that
his old friend had come to see him. He made me wait at the gate till the
evening, and then two guards escorted me, as if I were a prisoner, to his
august presence. As he sat there on a high seat, surrounded by his courtiers, I
felt like a beggar looking up at him.
“‘Who are you? What do you want?’ he asked majestically. I explained
who I was and how I had come to visit him as an old friend. ‘Friend!’ he
repeated sneeringly and looked about. His courtiers sniggered politely,
stared at me with surprise, and shook their heads. I repeated the word
‘friend’ again, whereupon the King from his eminence said, ‘Oh, ignorant

one, don’t you realise that there can be no such thing as friendship between
persons of unequal status? How can a king be a friend of a man in want, such
as you? Obviously, you have come to ask for something. Yes, that you shall
have for travelling so far. I see that you are a brahmin in want, but don’t ask
for friendship. It can never be. Take the gift and be gone.’ He turned to a
courtier and said something and continued, ‘It may be that we were at some
stage thrown together through special circumstances, but don’t you realise
that time changes everything? There can be no such thing as permanent
friendship; it is a childish notion                                                  Now you may go, take the presents they
will bring you and go away.’
“I stood speechless with rage. I could not bring myself to mention my
child. I could hardly believe that this was the same man I had played with
under the trees of our hermitage until his elders came after him in the evening
to take him home. I was too angry to say more than, ‘I will wait till the same
“time” you speak of comes round to give me a chance to speak to you again.’
I turned on my heel and left, while they ran after me with all sorts of gifts in a
bundle. I threw the bundle at the palace gate and went home. Thereafter, I
wandered here and there, and when I came to this city, Bhishma recognized
me and engaged me to be your teacher. Now let me demand my fee. Go out
all of you, attack Panchala with the best of your arms, chariots, and soldiers,
and bring that Drupada back a prisoner, alive                                        ”
Soon the engines of war rolled on, and the young men were delighted to
test their skill in arms. In a matter of days, they returned with the booty asked
for, King Drupada, as captive. They placed him before their master Drona,
who addressed him from his eminent seat: “Aswathama, who is my son, was
a child in need of milk when I approached you for help to acquire a cow for
his sake. Today, he is a warrior in his own right; he joined my other pupils in
besieging your city—all on my order. I could take your life, if I chose, but
have no fear. I am not vindictive, still valuing the memory of our boyhood
days. I will give you back half your kingdom, unasked. The other half I will
keep and rule, so that we may remain equals. I will always be your friend;
have no doubt about it.”

3   House of Joy-and Ashes
DHRITARASHTRA, in an excess of affection for his nephews, announced
Yudhistira as his heir apparent, and immediately he regretted it. The heir
apparent and his brothers appeared to take their roles too earnestly. The
brothers together and separately led expeditions around the neighbouring
kingdoms, conquered territories, and expanded the empire of Kurus. They
became heroes in the eyes of the public, who discussed their exploits
constantly.
As became a king, Dhritarashtra constantly enquired of his spies, “What
are people talking about?” The spies reported how at the market-place
everyone was talking about Arjuna’s exploits, the feats of Bhima, or the
greatness of Yudhistira. The King would have preferred his sons to be
mentioned also, but there was no reference to Duryodhana or his brothers.
He called his chief minister, a man versed in political subtleties, and
asked him confidentially, “Did you notice how Pandu’s sons are trying to
become popular, overshadowing everyone else? I am not feeling happy about
it. You realise that my sons and nephews are equally endowed, but those
boys are going too far. Please advise me. You know what I have in mind.”
The minister, astute and cunning, replied, “Yes, yes, I understand. I was
preparing to bring up this subject myself.” He then elaborated on his thesis as
to how a king should protect himself from enemies within and without, and
how ruthless he should be in guarding himself. “Keep your teeth sharp
enough to give a fatal bite at any moment. You should stand in fear even of

those from whom you could expect no treachery. Never trust anyone or show
your distrust openly. There can be no kith and kin for a king, if Your Majesty
will forgive my saying so. We must place our spies not only in foreign
kingdoms, but in our midst too; in public gardens, places of amusement,
temples, drinking halls; in the homes of ministers, chief priest, chief justice,
heir apparent and heir presumptive; and also behind doorkeepers and drivers
of chariots                                                                        Our sources of information must be widespread and
unlimited. Every report, however slight, must be scrutinised and assayed. For
a long time I have been considering various measures of security to be
enforced in this palace, only now do I dare talk about it.” He suggested in a
subtle, roundabout manner that the King should exile his nephews.
Duryodhana, after making sure that his father’s complacency was shaken,
whispered to him in the privacy of his chamber, “We must look to our safety;
the time has come. Our spies report that the citizens expect Yudhistira to be
crowned any minute. You made a mistake in declaring him heir to the throne.
People conclude that you are abdicating because of your handicap, as you
had done once in favour of Pandu. We must wake up. I will try to wean away
the more important sections among the people with gifts and honours, so that
they may start speaking in our favour. It will work, but gradually. Meanwhile,
it is important that we get Pandu’s sons out of the capital—temporarily, at
least. If Pandu’s son becomes king, and after him, his son or his brothers, or
their sons, and then their sons, we will be nowhere. There is no cause for you
to feel alarmed. In your lifetime you will be cared for. Bhishma is here, and
Pandu’s sons will not dare to touch your person. But others, the sons of the
blind ex-King, will be doomed.”
Dhritarashtra waited for a chance to speak to Yudhistira, whose hours
were fully occupied in the performance of his duties as heir apparent. He
consolidated the territories he had won for the King, listened to public
grievances, and inspected the army, encouraging the generals with words of
praise and decorations. He was accessible to all and sundry, and hardly
disturbed his uncle with affairs of the state.
Dhritarashtra waited for two days, and then summoned Yudhistira. “How
hard-working you are!” he said. “It is my good fortune to have your help; you
have relieved me of much fatiguing work. However, I have begun to feel that
you must have a change, some relaxation. I am thinking where you should go
if you wish to . . .”

He paused, as if to consider several possibilities. Panic had made him
crafty. He had already decided, on the advice of Duryodhana, to send
Yudhistira to a place named Varanavata, at a safe distance from the capital.
He continued, “During the coming festival of Shiva, the town will be full of
gaiety, and I have no doubt you will enjoy this holiday. Take your mother and
brothers along; take a lot of gifts with you so that you may distribute presents
liberally to artists, performers, and learned men; stay as long as you like at
Varanavata. After all, the heir to the throne must become familiar with all
parts of the country and must have been seen by all his subjects before he
ascends the throne.”
Yudhistira understood the implications of this generous offer, but kept his
thoughts to himself.
On a certain day fixed by the astrologers, Yudhistira took leave of his
uncle and, with his brothers, started for Varanavata in several chariots. A
large body of citizens followed, a few among them expressing their suspicion
about the motives of the King. Yudhistira assuaged their fears and suspicions.
“Our King is our father, concerned with our welfare. He means well for us.
We will come back after enjoying our holiday.”
As a piece of courtesy, Bhishma and Drona and other elders escorted the
Pandavas part of the way, and then turned back. Vidura accompanied them
farther, up to the frontier of the capital, where a group of citizens still
surrounded them.
Before  bidding  them  farewell,  Vidura  uttered  a  warning  in  a  code
language: “One who understands his enemy can never be hurt. One should
realise that there are sharp weapons, though not of steel, that could strike if
one is not watchful. What consumes wood and straw can never reach a hole;
remember that the jackal emerges from many outlets underground. The
wanderer may know the direction by the stars and survive by firmness of
mind.”
Yudhistira answered in the same manner, “I have understood.”
Later, when the others had left and they were proceeding along, Kunthi
remarked, “You and Vidura were conversing in a strange dialect before
parting. We could not make out what you were saying. What was it?”
“You will understand in course of time. Let us not talk of it now,” replied
Yudhistira.

The citizens of Varanavata received the Pandavas with great enthusiasm.
They were invited into many homes. They mixed with the crowds and
enjoyed the excitement of the Shiva festival. Among those who had received
them with a great show of warmth was one Purochana, an architect, who was
Duryodhana’s agent. He had designed for the Pandavas an exclusive mansion
named the House of Joy, fitted with luxurious beds, carpets, and couches of
original design, and stocked with food and drink. The five brothers and their
mother each had separate accommodations with every comfort.
But when Purochana had left them alone, Yudhistira took Kunthi aside.
“The wretch thinks I don’t know. Mother, this is what Vidura warned us
about. If you sniff deeply, you will notice the smell of oil, resin, and straw,
which are packed behind those gilded walls. The man lives here, to ward off
suspicion, but he is waiting for a signal from our beloved cousin to start a
fire at midnight. Let us be watchful and not betray any sign that we know.”
As hoped, a few days later, there came a quiet visitor, a messenger from
Vidura.  He  identified  himself  by  quoting  Vidura’s  parting  message  to
Yudhistira, “Remember the jackal emerges from many outlets . . .” to which
Yudhistira replied, “I have understood.”
The  visitor  said,                                                                “I  am  a  specialist  in  digging  mines.  I  can  make
subterranean tunnels.” When Yudhistira took him aside, the miner continued,
“Purochana has been ordered to wait for the dark half of the month and start
the fire on the fourteenth day at midnight, when you are asleep.” With a grim
smile, Yudhistira remarked, “How thoughtful of them!”
“I will complete my work well before that time,” said the miner. “May I
look through this mansion and select a spot for excavation? No one must hear
the sound of our crowbars.”
In a central portion of the house, a chamber of thick walls and doors, the
miner dug up the floor behind closed doors, taking care not to rouse
Purochana’s suspicion. When the pit was ready, its mouth was covered with
planks and camouflaged, while the miner’s men went underground and built a
tunnel. Purochana, unsuspecting, continued to play the role of steward to the
Pandava household, and the citizens of Varanavata never had any inkling of
the intrigues and counter-intrigues, but rejoiced to see so much of the
Pandava princes in their midst.
When the tunnel was ready, Kunthi invited the public to a grand feast.
After the guests had been fed and seen off, Yudhistira said to his brothers, “It
is time for us to leave, too.”

They opened the secret passage, and after everyone had gotten in, Bhima
remained behind to set fire to the house, starting with the room in which
Purochana was sleeping. It was a successful conflagration. The material
being what it was, very soon the whole building was in flames. By the time
the town woke up to it, the Pandavas had proceeded far into the tunnel.
When they emerged at the other end on a river’s edge, a boat awaited them
with ready sails. The boatman had been engaged by Vidura and established
his credentials by repeating the message, “Remember that the jackal emerges
from many outlets underground.” Then he carried them safely across the
river. On the other side, they entered a thick forest, where they wandered
aimlessly, wishing only to get far away from Hastinapura.
There was much public mourning and private rejoicing at the news that the
Pandavas had perished in a fire. In the mansion named the House of Joy, the
charred remains of a woman and her five sons had been discovered.
Dhritarashtra had not expected his security measures to be carried so far, and
was  now  conscience  stricken.  He  ordered  elaborate  obsequies  to  be
performed for the dear departed and country-wide public mourning.

4   Bride for Five
IN THE FOREST, Bhima maintained a watch, while his mother and brothers,
overcome with fatigue, slumped down and fell asleep. His heart bled to see
them lying on the bare ground. At the thought of their travails, he ground his
teeth and swore vengeance on his kinsmen. But through his physical might
and courage he was able to mitigate their suffering. He even carried them on
his shoulder when one or the other was footsore or tired.
Once he encountered a rakshasa, hiding himself in a mountain cave, who
waylaid and ate up any human being passing through the forest. Bhima
destroyed him and made the forest safe for others coming after him. The
rakshasa’s sister, Hidimba, fell in love with Bhima, assumed a beautiful

human form, and bore him a son named Ghatotkacha, who always came to his
father’s aid in any crisis and played a great part in the battle later.
The path ahead seemed endless as the one behind. The exiles had lost all
sense of direction or goal. They ate roots and berries or hunted game. They
had passed many forests, mountains, and lakes, with nothing clear except that
they were going in the right direction, away from Hastinapura. Kunthi asked
now and then, “Do you have any idea when and where we shall stop?”
“No,” replied Yudhistira, “but I have no doubt that we will have guidance
at the right moment.” He proceeded along, and the others followed.
One day at dusk, when they were resting beside a lake after the evening
ablutions and prayers, they had a venerable visitor. It was their great-
grandfather Vyasa, the Island-Born, and composer of The Mahabharata. It
was a welcome change from the monotony of trudging along in the same
company.
Vyasa said, “You see those two paths? Follow the one to your left, and you
will arrive at a town called Ekavrata. There you will be quite safe from
observation. You will have to behave like brahmins and live quietly and bide
your time. Your fortunes will change and circumstances will change. But be
patient. Ahead I see victory for your principles. Have no doubt that you will
again live in your palace, rule the country, distribute gifts and alms to the
needy, and perform grand sacrifices such as the rajasuya and aswametha.”
At Ekavrata, Vyasa introduced the Pandavas to a hospitable family who
gave them shelter. They were at peace with themselves now, but for the
gnawing memory of their cousins’ vileness. Yudhistira always calmed them
with his philosophy of resignation and hope. Their daily life soon fell into a
routine. As became brahmins, they went round the town begging for alms,
returned with their collection, and placed it before their mother, who divided
it among them. Bhima’s needs being greater than those of others, he was
given the largest share of food. Thus life went on uneventfully until one day
they found their hosts in great grief, arguing among themselves. There was
much gloom and lamentation through all their quiet arguments, which were
overheard by their guests. There came a stage when the Pandavas could not
help asking for an explanation.
Their host said, “On the edge of this town lives a rakshasa who leaves us
alone only on condition that every home send up, by turn, a cartload of rice
and two buffaloes, to be delivered by a member of the house. He is always

so hungry that he consumes the food, the buffaloes, and finally also the person
who has brought him the food. We dare not complain, since he threatens to
destroy this town if there is any form of resistance. Every home gets its turn;
today it is ours. I want to be the one to go and save the younger members of
my family, but each one of them wants to be the victim to save the rest. I
don’t know. I think the best course would be for all of us to be consumed by
that demon so that no one will be left to grieve for another                      ”
After pondering the situation, Kunthi turned to Bhima and said, “You take
the food for that rakshasa today.”
But when Bhima readily agreed, Yudhistira tried to stop him. “We cannot
risk Bhima, nor Arjuna, nor the twins, who are very tender                        Let me carry
the food for the rakshasa. Even if I perish, Bhima and Arjuna will be able to
see you all through your difficult days.”
He was overruled by Kunthi. “Let Bhima go; he will come back.”
Pushing along a cartload of food and two buffaloes, Bhima arrived on the
edge of the town. He drove off the animals before entering the forest, and let
out a big shout, calling the demon by his name. “Baka, come out,” he called
repeatedly, and started eating the food himself. “Hey, you wretch,” he dared,
“come on and watch me eat                                                         ”
The demon came thundering out. “Who are you to call me by name?” He
was fierce and immense.
Bhima calmly continued to eat without even turning to look, as the demon
came up behind him with all that uproar. Noticing his indifference, the
rakshasa hit him from behind, but Bhima went on eating.
“Who are you, eating the food meant for me? Where are the animals?”
Bhima  said,                                                                      “Animals?  The  buffaloes?  They  are  grazing  peacefully
somewhere. I drove them off. You will not have them or anything else to eat
today. You are on a fast today.” He was unconcerned even when the rakshasa
belaboured him from behind. “I don’t like this disturbance while eating. You
must learn to wait.”
The rakshasa felt rather bewildered at first, and gave him a few more
knocks, but Bhima with his mouth full just flicked him off as if he were a bug
on his nape. The rakshasa now tried to pull him away from the heap of food
and grab it himself. He could hardly move Bhima from his seat, and when he
tried to reach for his food, Bhima warded off his hand indifferently.
“I am hungry, how dare you?” screamed the rakshasa till the forests echoed
with his voice. “I will eat you.”

“Oh, yes,” said Bhima, “I know you will do it, you devil, treating those
who bring you food as if they were a side dish. Know that you can’t do it any
more                                                                                              ”
“Or do you plan to eat me?” asked the rakshasa sneeringly.
“No, I wouldn’t relish you, but I can tear you into morsels convenient for
jackals and vultures to eat                                                                       ”
Every attempt that the rakshasa made to seize the heap of rice was
frustrated by Bhima, who began to enjoy the game immensely. All the
rakshasa’s attempts to choke him were equally frustrated. Bhima did not
budge until he had polished off every scrap of food he had brought, and then
he turned to settle the score with his adversary. A grand fight ensued—they
tore up immense trees, hurled boulders and rocks, and hit each other with
fists. Finally Bhima lifted the rakshasa over his head, whirled him about, and
dashed him on the ground. As he lay limp, Bhima placed his knee over him
and broke his back.
The citizens of the town were filled with gratitude and asked in wonder
how a brahmin came to possess such strength and valour, qualities which
would have been appropriate only in a kshatriya. The Pandavas explained
Bhima’s talents away by saying that he had mastered certain esoteric mantras
which enabled him to overcome even the deadliest adversary.
It soon became necessary for the Pandavas to move on from the hospitable
home, where they were now in danger of being recognized. Moreover, a
traveller  had  informed  them  that  Drupada,  the  King  of  Panchala,  had
announced the swayamwara of his daughter, and that he had sent invitations
far and wide for prospective bridegrooms to assemble in his palace on a
certain day so that the bride might make her choice.
The Story of Drupada
Drupada, smarting under the defeat inflicted on him by the disciples of Drona, had wandered far
and wide and found a guru, who instructed him as to how to beget a son who could someday
vanquish Drona.
Drupada had performed prayers and sacrifices, and from the sacrificial fire arose a son and a
daughter. The son was born bearing arms and encased in armour, and had all the indications of
becoming an outstanding warrior. He was named Dhrishtadyumna, meaning “one born with courage,
arms, and ornaments.” The daughter was dark and beautiful and was called Draupadi and also
Panchali.
Draupadi’s swayamwara was not an occasion to be missed, so the
Pandavas and their mother started for Panchala. There, they occupied an

obscure house on the Potters’ Street. At the start of each day they went round
seeking alms, and brought home their collections to be divided among them
by their mother.
On the day of the swayamwara, the Pandavas had left home early and
joined the throng moving towards the palace. A vast ground had been cleared
and built up with galleries to accommodate the visitors and the young men
contending for the Princess’s hand. Princelings wearing gaudy decorations
and bearing imposing arms had arrived on horseback and chariots.
The day started with elaborate ceremonies performed by the royal priests.
At the appointed hour, Draupadi entered the arena and looked around,
sending all the young hearts racing. She was escorted by Dhrishtadyumna, her
brother, the Prince of the house. He announced that those who would be
eligible to be garlanded by the Princess must string a bow kept on a pedestal
and shoot five arrows at a revolving target above by looking at its reflection
on a pan of oil below.
The princes from the warrior class were the first to approach, but most of
them withdrew after one look at the bow. One or two dropped it on their
toes. Some could not even stretch the steel coil forming its bowstring.
Draupadi watched the process of elimination with relief. She saw the
princes, in imposing battle dress, coming forward haughtily and retreating
hastily, galloping away on their horses. Comments, jokes, and laughter filled
the air.
The Kauravas were in a group at one corner of the hall contemptuously
watching the arrivals and departures. Karna, the most gifted master of arms
and  archery,  was  there  with  Duryodhana.  His  brothers  and  henchmen
occupied the seats of honour and jeered at the candidates who failed. A lull
fell on the assembly when their turn came, and the girl shivered instinctively
and prayed to the gods to be saved from them.
She watched with apprehension as Karna approached the bow and lifted it
as if it were a toy. He stood it on its end and stretched out the bowstring. But
at the very moment when he took aim to shoot the mark, Draupadi was heard
to remark, “I will not accept him                                                  ” At this, Karna dropped the bow and
returned to his seat with a wry smile.
Duryodhana frowned and said in a whisper, “She had no right to talk. If
you string the bow and hit the mark, she must accept you. That is the
condition. Otherwise, you may seize her and fly off. Go back and take the
bow. We will support you.”

“No,” said Karna, “I don’t want her.”
In that assembly, unobserved, was a person who was to play a vital role in
The Mahabharata later. It was Krishna, the King of Dwaraka, actually the
eighth incarnation of the god Vishnu, who took his birth in the Yadava clan.
He had incarnated as a human being as he had explained:
“For protecting the virtuous
For the destruction of evil, and
For establishing righteousness
I am born from age to age.”
He whispered to his brother, Balarama, at his side, “These brahmins are
none other than the Pandavas, who were supposed to have perished in a fire.
This was all predestined, we will see a great deal of them yet                  ”
Now there was a stir as Arjuna got up from the brahmin group. There were
shouts of protest. “How dare a brahmin enter this contest, which is open only
to the warrior class? Let brahmins stick to their scriptures.” But King
Drupada ruled that he had mentioned no caste in his announcement. Anyone
was free to try his luck at the swayamwara.
Draupadi watched anxiously as Arjuna approached the bow. He not only
strung the bow, but hit the target again and again, five times. Draupadi
approached him with the garland of flowers and slipped it over his neck, and
they became betrothed. Arjuna clasped her hand and led her off.
There was a commotion at once. “We have been cheated! How can a
brahmin win a kshatriya bride? We will not tolerate it. We will kill King
Drupada and carry away the girl.” Fighting broke out. Bhima, the strong
brother among the Pandavas, armed with the trunks of two huge trees plucked
out of the park, guarded the girl while she was taken away to their home in
the Potters’ Street.
Kunthi was in the kitchen when the brothers arrived. Bhima, wanting to
sound lighthearted, cried from the doorstep, “Mother, come out, see what
bhiksha we have brought today.”
Without coming out, Kunthi answered from the kitchen, “Very well, share it
among yourselves.”
“Oh!” exclaimed Bhima. “Oh! Oh!” cried everyone, and the loudest
exclamation was from Arjuna, who had won the bride.
The mother came out to see why there was such an uproar and cried, “Oh!
Who is this? You have won, Arjuna?” She was full of joy, and clasped the
girl’s hand. “Oh! Arjuna, you have won this bride, this Princess, this lovely

creature! So you entered the contest after all. I never believed that you
seriously meant to go there. What a risk you took of being discovered by your
enemies! How happy I am to welcome this daughter-in-law! Tell me . . . what
was the . . . Come in, come in.” Her joy was boundless. Her son had won the
greatest contest and had come through it safely and gloriously. “Come in,
come in                                                                         ”
They trooped in behind her. She spread out a mat and told the girl to be
seated, but, like a well-mannered daughter-in-law, Draupadi would not be
seated when the men and mother-in-law were standing. Moreover, her mind
was all in a whirl.
There was an awkward pause as the five brothers stood around uncertainly
and Draupadi stood apart with downcast eyes, trying not to stare at the five
men who were to share her, if the mother’s injunction was to be obeyed.
What a predicament for the girl, who thought that she was marrying one man
and found four others thrown in unexpectedly!
Now Draupadi studied the five brothers as unobtrusively as possible,
wondering what freak of fate had brought her to this pass. Kunthi tried to
make light of her own advice and said with a simper, “Of course I did not
know what you meant when you said you had brought bhiksha. I thought it
was the usual gift of alms                                                      ” Her voice trailed away.
Bhima the strong, incapable of the subtleties of speech, struggled to
explain himself. “I . . . meant to be jocular, I meant . . .”
It was Arjuna who broke the awkward moment. “Mother, your word has
always been a command to us, and its authority is inescapable. How can it be
otherwise? We will share Draupadi as you have commanded.”
“No, no, no . . .” cried the mother.
Yudhistira said, “Arjuna! What preposterous suggestion are you making in
jest? A woman married to one man is a wife, to two, three, four, or five, a
public woman. She is sinful. Whoever heard of such a thing!”
The mother said, “Don’t make too much of an inadvertent bit of advice.
You make me feel very unhappy and guilty, my son. Don’t even suggest such
an outrage.”
Arjuna pleaded, “Please don’t make me a sinner; it is not fair to condemn
me to suffer the sin of disobedience to a mother’s word. You, my eldest
brother, you are a man with a judicious mind and a knowledge of right and
wrong. We four brothers and this girl will be bound by your words. You must
advise us as to what is good and fair. Advise us, and we shall be bound by

your words, but bear in mind that we cannot go back on the command of a
mother                                                                            ”
When he said this, all the brothers studied the face of the girl, and their
hearts beat faster, for already Manmatha, the God of Love, was at work,
stirring their blood and affecting their vision.
Yudhistira brooded for only a moment, recollected the words of a seer
who had already prophesied this situation. Deciding to avoid heart-burning
amongst the brothers, he declared, “This rare creature shall be wife to all of
us.”
The King of Panchala, father of Draupadi, summoned the Pandavas to
discuss the arrangements for the wedding. The five brothers with their mother
and the girl were invited to the palace to be honoured and feasted. They were
taken through the palace and its grounds, where fruits, souvenirs, rare art
objects, sculpture, paintings, carvings, gold-inlaid leather, furniture of rare
designs, agricultural implements, chariots, and horses were displayed. When
they passed through the hall where swords, arms, shields, and equipment of
warfare were kept, the five brothers picked up the articles, admiring them
and commenting among themselves, spending more time in this part of the
palace than anywhere else.
Observing this, the King suspected that they might be warriors, although
they were disguised as brahmins. When they repaired to the chamber and
were settled comfortably, the King said point-blank to Yudhistira, “I know
you will always speak the truth. Tell me who you are.”
And Yudhistira declared his identity and that of his brothers, and explained
their trials and tribulations since the time of their leaving their kingdom a
year before.
Now the King said, “Let us rejoice that this day your brother Arjuna, the
man with the mighty arm, will marry my daughter, and let us celebrate this
union of our families in style. Let us make everyone in this world happy
today.”
Yudhistira replied, “I am the eldest and still unmarried. I must be the first
to marry, according to our law. Please give me your blessings to be married
first.”
“So be it,” said the King, little dreaming of the implication. “You are the
eldest, my daughter now belongs to your family. If you decide to marry her
yourself, you will be free to do so, or you may give her to whomever you like
among your brothers. I have nothing more to say.”

“Now,” said Yudhistira simply and quietly, “Draupadi will have to be
married to all of us.” He explained how it had come about and concluded,
“We have always shared everything and we will never deviate from the
practice.”
The King was stunned on hearing this. When he recovered his balance, he
cried,                                                                                                     “One man can take many wives, but one woman taking several
husbands has never been approved anywhere, either in practice or in the
scriptures. It is something that can never receive approval from any quarter.
A man of purity like you, one learned and well equipped in knowledge—
what evil power is influencing you to speak thus?”
Yudhistira tried to calm him. “The right way is subtle and complicated. I
know I am not deviating from it. O conqueror of the worlds, have no
misgivings, give us your permission.”
The King said, “You and your venerable mother and my daughter . . .
please talk it over among yourselves and tell me what should be done.”
At this moment, the sage Vyasa arrived. When all the formalities of
greeting were over, the King asked, “Give us your guidance; can a woman
marry five men?”
“Not always,” answered Vyasa, “but in this particular instance, it is
correct. Now listen . . .” He got up and walked into the King’s private
chamber. The others followed at a distance and waited outside.
The Lives of Draupadi
“Your daughter,” said Vyasa, “was called Nalayani in her last birth. She was one of the five ideal
women in our land. She was married to a sage called Moudgalya, a leprous man, repulsive in
appearance and habits, and cantankerous. She was, however, completely indifferent to his physical
state and displayed the utmost devotion to him as a wife. She obeyed all his erratic commands,
accepted his fickle moods, submitted herself to all his tyrannical orders, and ate the scraps from his
plate. All this she did without hesitation or mental protest, totally effacing her own ego. They spent
many years thus, and one day her husband said, ‘O beautiful one, perfect wife on earth, you have
indeed passed through the severest trial and come through unscathed. Know you that I am neither old
nor diseased nor inconsiderate. I assumed this vicious and disgusting appearance in order to test you.
You are indeed the most forbearing partner a man could hope for. Ask me for any boon you may
fancy, and I will grant it.’
“Nalayani said, ‘I want you to love me as five men, assuming five forms, and always coming back
to and merging in one form.’ And he granted her the wish. He shed his unpleasant appearance in a
moment and stood before her as an attractive, virile man—and he could assume four other forms too.
The rest of their life was all romance; they travelled far and wide, visited beautiful romantic spots on
earth, and led a life of perfect union, not in one, but several worlds. They lived and loved endlessly.

“She never got tired of it, but he did. He told her one day that his life of abandon was at an end and
that he was retiring into loneliness and introspection. At this she wailed, ‘I am still insatiate. I have
lived a wonderful life with you. I want you to continue it for ever.’
“Moudgalya rejected her plea, warded her off as a drag on his spiritual progress, and departed.
Whereupon she came down to earth from the dreamy elysium in which she had dwelt and prepared
herself to meditate on Ishwara the Almighty. She meditated with great rigour, and when Ishwara
appeared before her, she muttered, ‘I want my husband, husband, husband                                     ’
“‘You will soon end this identity and will be reborn as a beauty and marry five husbands,’ said the
god.
“‘Five husbands! God! Why five? I want only one.’
“‘I cannot help it. I heard you say “husband,” and that five times,’ said Ishwara. And that proved
the last word on the subject, since a god’s word is unretractable.
“While it seemed as if the god had spoken in jest, he had his purpose. In the vision of a god there is
no joking, everything works according to a scheme. Nalayani was reborn as the daughter of Drupada
without being conceived in a womb, but out of a sacrificial fire. Justice and goodness have to be
reinstated in this world. The Kauravas are evil incarnate; powerful, clever, and accomplished. For the
good of mankind, they must be wiped out, and Draupadi will play a great role in it.”
Draupadi was wedded to the brothers. At the ceremony, the first to take
her hand was the eldest, Yudhistira; next came the mighty Bhima; after him
the actual winner, Arjuna; and lastly the twins, Nakula and Sahadeva, one
after the other. The Princess was to live with each brother for one full year as
his wife, and then pass on to the next. When she lived with one, the others
swore to eradicate her image completely from their minds. A very special
kind of detachment and discipline was needed to practise this code. Anyone
who violated it, even in thought, exiled himself from the family and had to
seek expiation in a strenuous pilgrimage to the holy rivers.

5   Uncle’s Gift
IN HASTINAPURA there was much uneasiness, since it was now clear that
the Pandavas were still alive. “Then who was it that perished in the fire?”
the courtiers speculated.
“Our own man—the fool,” said Duryodhana, “and a woman with five
children, who had come to dine at the feast, and slept off—drank too much
wine, I suppose! I have reports that she’d been seen earlier at the feast
The God of Fire took a woman and her five sons, but not the five we had in
mind                                                                          ” And he and his brothers laughed grimly at the joke.

Dhritarashtra was heard to comment on the swayamwara, “Ah, what a
glorious choice for our family! Drupada’s daughter is a rare creature. I have
heard about her indeed! May they flourish and be happy!”
When he caught him alone, Duryodhana berated him for his enthusiasm.
“How can you felicitate our arch-enemy Yudhistira? Have you no interest in
your own sons? Have you no concern for your own family?” He glared
angrily at his father, who, though eyeless, sensed the fury behind his son’s
speech. He explained with an artificial laugh, “I did not mean it. I was
speaking to Vidura, as you know, and I did not want to reveal to him my real
feeling in the matter. We have to be careful with him. I would have been
really happy if you had won the bride; that’s how I had understood it at first,
and felt happy too. But later Vidura explained, and one has to be cautious
when referring to those boys in his presence.”
“Now we must act,” continued Dhritarashtra. “Drupada becomes a father-
in-law and ally of the Pandavas. His son Dhrishtadyumna is equal to any of
us. Drupada has not forgiven or forgotten the fact that his kingdom was cut
up, and that he was humiliated by our guru, Drona. Each day he is getting
stronger and stronger and will not rest until he has recovered his whole
territory. Our guru made a mistake in leaving him alive. Drupada will never
forget that we attacked him.”
“The Pandavas too had attacked him!” said Duryodhana.
“But their circumstances have changed, and they are in-laws now, and
allies, and have a common enemy in us. Mark my words, they will not spare
us.”
Duryodhana  toyed  with  the  idea  of  bribing  Drupada  to  isolate  the
Pandavas or poison them . . . and Dhritarashtra, who was a fond parent,
listened to him without contradicting him, although he was sceptical of
Duryodhana’s wisdom in such matters. Dhritarashtra’s dilemma was that he
loved his sons, but could not hate his brother’s sons sufficiently. He knew he
was a party to intrigues and unholy decisions, but he could not act on his
judgement where his sons were concerned. He had no mind of his own, and
was in a perpetual conflict with his better instincts. Whoever spoke to him
got his attention. This became more marked now, when Drona and Vidura and
Bhishma gathered around him to discuss the Pandavas.
Bhishma said, “The gods have helped them. At least now you may rectify
your error. Send them your blessings and gifts, and welcome the daughter-in-
law of the house and bless her. Let them all end their exile and come back.

Restore to Yudhistira what is rightfully his. As far as I am concerned, all are
my grand-nephews; I knew that you supported your son’s plan to get them out
of your way. But you will have realised by now, I hope, that it is not so easy
to get rid of human beings. The Almighty is all seeing                            ” Vidura spoke on
the same lines.
Drona was even more emphatic. “I know what Arjuna can accomplish. I
know Drupada and his growing might. His son is no ordinary warrior. I have
seen him. I know him. They are building up an invincible camp. Many others
will also be joining them soon. Krishna from Dwaraka was also seen there
with them. He will bring in the Yadavas and many others to their side.
Krishna by himself will be their chief support soon—you will see it. Krishna
is no ordinary mortal, remember                                                   Don’t let your past error continue and
take you down the path of annihilation.”
His forthright talk was not to the Kauravas’ taste. Later Karna said, “Don’t
listen to Drona, though he is our master. What does he know of statecraft? He
is concerned only with the art of war and nothing else. Bhishma and Vidura,
you know, are the Pandava agents in our midst. The wisest course for us
would be to take an army and destroy Drupada, and with him also the
Pandavas. No other course is open to us. It is said in all our shastras that
quick action and force alone can eliminate a threat. Before Drupada grows
even stronger, we must act.”
In these conflicting counsels Dhritarashtra was bewildered. After much
wavering, he called Vidura and said finally, “You must go to Panchala and
convey my greetings to Drupada. Invite Yudhistira and his brothers to return
home with their bride, and we will settle the question of their future so that
the cousins may live in peace with each other.”
Vidura went to Panchala carrying presents to the King and his family. He
was received cordially and seated in a place of honour. He formally
conveyed the greetings from Dhritarashtra and his sons, and invited the
Pandavas to return to Hastinapura. As he listened, Yudhistira looked at his
brothers, but they waited for him to decide. Yudhistira’s mind was filled with
misgivings. How could they again trust their uncle at Hastinapura, whose
weakness for his sons was notorious? Vidura was perhaps being used, in his
innocence, to lure them back to a deathtrap. He just said, “Now, we are
living in the hospitality of our father-in-law. We cannot leave without his
sanction. We shall abide by his decision.”

At this, Drupada said, “How can I ever say that you should go? You are
not merely our guests but our sons-in-law. We consider it a privilege to have
you in our midst. But at the same time, your uncle has a claim on you too.
. . .”
Vidura added, “My brother Dhritarashtra would have himself come to
invite you, but for his physical condition. He, however, counts on your good
will to be able to receive and bless the bride and the bridegrooms.”
Yudhistira once again looked about for guidance. Only a god, who could
take in at a glance the past, present, and future, could guide him at this crucial
moment.
Krishna happened to be at the court on a visit. He knew that the destiny of
the Pandavas was soon to be in his hands. When they turned to him for
advice, he said, “I feel that you should all go to Hastinapura, and I will go
with you.”
On their arrival at Hastinapura, Dhritarashtra received his nephews with
every show of affection. Several days later, he told Yudhistira,                     “I am
dividing this kingdom, and your half will be Khandavaprastha. I would like
you to settle down there with your brothers, wife, and mother. Your cousins
will rule here; and you may each live happily in your own territory.”
The Pandavas set out, led by Krishna, for Khandavaprastha, which proved
to be nothing more than a desert—but they were happy to have found a place
which was their own. They measured out the land and, after purificatory
ceremonies,  began  to  build  fort  walls,  moats,  and  encampments.  With
Krishna’s blessings, and with the services of the architects he had brought
from  Dwaraka—since  they  could  no  longer  trust  any  builder  from
Hastinapura—in due course, a brilliant city came into being. It contained a
palace with every luxury; mansions; broad roads and highways, shaded with
trees; fountains and squares; and shops filled with rare merchandise. Many
citizens and traders from Hastinapura came to reside there, attracted by its
beauty and convenience. The name of the city was changed to Indraprastha,
since it matched the splendour of the City of God.
When they were settled, Yudhistira had a visit from Sage Narada.*1
Narada wished to see for himself how well the Pandavas had settled at
Indraprastha. He spoke at length to Yudhistira on the duties of a king, and
then passed on to the problems that were likely to arise among brothers
possessing a common wife. He advised that at the time she was possessed by

one, the others must not only avoid all thoughts of her, but take care never to
intrude into the privacy of the couple. The penalty for such a lapse was also
decreed—exile for twelve years. To illustrate his warnings, Narada narrated
the story of Sunda and Upasunda, two invincible brothers, demons who ruled
the world and were deeply attached to each other until they abducted
Tilottama, a celestial beauty. In due course they fell out and destroyed each
other.
In spite of the restrictions laid down by Narada, one day Arjuna had
perforce to intrude when Yudhistira was in Draupadi’s company, seeking his
guidance on an urgent matter of the state. Exiled for twelve years, he spent
his time bathing in holy rivers. In the course of his wanderings, Arjuna also
married Ulupi, a princess of the serpent world, and then Subadhra, sister of
Krishna.

6   City of Splendour
TO COMMEMORATE their successful rehabilitation, Yudhistira performed
a  grand  rajasuya  sacrifice.  Thousands  were  invited  to  be  present  in
Indraprastha, Krishna being the most distinguished among them all. The
guests were overwhelmed with the hospitality and general grandeur of the
new  Pandava  capital  with  its  mansions,  parks,  and  broad  roads.  The
prosperity of the Pandavas was admired by some and envied by others.
Among those in whom envy was stirred was Duryodhana, who along with his
uncle, Sakuni, had been a special guest and was given a palace and looked
after with extreme concern.
After the sacrificial ceremonies were over, all the visitors left, loaded
with presents and honours. Duryodhana felt so comfortable that he extended
his stay at Indraprastha as long as he could. Finally, one day he took leave of

the Pandavas and left with his uncle Sakuni for Hastinapura. While riding
back in his chariot, Duryodhana said with a sigh,                                 “See how well the
Pandavas live! And how much they have managed to create—out of that
desert land to which they were condemned!”
“They have the grace of gods,” said Sakuni, “and they have also laboured
hard to achieve prosperity                                                        ”
Duryodhana received the remark in silence, and then said, “Did you notice
how well every one of the thousands spoke of them and what rare gifts were
exchanged?”
“Yes, yes, one could not help noticing all that,” replied Sakuni.
“We are doomed,” said Duryodhana, “while they are coming up with so
many as their allies and friends                                                  ”
“After all, they have developed only their portion of land. It need not
concern you.”
“You do not understand,” insisted Duryodhana. “I feel tormented, and
unless they are degraded in some way, I shall know no peace. My soul burns
at the thought of those worthless cousins sitting up and preening themselves!”
Sakuni laughed at this and said, “Why don’t you leave them alone? No use
challenging them to a war. In addition to their allies, Arjuna is now armed
with his great bow, Gandiva, and with the gift of an inexhaustible quiver.”
“Yes, I heard about that shameful thing—how he got it!”
“Nothing so shameful; it was a gift of Agni. He is favoured by the gods.
. . .”
“How? Go deeper into it.”
“To please Agni, he set the Khandava Forest on fire with his astra. He and
his ally Krishna, who professes to be an incarnation, rounded up all the poor
beasts and birds, sealed off the exits, and drove them back into the forest.
Fledglings and birds and cubs and their parents—all alike were roasted and
cooked—because the God of Fire needed to consume animal fat for his own
well-being. Arjuna was only too ready to provide it and was rewarded with
the Gandiva! Whatever you may say of it, Gandiva has made Arjuna
invincible. It is an inescapable fact. We cannot fight with them yet. You made
attempts to end their lives, and all your plans failed. Now they are strong and
prosperous—leave them alone, I say. Don’t go near them; they live in their
territory and you in yours. I don’t see why you should think of them at all.”
“You don’t understand, you don’t realise the agony I suffer. Do you know
how they flaunt their prowess and prosperity and laugh at me? Actually

laugh! They stand in a row and laugh at me. They let their servants laugh at
me.”
“Well, we were treated as honoured guests all along—I cannot imagine
they would have laughed at you.”
“I tell you, they did openly to my face.”
“How? When was it?”
“At their new hall of assembly                                                    ”
“What a grand, marvellous building, none to equal it anywhere,” said
Sakuni. “Again, it is a gift from that divine architect Maya, who was saved
from the fire of Khandava Forest                                                  ”
“Everything  for  them  seems  to  have  come  out  of  that  fire!”  said
Duryodhana. “We should have had an assembly hall of that kind, not they.
They don’t deserve such a grand structure—after all, Hastinapura is more
ancient than Indraprastha. How cunningly built, what polish!” He was lost in
the vision of that great structure. Soon he recovered his mood of indignation
and said, “There was what looked like a pool with lotus blooms on it, all in
a passage. While stepping into it, I tucked up my cloak—it was only a
polished marble floor, and they laughed at me for this little mistake. A few
yards off was another place which looked like that, and I fell into it and
drenched my clothes. I had to change, and they seemed to have watched for it.
All of them laughed and joked, especially that wild bull, Bhima. Oh!”
“Oh, forget it, it was not really designed to upset you, as you know              ”
“And then there was an open door I tried to pass through, which was
actually only a wall. And at an open door I hesitated, taking it to be only a
wall. I saw a lovely rose I couldn’t pluck since it was only a painting. They
were spying on me all the time; they stood about and guffawed at my
predicament, including Draupadi . . . that awful woman. Someday it will be
my turn to laugh at her, be sure of that                                          ”
After much talk on the same lines, Sakuni said, “Give up the idea of
challenging them to a war. Some other way must be found to humiliate them.
. . .” He thought over it and said, “Challenge them to a game of dice. Well,
I’ll help you; we will finish them through it. I know Yudhistira’s mind. He
can never decline an invitation to a game, though he is a worthless player, the
weakest player one could imagine!”
The idea appealed to Duryodhana and he said, “You must help me. First
speak to the King and persuade him to invite Yudhistira                           I cannot talk to
the old man about it.”

At Indraprastha, Yudhistira had a visit from Sage Vyasa. Vyasa had come
ostensibly to bless him after the rajasuya, but before leaving he uttered a
prophecy which made Yudhistira uneasy. “I read the signs and portents. The
next thirteen years are going to prove difficult for you. Actions and reactions
will be difficult to arrest, and will produce grave consequences. At the end
of thirteen years, the entire race of kshatriyas will be wiped out, and you will
be the instrument of such a destruction.”
After Vyasa left, Yudhistira remained gloomy and reflected, “How can we
ward off what is destined to happen? I make this vow: for thirteen years, I
will not utter a harsh word to anyone, whatever may happen, whether it be a
king, brother, or commoner; I shall not utter any word that may create
differences among persons. Harsh words and arguments are at the root of
every conflict in the world. I shall avoid them; perhaps in this way I can
blunt the edge of fate.”
When they reached Hastinapura, without wasting a moment, Sakuni spoke
to King Dhritarashtra. He reported in detail on the rajasuya, and the
distinguished guests, and the grandeur of the whole business. In conclusion he
said, “Your son Duryodhana was received and treated well, but I suspect he
is not happy. He has lost his colour, a pallor is coming over him, he has no
taste for food, he is brooding, there is some deep disturbance in his mind. We
must find out the cause of it.”
Dhritarashtra was upset. Immediately he sent for his son Duryodhana and
questioned him. “I learn that you have grown pale, and some worry is
gnawing you inside. Tell me what it is. We will make you happy again.”
Duryodhana described in detail the splendour and richness of all that he
had seen in the Pandava country, and concluded, “They are our enemies: that
you must understand in the first place.”
“No, no,” said the old man. “I can make no distinction between you and the
Pandavas.”
“That may be, but I have a different philosophy. They are our enemies. I
have read in the scripture that one who does not feel angered at the rise and
prosperity of his enemies is like a mud effigy without any feeling. Jealousy is
a normal, legitimate emotion. It is our duty to match their luxury and excel
them, and impoverish them when the time comes.”
Dhritarashtra, though he disputed his son’s view, ultimately weakened and
agreed to do his bidding. When he heard of the Hall of Marbles at
Indraprastha, he decided to build one for Duryodhana immediately. He

summoned his minister and ordered, “Let a million men work on this, but I
must have this hall of assembly built in the quickest time; it must rise as if by
a conjurer’s spell. Let the hall be as wide and long as the Lake of
Manasarovar, of which I have heard, so that a man standing at one end cannot
be seen from the other end. Let there be a thousand marble pillars supporting
the roof. Let the roof be set with countless gems and scintillate like a starry
night. The Prince has described to me vividly all that he saw at Indraprastha.
Gold and the nine kinds of precious stones must be embedded in every wall
and pillar—not an inch of space must be left vacant. Let there be no delay.
Put up a lotus pond so still that people may want to walk on it. Let the marble
on the floor be shining bright so that people might tuck up their garments
while stepping over it. Let a million men be engaged.”
When the hall was ready, he dispatched Vidura to Indraprastha to invite the
Pandavas to visit, as desired by Duryodhana.
Yudhistira felt happy and puzzled when on a certain day Vidura arrived at
Indraprastha.   After   the   initial   courtesies,   Vidura   explained,           “King
Dhritarashtra invites you to visit his new hall, which he has named the
Crystal Palace. He is inviting all the princes known to him. He wants you to
come without delay, and bring along your brothers, mother, and Panchali. He
says that you should stay and enjoy, and also amuse yourself with a game of
dice in that distinguished hall.” After delivering the message in the official
manner, Vidura expressed his personal impressions and judgement. He
explained the circumstances under which the hall had come into being.
“Nothing that I said could have any effect on him. He is carried away by his
son’s views and interests, ignoring all else. If you decide not to respond to
this call, I can go back and say so. I am, after all, only a messenger.”
Yudhistira thought over the invitation, remembering Vyasa’s warning.
“Could it be pre-ordained?” He had uneasy feelings and said, “Gambling is
immoral; it leads to bitterness and conflict. Why should we engage ourselves
in such an evil game? We know fully where it will lead us.”
Vidura remained silent. He merely repeated, “O King, do what seems to
you the best under these circumstances.”
Yudhistira said, “When Dhritarashtra commands, how can I refuse? It is
against the kshatriyas’ code to refuse when invited to play a game. I will
come.”

Arriving at Hastinapura, the Pandavas went up to each one of their
relations, starting with King Dhritarashtra, and greeted them. Then they were
shown their chambers, where they were served food and drink, and were
also provided with music to put them to sleep. They were awakened in the
morning by bards singing and playing on their instruments. After exercise and
repast, having bathed, donned new clothes, prayed, and anointed themselves
with sandal paste and perfume, they set out to the assembly hall.

7   Stakes Unmatched
DHRITARASHTRA FELT an inordinate enthusiasm for the coming gambling
match between his son and the Pandavas, and was proud of the hall he had
built for this purpose. The hall was packed with visitors—rulers from the
neighbouring  countries  and  several  distinguished  guests.  In  the  central
portion of the hall, on one side sat Yudhistira, backed by his brothers; on the
other, Duryodhana, Sakuni, and their supporters. The royal seats were
occupied by Dhritarashtra, with Sanjaya as ever at his side, and Vidura,
Kama, Bhishma, and the hundred brothers. When they were all settled and
ready to play, Yudhistira said to his opponents, “Please play a fair game and
do not try to win by unfair means. Gambling itself is not harmful, but it
becomes a vice when deceit is employed.”
Sakuni replied, “There can be no such thing as deceit in a game. One who
knows how to handle the dice and how to throw them is gifted with a special
knowledge and deserves success. He should not be called a cheat. One who
knows his dice imparts life to them, and then they obey his commands. How

can you call this deceit? There is no such thing. The real evil is the stake; one
who stakes irresponsibly and blindly commits a sin. In every contest,
whether of arms, wits, or learning, the competent one seeks to defeat the
incompetent  one;  and  there  is  nothing  wrong  in  it.  If  you  have  your
misgivings, let us not play. We are ready to withdraw.”
Yudhistira replied, “Having accepted the challenge, I will not withdraw.
Let us begin. With whom am I to play in this assembly? I have wealth, gems,
and gold—an inexhaustible source. Whoever can match my stakes, let him
begin.”
At this point, Duryodhana said, “I am also pouring out my wealth and
jewels on this occasion and Sakuni, my uncle, will play on my behalf                 ”
Yudhistira said, “Playing by proxy is not permissible. But if you insist, let
the game begin; here is my stake.”
Beginning modestly with a handful of pearls, the stakes grew in size.
Yudhistira slipped into a gambler’s frenzy, blind to consequences, his vision
blurred to all but the ivory-white dice and the chequered board. He forgot
who he was, where he was, who else was there, and what was right or
wrong. All he knew was the clatter of the rolling dice, followed every few
minutes by Sakuni’s raucous chant, “I win,” and the cheers that burst from
Duryodhana’s party. Yudhistira was provoked to raise his stakes higher each
time Sakuni’s voice was heard.
“I have hundreds of women of ethereal beauty and capacity to serve and
please                                                                               I have a chariot drawn by eight horses before whose pace no
mortal can survive; it has gold-inlaid wheels and bells that can ring across
the earth                                                                            ” At each stage he was hoping that the other side would give up,
but they accepted the highest challenge calmly as they were in no doubt about
Sakuni’s “I win.” Again and again it happened. The elders in the assembly
hall were aghast at the trend of the events. Yudhistira endlessly described the
enormous wealth that he possessed in elephants, armies, cattle, and territory,
and offered each item in the hope it would be unmatched. But within two
minutes, an interval just sufficient to roll the dice, Sakuni would declare, “I
win, I win.”
Suddenly Sakuni was heard to say to Yudhistira, with a great deal of mock
solicitude, “King, I notice that you have lost a great deal. I’ll give you time to
recollect anything you may still have in your possession, and tell me . . .”
Yudhistira’s ego was roused. “Why do you ask for an estimate of my
wealth? I have still enough in millions and trillions. You don’t have to

concern yourself with my limits                                                   Here is . . .”
“I win,” declared Sakuni.
“Never mind, I still have cattle, horses, and sheep extending up to the
banks of Sindhu. I will play with them, continue.”
“I win.”
“I have my city, the country, land and wealth, and all dwelling houses . . .”
“I have won.”
“Now my wealth consists of my allies, princes. You see them decked in
gold and royal ornaments . . .”
“I win.”
Within a short time Yudhistira had lost all his dependent princes, soldiers,
and attendants, and Sakuni asked with a leer, “Have you anyone left?”
At this point, Vidura said to Dhritarashtra, “This has gone too far. Stop it,
and if you are not obeyed, get that jackal in our midst, your son, destroyed.
Otherwise, I see the complete destruction of your entire family, sooner or
later. To save a family or a clan it is proper to sacrifice an individual. Even
at birth, Duryodhana never cried like a baby, but let out a howl like a jackal
which everyone understood as an evil sign. They advised you to destroy that
monster forthwith, but you have allowed him to flourish in your family. You
are partial to him and accept all his demands, and you have sanctioned this
monstrous game, which is undermining the Pandava family. But remember
that this setback to them is illusory; whatever they lose now, they will
recover later with a vengeance. Before it is too late, stop it and order
Dhananjaya*1 to kill Duryodhana here and now, and you will save the entire
race                                                                              ”
It took a lot of courage to offer a suggestion like this openly, but Vidura
was sure of his stand, and saw that Sakuni was practising some subtle deceit.
“Those who collect honey after ascending giddy heights never notice that
they are about to step off the precipice at their back,” continued Vidura. “O
King, you have enough wealth, you do not have to earn by gambling                 The
Pandavas themselves won to your side could prove to be your greatest
wealth. You will not need anything more. Dismiss Sakuni at once, let him go
back to his country. Don’t carry on this contest with the Pandavas                ”
Duryodhana was annoyed at this advice and said, “Vidura, you have
always been a champion of our enemies and have detested the sons of
Dhritarashtra, to whom you owe your food and shelter. I only follow my
conscience, which tells me to do this or that, and I see nothing wrong in it.

You follow your conscience and I will follow mine, even if it takes me down
to perdition. If we do not suit your temperament, go away wherever you
please.”
Vidura turned to the old King. “All right, I will leave now,” he stated.
“You are fickle minded and partial to this jackal in your family. You think that
your sons are your well-wishers, and if you wish to follow them to your
doom, I can’t prevent you. Any advice I give will be like a medicine rejected
by a diseased man, a man who is dying                                              ” But after saying this, he stayed
on, not having the heart to abandon the old King to his fate. Dhritarashtra
remained silent.
Yudhistira looked around and, pointing to his youngest brother, Nakula,
who was standing behind him, said, “He is the brother I adore; he is my
wealth                                                                             ”
“I win,” declared Sakuni, and beckoned Nakula to walk over to his side.
There was hardly any pause before Yudhistira turned to point at Sahadeva
next and said,                                                                     “Sahadeva is the most learned and wise youth, whose
knowledge of justice in all the worlds . . .”
“I win,” said Sakuni, and Sahadeva was summoned to cross over to the
winner’s side. Sakuni eyed the remaining two brothers and added slyly,
“Bhima and Arjuna, they are your mother’s sons, while those two are only
your stepmother Madri’s sons, whom you could afford to stake away                  ”
Yudhistira’s anger rose at this insinuation, and he cried, “How your evil mind
works! You are trying to impute partiality to me, and bring a division
amongst us                                                                         ”
Sakuni responded with a great deal of humility, and with a bow, “Forgive
me, O King, you know when carried away by his success a gambler is likely
to rant whatever comes to his mind, words which one would not dare to
speak even in a dream. Forgive my levity                                           ”
Yudhistira pointed at Arjuna and declared, “Here is the one, perhaps the
greatest hero, who should not be staked, but I will. Let us see . . .”
“I win,” Sakuni said again, and added, “Now, any one left?” Looking at
Bhima, he caressed the dice between his fingers.
Yudhistira rose to the occasion.                                                   “Yes, I will now stake Bhimasena,
wielder of the thunderbolt, who has no equal in strength, a pulveriser of foes
. . .”
“I win,” said Sakuni and asked, “Is there anything or anyone you have not
lost?”

With the dice poised and ready, Yudhistira replied, “I alone am still not
won. I will stake myself and do whatever is to be done by one lost to you.”
Again came the words, “I win.” Sakuni said now, “Only the Princess of
Panchala is left; will she not feel lonely with all her husbands gone suddenly
in this manner?”
Yudhistira, having lost his judgement completely, replied,                       “Yes, that
sounds reasonable. Panchali is like the goddess Lakshmi, the spouse of Lord
Vishnu at Vaikunta,” and then he launched into a lengthy description of her.
“She is the goddess Lakshmi herself in stature, grace, and complexion; eyes
like lotus petals; a woman who is an ideal wife to guide, serve, and sustain a
man at all times. Oh! Suvala*2, with her our luck will now turn and we will
win back every bit we have lost so far                                                                                                     She is our symbol of luck and
prosperity, now I will stake her                                                 ”
When Yudhistira said this, there was an outcry of protest in the assembly.
Vidura hung down his head, unable to bear the spectacle. Dussasana and
Karna  laughed  derisively.  Dhritarashtra,  alternating  between  righteous
conduct and bias towards his son, could not contain himself, but eagerly
asked, “Has she been won, has she been won?” He heard the dice roll and
Sakuni say with gusto, “Yes, Maharaja, I have won                                ”
Duryodhana jumped up and embraced his uncle in sheer joy and cried,
“You are . . . you are a master, a great master indeed. None your equal in the
seven worlds                                                                     ” Then he turned to Vidura and commanded, “Go, get that
beloved wife of the Pandavas. Let her learn her duties as a sweeper of the
chambers of noble men, and how to wait on their pleasure                         Go, bring her.
. . .”
Vidura was infuriated and replied, “You jackal in human form, don’t talk.
You are provoking the tigers. When destruction begins, it will be total,
caused by you and your indulgent, thoughtless father. Even now it is not too
late . . . don’t utter such irresponsible, sinful words                          ”
Duryodhana turned to an attendant. “This Vidura has lost his sense and is
raving. He does not like us; he is the jackal in our midst. You go and tell
Panchali that she is no longer a princess but a slave won by us and that we
command her to come hither, without a moment’s delay                             ”
The  attendant  hurried  on  to  Draupadi’s  chambers  and  conveyed  the
message apologetically. In a short while he returned. “She has asked me to
bring back an answer to this question, ‘Whom did Yudhistira lose first, me or

himself? Whose lord were you at the time you lost me?’” He addressed the
question to Yudhistira, who looked at the floor, unable to face anyone.
At this moment Duryodhana ordered, “Let her first come, and then put the
question to her late lord herself; and the assembly shall hear the words that
pass between them.” The messenger went to Draupadi and again came back
without her. Duryodhana asked him to go out a third time. When this attendant
hesitated, he turned to his brother Dussasana and said, “Perhaps this fellow
is a coward, afraid of this ruffian, Bhimasena, but he doesn’t know he can do
nothing now, being our slave                                                      Go and bring her without a moment’s delay.
She has no right to question and dawdle. She is a puppet for us to handle. Go
and bring her here.”
When Dussasana appeared, Draupadi said again, “I must have an answer
to my question. Did Yudhistira lose me before or after he lost himself?”
“What is that to you?” asked Dussasana.
She replied, “If he had lost himself first, he could have no right to stake
me, and so . . .”
“Stop your argument. Will you follow me to the assembly or not?” As he
approached her, she shrank back saying, “I cannot come before any one today
. . . I am in the woman’s month . . . I am clad in a single wrap . . . go away.
.” She tried to escape him by attempting to run into the women’s
apartments. Dussasana sprang on her, seized her by the hair, and dragged her
along to the assembly hall
“I am in my monthly period . . . clad in a single piece                           ”
“Whether in your season or out of it, or clad in one piece or none, we
don’t care. We have won you by fair means and you are our slave                   ”
With her tresses and sari in disarray through Dussasana’s rude handling,
Draupadi looked piteous as she stood in the centre of that vast assembly
facing the elders and guests. “This is monstrous,” she cried. “Is morality
gone? Or else how can you be looking on this atrocity? There are my
husbands—five, not one as for others—and they look paralysed! While I
hoped Bhima alone could crush with his thumb the perpetrators of this
horrible act, I do not understand why they stand there transfixed, speechless
and like imbeciles                                                                ”
Karna, Dussasana, and Sakuni laughed at her and uttered jokes and also
called her “slave” several times. She looked at their family elder, Bhishma,
pleadingly and he said, “O daughter of Drupada, the question of morality is
difficult  to  answer.  Yudhistira  voluntarily  entered  the  dice  game  and

voluntarily offered the stakes. Sakuni is a subtle player, but Yudhistira went
on recklessly. I am unable to decide on the question you have raised. While
he played and staked out of his own free will, we can have nothing to say, as
long as he was the master, but after he had lost himself, how far could he
have the authority to stake his wife? On the other hand, a husband may have
the absolute right to dispose of his wife in any manner he pleases, even if he
has become a pauper and a slave                                                  I am unable to decide this issue   ”
Draupadi was undaunted. “How can you say that he voluntarily entered
this evil game? Everyone knew that the King had no skill, but he was
inveigled into facing a cunning gambler like Sakuni. How can you say that he
played voluntarily, or that the staking was voluntary? He was involved and
compelled and lost his sense. He acted like one drugged and dragged. Again,
I ask the mighty minds assembled here, when he put up his stake, did anyone
notice whether the other side put up a matching stake? Did Duryodhana offer
his wife or his brothers? This has all been one-sided. The deceitful player
knows he can twist the dice to his own advantage and so does not have to
offer a matching stake. Yudhistira in his magnanimity never even noticed this
lapse. All wise minds gathered here, saintly men, equal to Brihaspathi in
wisdom, you elders and kinsmen of the Kauravas, reflect on my words and
judge, answer the points I have raised here . . .” Saying this, she broke down
and wept.
Bhima, who had stood silently till now, burst out, “Yudhistira, there have
been other gamblers in this world, thousands of them. Even the worst among
them never thought of staking a woman, but you have excelled others in this
respect. You have staked all the women in our service, and also your wife,
without a thought. I did not mind your losing all the precious wealth and gems
we had, but what you have done to this innocent creature! Looking at her
plight now, O brother, I want to burn those hands of yours                       Sahadeva,
bring some fire. I shall scorch those hands diseased with gambling. Or give
me leave to smash these monsters                                                 ”
Arjuna placated Bhima. “When you talk thus, you actually fulfil the aim of
our enemies, who would have us discard our eldest brother. Yudhistira
responded to the summons to play dice, much against his will.”
Bhima answered rather grimly, “Yes, I know it. If I hadn’t thought that the
King had acted according to kshatriya usage, I would myself have seized his
hands and thrust them into fire.”

Seeing the distress of the Pandavas and of Draupadi, Vikarna, one of the
younger sons of Dhritarashtra, said, “This unfortunate person has asked a
question which has not been answered. Bhishma, Drona, Dhritarashtra, and
even Vidura turn away and remain silent. Will no one give an answer?” He
paused and looked around and repeated Draupadi’s question, but no one
spoke. Finally he said, “Whether you Kings of the earth answer or not, I will
speak out my mind. It has been said that drinking, gambling, hunting, and the
enjoyment of women in excess will bring down a king, however well
protected and strong he might be. People should not attach any value or
authority to acts done by anyone under the intoxication of wine, women, or
dice. This rare being, Yudhistira, engaged himself in an unwholesome game,
steeped  himself  in  it,  staked  everything—including  Draupadi—at  the
instigation of the wily Sakuni. She is the common wife of the other four also,
and the King had first lost himself and then staked her. Reflecting on these
things, I declare that Draupadi has not been won at all.” A loud applause
resounded through the hall and his supporters cursed Sakuni aloud.
At this point, Karna stood up and motioned everyone to remain quiet.
“This Vikarna is an immature youth, not fit to address an august assembly of
elders. It is not for him to tell us what is right or wrong, the presumptuous
fellow! Yudhistira gambled and staked with his eyes wide open. Don’t
consider him an innocent simpleton, he knew what he was doing. He knew
when he staked Draupadi, he was offering his wife. Whatever has been won
has been won justly. Here take off the princely robes on those brothers.
Moreover, what woman in any world would take five husbands? What does
one call the like of her? I will unhesitatingly call her a whore. To bring her
here, whatever her state, is no sin or act that should cause surprise. You,
Yudhistira and the rest, take off your princely robes and come aside.”
At this order, the Pandavas took off their coats and gowns and threw them
down and stood in their loincloths. Duryodhana ordered, “Disrobe her too.
. . .”
Dussasana seized Draupadi’s sari and began to pull it off. She cried, “My
husbands, warrior husbands, elders look on helplessly. Oh God, I can expect
no help from any of you                                                          ” As Dussasana went on tugging at her dress, she
cried, “O God Krishna! Incarnation of Vishnu, Hari, help me.” In a state of
total surrender to God’s will, she let go her sari with her hands raised to
cover her face, eyes shut in deep meditation.

The god responded. As one piece of garment was unwound and pulled off,
another appeared in its place, and another, and another, endlessly. Dussasana
withdrew in fatigue, as a huge mass of cloth unwound from Draupadi’s body
lay in a heap on one side. But her original sari was still on her.
Everyone was moved by this miracle and cursed Duryodhana. Bhima
loudly swore, “If I do not tear open this wretch’s chest someday in battle and
quaff his blood . . .”
When  the  novelty  of  the  miracle  wore  off,  the  Kauravas  engaged
themselves again in bantering and baiting their victims. Duryodhana said,
“Let the younger Pandava brothers swear here and now that they will not
respect Yudhistira’s commands any more. Then we will set Panchali free.”
Bhimasena cried, “If Yudhistira commands me, I will slay you all with my
bare hands. I don’t need a sword to deal with rats.”
Duryodhana bared his thigh and gestured to Draupadi to come to his lap.
This maddened Bhimasena and he swore at that moment, “If I do not smash
that thigh into a pulp some day . . .” The Kauravas all laughed.
Karna said, “O beautiful one, those ex-lords have no more right over you;
slaves can have no rights. Now go into the inner chambers and begin your
servitude as we direct                                                           ”
Finally, Vidura said to Dhritarashtra, “Stop all this mean talk, O King.
Although they stand here apparently in misery, they have the protection of
God.”
Dhritarashtra felt repentant, summoned Draupadi, and said, “Daughter,
even in this trial you have stood undaunted, holding on to virtue. Please ask
for any favour and I will grant it.”
Promptly Panchali said, “Please free Yudhistira from slavery.”
“Granted,” said Dhritarashtra, and since he was in a boon-granting mood,
he added, “Ask for another boon.”
“Let all his brothers be freed.”
“Granted,” the king replied. “Now you may ask for a third boon.”
“I do not want anything more.”
Dhritarashtra turned to his nephew. “Yudhistira, you may take back all that
you have lost—wealth, status, and kingdom. Now speed back to Indraprastha
and rule in peace. Don’t have any ill will for your cousins. Don’t forget that
you are all of one family. Go away in peace.”
Presently the five brothers and Draupadi got into their chariots and started
back for Indraprastha.

After they were gone, Duryodhana, Sakuni, and Karna held a consultation
among themselves. Karna said,                                                     “The brothers have been saved by the
woman’s intercession—the shameless creature; it is not safe to let them go
free like this. We will be attacked as soon as they find the time to sit and
brood on all that has happened.”
Duryodhana once again got the ear of his old father. “You have undone
everything . . . everything. We carefully trapped the cobra and its family, but
before the fangs could be pulled out, you have removed the lid of the basket
and let them loose. Don’t imagine they will be gone; they will come back to
finish us.”
“What  parable  is  this?”  asked  the  old  King,  puzzled.  Duryodhana
explained, “Your nephews, who are such favourites of yours, are on their
way to Indraprastha, their glamorous capital. Tomorrow at this time they will
reach it. A day after this time they will be starting back with their forces,
their allied forces, and all the satellites hanging on their favours, and will
come back here in double-quick time and fall on us. We shall have no time to
rally our forces or protect ourselves in any manner. Yudhistira’s mind is too
complex for us to understand. He will have made up his mind to regain his
dignity, and you heard what that mound of flesh, Bhimasena, has promised to
do to us                                                                          ”
As he went on, the picture became so terrifying that the old King cried,
“What shall we do now?”
“Call them back for another game, and this time they shall finally be dealt
with. Get them back before they reach Indraprastha. Once they are on their
soil, they may not care for your summons. Let your fastest courier fly to them.
This time they shall be dealt with satisfactorily                                 ”
“How?”
“You don’t have to bother about all those details. Leave it to us. Uncle
Sakuni will manage. Only employ your authority to get them back here in the
quickest time.”
The King immediately dispatched a messenger to summon Yudhistira and
his party back to Hastinapura. Learning of this decision, Gandhari, his wife
wailed, “When Duryodhana was born, he howled ominously, like a jackal,
and the seer Vidura advised, ‘Throw away this child and let him perish;
otherwise our entire dynasty will be destroyed when he grows up                   ’ Now
I understand what he meant. O King, ignore this son or cast him away and

save our race. Don’t join in his malicious plans, don’t be the cause of the
destruction of our race.”
Dhritarashtra just said, “If our race is destined to be destroyed, how can I
or anyone prevent it? I cannot displease my sons. Let the Pandavas return and
resume the game.”
The  messenger  reached  Yudhistira  when  he  had  gone  halfway  to
Indraprastha. “The King, your royal uncle, wants me to say, ‘The assembly is
ready again, O Yudhistira, son of Pandu, come and cast the dice.’”
Yudhistira thought it over, and looked at his brothers and wife, who stood
speechless, unable to comment. He was always their leader and they could
make no decisions. Yudhistira said, “What God wills we cannot avoid. It is
the King’s summons again. I must go back and play                                   ” Impelled by the
gambler’s inescapable instinct to try a last chance, he turned his chariot
round and drove back to Hastinapura.
The onlookers and the gambling parties took their respective seats in the
hall. Sakuni spoke first. “The King has given you back everything you had
lost. That is well, we cannot question His Majesty’s actions. But now there is
going to be a different kind of stake. At the end of this game, the loser will go
into exile, barefoot, and dressed in deerskin. He must live in the forests for
twelve years, and then in a city incognito for one full year. In that year of
hiding, if he is recognized, there must be another term of twelve-year
banishment. If you defeat us in this game, we will go into exile immediately
for twelve years, and if you are defeated, you will go through it right from the
moment you lose.”
Yudhistira, as usual, needed no persuasion to say “yes” to the proposal.
Sakuni threw the dice and said, “I win.”
Not long after, one by one, the Pandavas once again had to cast off their
glittering royal robes. They dressed themselves in deerskin and prepared to
leave for the forests. Again they were taunted by the victors. Dussasana said
to Draupadi, “Your father planned a noble life for you, and now you have
ended up with these vagrants. What good will they do you clad in deerskin
and begging? This is your time to choose a proper husband out of the nobles
assembled here, someone who will not sell you. Those brothers are now like
corn without the kernel                                                             ”
                                                                                    Bhima nearly jumped on him and said, “You pierce our hearts with these
                                                                                    words; I promise I will pierce yours with real arrows, when I remind you of
these words some day                                                                ”

Dussasana clapped his hands and almost danced around their victims,
jeering, “Oh, cows, cows.”*3 As they were moving out, Duryodhana, setting
aside all his dignity, walked behind Bhima, mimicking his strides and
manner.
Bhima turned round and said, “You gain nothing by this buffoonery; we
shall all recall this when I split your thighs with my mace and trample on
your head.”
Arjuna, Nakula, and Sahadeva also promised to take revenge, each in his
own way. They then went up to Dhritarashtra and all the elders of the family
and bade them farewell. Vidura suggested, “Let your mother, Kunthi, stay
behind in my home. I will look after her till you are all back from your
exile.”
When he got a chance to talk to Vidura privately, King Dhritarashtra asked,
“Tell me how and in what state the Pandavas left.” He was, as usual, torn
between tender feelings for his nephews and an inability to displease his son
Duryodhana. The King was filled with self-blame, anxiety, and a blind hope
that everything would turn out all right—as if after a bad dream—and that he
would hear someone say that the Pandavas actually did not suffer, but were
happy and unscathed all through.
But if any such soothsayer was needed, it certainly could not be Vidura.
“Yudhistira crossed the street with his head bowed, his face veiled with a
piece of of cloth. Bhima looked neither to his left nor right, but fixedly at his
mace in hand. Arjuna looked at no one either, but went spraying handfuls of
sand around. Yagnaseni*4 covered her face with her dishevelled tresses, and
passed on in the clothes she had been wearing. Nakula and Sahadeva
smeared their faces with mud in order not to be recognized                          Dhaumya,
their priest, walked holding a spike of dharba grass steadily pointing east,
and reciting aloud the Sama Veda                                                    ”
“What does it all signify?”
“Yudhistira, being a righteous man, covered his face because he knew his
look would burn up any one catching his eye; he wishes to save your sons
and their friends from this fate. Bhima looked at his own muscle and the
weapon in his hand since he wanted to show that in the fourteenth year he’d
be employing them to good purpose. Arjuna wished to indicate that his
arrows would spread out like a cloud of spray when his time came. Dhaumya

indicated that he will have an occasion again to recite the Sama Veda and
lead the Pandavas back in a procession on their victorious return.”
“Alas, alas!” wailed Dhritarashtra. “Is there no way of undoing all this
error? Go, someone, go up and call them back. Tell them that I want them to
forget everything and come back. I shall earnestly ask them to return. Let
them live in peace; let my sons also live in peace and prosperity with nothing
lacking.”

8   Wanderings
THE PANDAVAS MARCHED ON in silence with a group of devoted
followers trailing along, until they reached the banks of the Ganga. There
they spent the night under a spreading tree. A few among Yudhistira’s
followers lit a sacrificial fire and melodiously chanted the Vedas, to while
away the time.
Yudhistira appealed to them, “Please go back. The forest is too full of
risks—reptiles and beasts of prey. We have brought upon ourselves this fate,
why should you share it? My brothers are too dispirited even to pluck fruits
or hunt animals to provide you food. So please return to your homes.”
Some listened to his advice and left, but others refused to go, assuring him
that they would look after themselves without proving burdensome in any
manner. Yudhistira was touched by their affection, and was unable to check
the tears welling up. His sorrow affected everyone.

At this moment, Saunaka, one of the learned men in the group, consoled
him with the philosophy. “Griefs and fears by the thousands afflict all men
night and day, but affect only the ignorant. Wise men like you should never be
overwhelmed by changes of circumstance, which cause poverty, loss of
home, kingdom, or of one’s kith and kin.” He expounded a philosophy of
acceptance and resignation, of getting beyond appearances to the core of
reality, where one could understand the ephemeral nature of wealth, youth,
beauty, and possessions.
Yudhistira explained, “It is not for myself that I feel the loss of a home. I
feel for my brothers and Panchali, whom I have involved in this misery. I am
sorry for those who are following me. One should have a roof to afford rest
and shade to those who seek one’s hospitality, otherwise one ceases to be
human.”
Understanding his predicament, Daumya, his priest, said, “At the beginning
creatures were born hungry. In order to help, the Sun tilted himself half the
year northward and the other half southward and absorbed the vapours. The
moon converted the vapours into clouds and sent down the rain, and created
the plant world, which nourishes life, at the same time providing for the six
kinds of taste. It is the Sun’s energy that supports life. Hence, Yudhistira, you
must seek his grace. All ancient kings have supported their dependents by
meditating on the Sun.”
Yudhistira purified himself with ablutions, and centered his thoughts on the
Sun God. Reciting a hymn in his praise, he uttered his one hundred and eight
names, standing in knee-deep water and fasting. In answer to his prayers the
Sun God appeared, luminous and blazing, offered him a copper bowl, and
said, “Let Panchali hold this vessel from this day, and you will have from it
an inexhaustible supply of food, as much as you want for twelve years to
come, and in the fourteenth year, you will regain your kingdom.”
After crossing over to the other bank of Ganga, they trudged along for
many days and reached a forest known as Dwaitavana, where dwelt many
hermits, living a life of contemplation amidst nature. The Pandavas could
forget their trials momentarily in such enlightened company. With the copper
bowl in Draupadi’s hands, Yudhistira could provide the hermits as well as
his followers with limitless food.
One afternoon Vidura arrived at their retreat. The moment Yudhistira saw
the coming chariot, he said to his brothers, “Does Vidura come again to

summon us to play dice? Perhaps Sakuni feels that he should appropriate our
weapons too, which he did not touch last time.” With great apprehension they
welcomed the visitor and enquired of his purpose. He replied, “I have been
cast away by our King.” And he explained the circumstances that led to it.
After the banishment of the Pandavas, Dhritarashtra was filled with regret
and summoned Vidura to prescribe for him a course for attaining peace of
mind. He had spent many sleepless nights thinking of his brother’s children
now treading the hard path in the forests. He wanted a salve for his
conscience, some agreeable statement from Vidura that the Pandavas would
be quite well, that fate had decreed their exile, and that Dhritarashtra was not
personally responsible for anything. But Vidura was as outspoken as ever
and repeated that Duryodhana should be cast away if their house was to be
saved. This irritated the King, who said, “Vidura, you believe in being
disagreeable. You hate me and my children. You are partial to the Pandavas
and always wish to do things that are agreeable to them.”
“As the sick man detests the medicine given to him, so did the King hate
the words of advice I uttered. Just as a youthful damsel would spurn the
advances of a man of seventy, so did Dhritarashtra spurn my advice. He said,
‘Go away for ever. I shall not need your guidance or advice to rule the
world. Go where they will heed your words—anywhere you may choose
except here. Now go away immediately.’ And here I am.”
The Pandavas were happy in Vidura’s company. But hardly had they
settled down to this pleasant state when another messenger arrived post-haste
from Hastinapura. It was Sanjaya. He was again received with every
courtesy, but he would hardly be seated for a moment. “I am in a great hurry,”
he explained. “Our King commands Vidura to return immediately. Yesterday
the King fell down in a faint at the assembly hall. He had been grief stricken
ever since he had expelled Vidura, and lamented, ‘I have lopped off my own
limb. How can I live? Will he forgive me? Is he alive?’ We revived him and
then he ordered, ‘Go and seek Vidura wherever he may be, and if he is alive,
beg him to return. Tell him how I feel like branding my tongue with hot iron
for my utterance. Sanjaya, my life depends upon you, go this instant and find
him.’”
Vidura had no choice but to return to Hastinapura. On seeing him,
Dhritarashtra, who had lain prostrate, sat up and wept with joy. But this
situation did not suit his sons.

Sakuni, Duryodhana, and Karna consulted among themselves. “Our King is
fickle minded. Someday he is going to send his own chariot for his nephews
and offer them the throne, and that is going to be the end of us. We know
where they are now. Let us go with a body of picked men and destroy them.
We should not let them nurture their grievance and plan revenge for thirteen
years                                                                              ” And soon they made various preparations to go forth and attack
the Pandavas in their forest retreat.
At this moment Sage Vyasa, knowing by intuition what was afoot, arrived
and advised them to drop their adventure. Turning to Dhritarashtra he said,
“Listen to me; I will tell you what will help you. Don’t allow this hostility to
continue. Your brother’s children are only five, yours are a hundred               You
have no cause for envy. Command your sons to go out and make their peace
with the Pandavas. Otherwise, as I read the future, at the end of thirteen years
the Pandavas will wipe you out of human memory. Heed my warning.”
Frightened by this prophecy, Dhritarashtra said, “Please advise my evil-
minded sons.”
At this moment another sage named Maitreyi arrived on a visit, and Vyasa
said, “Let this sage speak to your sons.”
After he was seated and shown all the courtesies, Maitreyi said to
Dhritarashtra, “I was on a pilgrimage to the holy places and happened to visit
Dwaitavana, where I met Yudhistira, his brothers, and Panchali living out the
life of forest nomads. I was pained to see them thus, and though Yudhistira is
resigned to it, it strikes me as an undeserved suffering.” Then, turning to
Duryodhana, the rishi said very softly, “O mighty warrior, listen to me. Put an
end to all this strife and bitterness and you will be saving your family from
annihilation.”
Duryodhana received the advice with a cynical smile, slapping his thigh in
response and kicking the ground at his feet to show his indifference,
whereupon the sage laid a curse on him. “When the time comes, you will
reap the fruits of your insolence and Bhima will rip that thigh of yours, which
you slap so heroically now.”
Dhritarashtra was aghast and begged, “Please take back your curse.”
“That I can’t, once uttered. However, if your son makes peace with the
Pandavas, my curse will not take effect. Otherwise, it will turn out exactly as
I have decreed.”

Having come to know that Yudhistira had been condemned to a forest life,
several friendly kings visited him to ask if they could help him in any way.
Yudhistira just said, “Wait for thirteen years. In the fourteenth year, I will
need all your help.”
Krishna had also arrived from Dwaraka, and spoke with Yudhistira. “I had
to be away on another mission. Otherwise I would have come to Hastinapura
and stopped the game which has brought you to this pass. I would have
persuaded the Kauravas to give up their sinful ways—or I would have
destroyed them all on the spot.”
Draupadi was moved by Krishna’s sympathy. “My five husbands, gifted
warriors of this world, looked on helplessly while I was dragged about,
insulted, and disrobed                                                            Dussasana grabbed me by the hair, and if I put up
my hands to protect my head, he tugged away the single wrap around my
body. He ignored my plea that this was not the time to touch me                   Nowhere
in the universe has any woman been so vilely handled, and Karna and
Dussasana and the others leered and joked and asked me to take a new
husband, as if I were a harlot.” She broke down and wept at the memory of
the incident. “Five warriors—five warriors were my husbands who could
not lift a finger to help me, except Bhima who was held back. You alone
came to my rescue . . . you heard my call . . . you are my saviour. Arjuna’s
Gandiva and someone else’s mace or sword—of what avail were they when
I was dragged before an assembly of monsters?”
Krishna appeased her. “I promise you—Duryodhana, his brothers, Karna,
and the evil genius behind them all, Sakuni—all of them will be punished.
Their blood will stain the dust. You will see Yudhistira installed on the
throne.”
After Krishna left, an argument began between Yudhistira and Draupadi.
She had faithfully obeyed Yudhistira’s commands, but never accepted his
philosophy. “To see you—particularly you, whom I have seen in a silken bed
and on a golden throne, waited upon by the rulers of the earth—now in this
state, mud spattered, clad in deerskin, sleeping on hard ground—oh, it wrings
my heart. To see Bhima, who achieves single-handed every victory, now in
this distressing state, does it not stir your anger? Arjuna of a thousand arms—
as it seems when he sends the arrows, worshipped by celestials and human
beings alike—bound hand and foot, does it not make you indignant? Why
does not your anger blaze up and consume your enemies? And me, the

daughter of Drupada and sister of Dhrishtadyumna, disgraced and forced to
live like this! How is it you are so mild? There is no kshatriya who is
incapable of anger, so they say, but your attitude does not prove it. You
should never forgive a devil, but destroy him without leaving a trace. On this
subject, have you not heard the story of Prahlada and his grandson Bali of
ancient  times?  The  grandson  enquired,                                          ‘Tell  me,  is  blind  forgiveness
superior to judicious anger?’ Prahlada, who knew all the subtleties of
conduct,  answered,                                                                ‘Child,  aggressiveness  is  not  always  good,  nor  is
forgiveness. One who is known to be forgiving always suffers and causes his
dependents also to suffer. Servants, strangers, and enemies ill-treat him, steal
his goods under his very nose, and even try to take his wife away. The evil-
minded will never be affected by compassion. Equally bad is indiscriminate
anger and the exercise of force. A man of anger and violence will be hated
by everyone, and suffer the consequences of his own recklessness. One
should show forgiveness or righteous anger as the situation may demand.’”
Yudhistira listened to her patiently and said,                                     “Anger is at all times
destructive, and I will not admit that there could be any occasion for its
exercise. O beautiful one, one should forgive every injury. There can be no
limit to forgiveness. Forgiveness is God and Truth and it is only through
divine compassion that the universe is held together. Anger is the root of
every destruction in the world. It is impossible for me to accept your
philosophy. Everyone worships peace. Our grandfather, Bhishma, as well as
Krishna, Vidura, Kripa, and Sanjaya; all of them strive for peace. They will
always urge our uncle to adopt peace. He will surely give us back our
kingdom someday. If he fails in that duty, then he is bound to suffer. It is not
for us to be angry or act in anger. This is my conviction. Patience.”
Draupadi replied, “It seems to me that men can never survive in this world
by merely practising tolerance. Excessive tolerance is responsible for the
calamity that has befallen you and your brothers. In prosperity and adversity
alike you cling to your ideals, fanatically. You are known for your virtuous
outlook in the three worlds. It seems to me that you would sooner abandon
me and your brothers than abandon your principles. O tiger among men, you
practise your philosophy with a steady mind. You have performed grand
sacrifices on a scale undreamt of by anyone in this world. Yet, my lord,
impelled by I know not what unseen power, you did not hesitate to lose your
wealth, kingdom, and all of us, and in a trice reduced us to the level of
mendicants and tramps. When I think of it my head reels and I go mad. We are

told that it is all God’s will and everything happens according to it. We are
like straws wafted about by strong winds, I suppose! The mighty God creates
illusions and makes every creature destroy its fellows. The Supreme Lord
enjoys it all like a child shaping and squashing its clay doll. Sometimes
God’s behaviour is bewildering. He sees noble, virtuous persons persecuted
beyond endurance, but keeps sinners happy and prosperous. I am sorely
confused and bewildered. Beholding you in this state and Duryodhana
flourishing, I cannot think too highly of God’s wisdom or justice. If God is
the real author of these acts, he himself must be defiled with the sin of every
creature.”
Yudhistira felt shocked at this speech. “You speak with profound fluency,
but your language is that of an atheist. I do not trade in virtue as merchandise,
to weigh its profit and loss. I do what seems to be right only because it is the
only way, and not for results. It is not right to censure God, my beloved. Do
not slander God. Learn to know him, understand his purpose, bow down to
him. It is only by piety that you can attain immortality.”
“It is not my purpose to slander God or religion. I am perhaps raving out
of my sorrow; take it in that light if you like. And I will continue my
lamentations and ravings, if you please. My lord, every creature should
perform its legitimate act; otherwise, the distinction between the animate and
inanimate will vanish. Those who believe in destiny and those who drift
without such beliefs are alike the worst among men; only those who act and
perform what is right for their station in life are worthy of praise. Man
should decide on his course of action and accomplish it with the instrument
of intelligence. Our present state of misery could be remedied only if you
acted. If you have the will and the intelligence and proper application, you
can regain your kingdom. Sitting on my father’s lap, I used to hear such
advice from a seer who often visited him in his days of distress.”
Before Draupadi had finished, Bhimasena rose and addressed Yudhistira.
“Our enemies have snatched away our kingdom not through fair means, but by
deceit.  Why  should  we  accept  that  state?  It  was  your  weakness  and
carelessness that brought on this condition. To please you, we have had to
accept this calamity . . . to please you. We have let down our friends and
well-wishers and gratified our enemies. My greatest regret in life is that we
ever listened to you and accepted your guidance; otherwise Arjuna and I
could have dealt with those sons of King Dhritarashtra. It was the greatest
folly of my life—the memory of it hurts me perpetually—to have spared

those fellows. Why should we live in the forest like wild beasts or
mendicants holding up a begging bowl—even if the bowl is the gift of the
Sun God? Food taken as alms may suit the brahmin, but a kshatriya must fight
and earn his food. You have bound yourself hand and foot with several vows
and with the cry of religion; but Dhritarashtra and his sons, my lord, regard
us not as men disciplined with vows, but as imbeciles. Give up your apathy
and feebleness, and become a sovereign again and rule your subjects as a
kshatriya should, instead of wasting your precious days amidst animals and
recluses. Leave Arjuna and me to clear the way for you                            ”
Yudhistira brooded on what he had said. “I cannot reproach you for your
words and for the feeling behind them. I agree that it was all my mistake. I
confess to something now. I agreed to the gambling only with a secret hope
that I would be able to snatch away the whole kingdom and sovereignty from
Duryodhana and make him my vassal, while we had only half the kingdom
after our return from Panchala Desa; but he played with the aid of that expert,
Sakuni, and now I am paying for my own cupidity, which I had not confessed
to any one till now. Don’t decide in anger or hurry; we will not achieve
anything through such resolutions. Oh, Bhima, I am pained by your words,
please wait patiently for better times. I have given my word that we would
remain in exile for thirteen years, and I cannot easily retract it now. Nothing
else matters                                                                      ”
Bhima made a gesture of despair. “We are like froth on the river, drifting
with its current, whatever one may think or do. Every moment we are
growing older. Thirteen years . . . ! Who knows whether we will be alive or
fit to take back our kingdom? And we will have thirteen years less for our
existence. We should attempt to wrest back our kingdom this very minute. We
have already spent thirteen months in exile. Each month has been like a year,
and that is sufficient fulfilment of your promise. You have agreed to remain
incognito for a year after the twelve-year exile. How can this condition ever
be fulfilled? Dhritarashtra’s sons will find out our whereabouts through their
spies, and then we will have to go into exile for another twelve years. Is that
it? That was an unfair condition for the thirteenth year. How could you agree
to it? How could the six of us ever remain unnoticed? Myself particularly,
                                                                                  how can I be concealed? You might as well try to hide Mount Meru   O
King, now let us plan seriously                                                   ”
Yudhistira remained silent for a long time, and then said, “Apart from my
promise and the bond thereon, it will not be practical for us to plunge into a

conflict now. On his side, Duryodhana has the support of Bhishma, Drona,
and his son Aswathama. All the others, who speak favourably for us now,
will join him should a conflict arise, since they are kept and sheltered by
him. Furthermore, all the armies of the kings we have punished in our early
campaigns will look for an opportunity to muster themselves for an attack
against us. We must gather strength and support gradually until we can match
our army with theirs. You and Arjuna are on our side, but Drona, his son
Aswathama, and Karna, practically invincible men, are on their side. How
are we to vanquish all those men? We have no chance of surviving a fight yet.
I feel uneasy thinking of all this. I do not know what to do really              ”
At this moment Vyasa arrived, and said, “Yudhistira, I read what passes in
your mind, and am here to dispel your fears. There will come a time, be
assured of it, when Arjuna will slay all your foes in battle. I will impart to
you a mantra called Pratismriti, and that will help you. You will impart it to
Arjuna, and let him go forth to meet the gods in their worlds and receive from
each of them a special weapon. After he obtains them he will become
invincible. Don’t despair.” He took Yudhistira aside and asked him to go
through a purificatory bath, and whispered the mantra in his ear. After that,
Vyasa departed, tendering a parting advice. “You have stayed in Dwaitavana
long enough. Now move on to another suitable place, and you will feel
happier there. It is not pleasant to stay in any one place too long.”
Presently  Yudhistira  moved  from  Dwaitavana  with  his  brothers  and
Draupadi to reside in Kamyakavana, which offered them a background of
lovely lakes and woods. In due course, Yudhistira felt the time ripe to impart
the secret mantra to Arjuna. On an auspicious day, after due preparations, he
transferred the great mantra to Arjuna and gave him leave to acquire more
weapons  from  Indra,  Varuna,  Iswara,  and  other  gods.  Arjuna  moved
northward and soon reached the Vindhya Mountains, where he selected a
spot and settled down to meditate.
Shiva appeared to Arjuna, first in the guise of a hunter and then in his true
form, granted to him an astra called Pasupatha, and then vanished. Following
him, Varuna, Yama, and Kubera came one after another and imparted the
techniques of their different special weapons, assuring him success against
the Kauravas.
Then on a mountain path he found a chariot waiting to carry him to Indra’s
city, Amaravathi. Being the son of Indra, he was received with all honours

and entertained with music and dance by celestial beings. In due course Indra
imparted to him the secrets of his weapons, and then suggested, “You will
now learn music and dance, which you will find useful some day.” So a
gandharva named Chitrasena tutored him in the arts.
During this period, the celestial courtesan Urvasi fell in love with Arjuna
and, with Indra’s sanction, set out to meet him at night dressed in transparent
silk, anointed with perfumes. When she knocked on the door of Arjuna’s
abode, he received her with profound courtesy, declaring, “You are like my
mother Kunthi or Madri                                                              ” at which Urvasi felt spurned and asked if he
had no manliness left. He told her, “I am under an ascetic vow at this time in
order to achieve certain aims and I cannot view you except as my mother.”
She cursed him, “Since you have disregarded a woman who has been
commanded by her lord and your father to please you, may you pass among
women unnoticed and treated as a eunuch.” She flounced out in a rage. Later,
Indra  told  him,                                                                   “You  have  surpassed  even  the  most  austere  rishis  in
exercising self-control. Urvasi’s curse will bear fruit in the thirteenth year of
your exile, when you will find it actually to be a blessing.”
At Kamyakavana, missing his company, Arjuna’s brothers and wife felt
depressed and restless. On the advice of Sage Narada, Yudhistira decided to
go on a pilgrimage; to bathe in holy rivers and lakes and pray in all the
sacred  spots.  The  Pandavas  began  their  pilgrimage  westward,  visiting
Naimisha Forest on the banks of the Godavari, and then proceeded to the
confluence of the Ganga and Yamuna, where the gods were said to come
down to perform tapas. They zig-zagged their way through the country, never
missing a single mountain or river that had any sacred association. They
could  now  forget  their  sorrows,  although  always  feeling  a  perpetual
emptiness in their hearts owing to Arjuna’s absence. At the end of the twelfth
year of exile, they had arrived at a certain spot in the Himalayas, where
Arjuna rejoined them after an absence of five years. When he described to
them the weapons he had acquired from the divine sources, their hopes rose
again, and they began to discuss seriously how to win back their kingdom
after the lapse of one more year of exile in disguise. At the end of the
pilgrimage they returned to Kamyakavana.

9   Hundred Questions
MEAN  WHILE,  news  reached  Dhritarashtra  through  his  spies  of  the
movements and achievements of the Pandavas, particularly of Arjuna’s
additions to his arsenal. Dhritarashtra was, as usual, torn between avuncular
sentiments and a desire to preserve himself and his sons. He went off into
speculations on what to do, and as usual fell into total confusion. Duryodhana
watched his father’s reactions with uneasiness and said, “The King cannot
forget his nephews; he is obsessed with thoughts of them. Now that we know
where they are, why should we not act swiftly and end this nuisance once and
for all?”
“That  may  not  prove  so  easy,”  said  Sakuni.                                “Arjuna  has  acquired
extraordinary powers and, fired by a sense of revenge, the Pandavas may
prove formidable. However, they have still over a year to remain in exile.
Yudhistira will not go back on his word, even if the King grows soft and
invites them to return home. But you may do one thing. They are now in
Kamyaka looking like wandering tribes, clad in animal hide and rolling in
dust. Why don’t you go up and exhibit yourself in your fullest royal

splendour? You are the lord of the world today, enjoying unlimited wealth,
power, and authority. It is said that there could be nothing more gratifying
than showing off one’s superiority before an enemy reduced to beggary. Why
don’t you establish a royal camp in the vicinity of the Kamyaka Forest, and
we will see that they come up before you in their rags to be admitted
grudgingly by the gatekeepers?”
On the excuse of having to inspect the cattle grazing on their frontiers,
Duryodhana got Dhritarashtra’s permission to establish a camp in the vicinity
of Kamyaka. The camp was a regal one with hundreds of courtesans,
attendants, soldiers, and courtiers. Feasts, dances, music, and entertainment
of every kind went on noisily night and day. The whole area was transformed
with colourful illuminations and fireworks.
Duryodhana and his accomplices had arrived at the camp in splendid
armour and military equipment, in dazzling style. They hoped that the
Pandavas would notice the brilliance and gaiety of the camp across the river
from Kamyaka. Duryodhana tried to send a messenger to summon the
Pandavas before him, but the messenger was denied passage across the river
by a watchman, a gandharva sent down by the gods to create a crisis. After
heated  arguments  and  protests,  a  scuffle  ensued.  Others  gradually  got
involved in the affair.
Starting thus, imperceptibly, a full-fledged fight developed between the
armies of the gandharvas and Duryodhana. At the end of the skirmish, after
his soldiers had been killed, Duryodhana was taken prisoner with his allies
and bound in chains.
Learning  of  this  incident,  and  of  Karna’s  flight  from  it,  Yudhistira
dispatched Bhima and Arjuna to rescue Duryodhana: “After all, they are our
brothers, and whatever might be the conflict between us, we cannot abandon
them now.”
Bhima and Arjuna went into action, and were able to free the prisoners
from the gandharvas, who had been instructed by Indra himself to undertake
this expedition and teach Duryodhana a lesson. Duryodhana thanked the
Pandavas for their help, wound up his camp, and went back to Hastinapura,
sadder and wiser. The Pandavas returned to Dwaitavana.
The Pandavas were in a hopeful mood when they came back to their
original  starting  point,  Dwaitavana,  after  their  prolonged  pilgrimage.

Dwaitavana was rich in fruits and roots, and the Pandavas lived on sparse
diets, performing austerities and practising rigid vows.
They managed to live, on the whole, a tranquil life—until one day a
brahmin arrived in a state of great agitation. He had lost a churning staff and
two faggots of a special kind, with which he produced the fire needed for his
religious activities. All his hours were normally spent in the performance of
rites. But that day, he wailed, “A deer of extraordinary size, with its antlers
spreading out like the branches of a tree, dashed in unexpectedly, lowered its
head, and stuck the staff and the faggots in its horns, turned round, and
vanished before I could understand what was happening. I want your help to
recover those articles of prayer, for without them I will not be able to
perform my daily rites. You can see its hoof marks on the ground and follow
them.”
As a kshatriya, Yudhistira felt it his duty to help the brahmin, so with his
brothers, he set out to chase the deer. They followed its hoof marks and
eventually spotted it, after a long chase. But when they shot their arrows, the
deer sprang away, tempted them to follow it here and there, and suddenly
vanished without a trace. They were by this time drawn far into the forest
and, feeling fatigued and thirsty, they sat under a tree to rest.
Yudhistira told his youngest brother, Nakula, “Climb this tree and look for
any sign of water nearby.”
Presently, Nakula cried from the top of the tree, “I see some green patches
and also hear the cries of cranes . . . must be a water source.” He came down
and proceeded towards a crystal-clear pond, sapphire-like, reflecting the
sky. He fell down on his knees and splashed the water on his face. As he did
this, a loud voice, which seemed to come from a crane standing in the water,
cried,                                                                            “Stop! This pond is mine. Don’t touch it until you answer my
questions. After answering, drink or take away as much water as you like.”
Nakula’s thirst was so searing that he could not wait. He bent down and,
cupping his palms, raised the water to his lips. He immediately collapsed,
and lay, to all purposes, dead.
After a while, Yudhistira sent his brother, Sahadeva, to see what was
delaying Nakula’s return. He too rushed forward eagerly at the sight of the
blue pond, heard the warning, tasted the water, and fell dead.
Arjuna followed. On hearing the voice, he lifted his bow, shot an arrow in
the direction of the voice, and approached the water’s edge. The voice said,
“Don’t be foolhardy. Answer me first before you touch the water.”

Arjuna, surveying with shock and sadness the bodies of his younger
brothers, replied, “When you are silenced with my arrows, you will cease to
question                                                                          ” Driven to desperation with thirst and enraged at the spectacle
of his dead brothers, he sent a rain of arrows in all directions. As the voice
continued to warn, “Don’t touch,” he stooped and took the water to his lips
and fell dead.
Next came Bhima. He saw his brothers lying dead, and swung his mace
and cried back when he heard the voice, “O evil power, whoever you may
be, I will put an end to you presently, but let me first get rid of this deadly
thirst                                                                            ” Turning a deaf ear to the warning, he took the water in the cup of
his palm and with the first sip fell dead, the mace rolling away at his side.
Yudhistira himself presently arrived, passing through the forest where no
human being had set foot before except his brothers. He was struck by the
beauty of the surroundings—enormous woods, resonant with the cry of birds,
the occasional grunt of a bear, or the light tread of a deer on dry leaves—and
then he came upon the magnificent lake, looking as if made by heavenly
hands. There on its bank he saw his brothers.
He wept and lamented aloud. Both the poignancy and the mystery of it
tormented him. He saw Arjuna’s bow and Bhima’s mace lying on the ground,
and reflected, “Where is your promise to split Duryodhana’s thigh? What
was the meaning of the gods’ statement at Arjuna’s birth that no one could
vanquish him?” How was he to explain this calamity to Kunthi?
A little later he said to himself, “This is no ordinary death. I see no marks
of injury on any of them. What is behind it all?” Could it be that Duryodhana
had pursued them, and had his agents at work? He observed the dead faces;
they bore no discolouration or sign of decay. He realised that his brothers
could not have been killed by mortals, and concluded that there must be some
higher power responsible. Resolving not to act hastily, he considered all the
possibilities, and stepped into the lake to perform the rites for the dead.
The voice now said, “Don’t act rashly; answer my questions first and then
drink and take away as much water as you like. If you disregard me, you will
be the fifth corpse here. I am responsible for the deaths of all these brothers
of yours; this lake is mine and whoever ignores my voice will die. Take
care!”
Yudhistira said humbly, “What god are you to have vanquished these
invincible brothers of mine, gifted and endowed with inordinate strength and
courage? Your feat is great and I bow to you in homage, but please explain

who you are and why you have slain these innocent slakers of thirst? I do not
understand your purpose, my mind is agitated and curious. Please tell me
who you are.”
At this request he saw an immense figure materialising beside the lake,
towering over the surroundings. “I am a yaksha. These brothers of yours,
though warned, tried to force their way in and have paid for it with their
lives. If you wish to live, don’t drink this water before you answer my
questions.”
Yudhistira answered humbly, “O yaksha, I will not covet what is yours. I
will not touch this water without your sanction, in spite of my thirst. I will
answer your questions as well as I can.”
The yaksha asked, “What makes the sun rise? . . . What causes him to set?”
Yudhistira answered, “The Creator Brahma makes the sun rise, and his
dharma causes the sun to set                                                     ”
Yudhistira had to stand a gruelling test. He had no time even to consider
what to say, as the questions came in a continuous stream. Yudhistira was
afraid to delay an answer or plead ignorance. Some of the questions sounded
fatuous, some of them profound, some obscure but packed with layers of
significance. Yudhistira was constantly afraid that he might upset the yaksha
and provoke him to commit further damage, although one part of his mind
reflected, “What worse fate can befall us?”
Without giving him time to think, the questions came, sometimes four at a
time in one breath. Their range was unlimited, and they jumped from one
topic to another.
“What is important for those who sow? What is important for those who
seek  prosperity?”  Before  Yudhistira  could  complete  his  sentence  with
“Rain,” he also had to be answering the next question with “Offspring            ”
The yaksha went on to ask, “What is weightier than the earth?”
“Mother.”
“Higher than the heavens?”
“Father.”
“Faster than the wind?”
“Mind.”
“What sleeps with eyes open?”
“Fish.”
“What remains immobile after being born?”
“Egg.”

“Who is the friend of the exile?”
“The companion on the way.”
“Who is the friend of one about to die?”
“The charity done in one’s lifetime.”
“Who is that friend you could count as God given?”
“A wife.”
“What is one’s highest duty?”
“To refrain from injury.”
To  another  series  of  questions  on  renunciation,  Yudhistira  gave  the
answers: “Pride, if renounced, makes one agreeable; anger, if renounced,
brings no regret; desire, if renounced, will make one rich; avarice, if
renounced, brings one happiness. True tranquility is of the heart               Mercy
may be defined as wishing happiness to all creatures                            Ignorance is not
knowing one’s duties                                                            Wickedness consists in speaking ill of others.”
“Who is a true brahmin? By birth or study or conduct?”
“Not by birth, but by knowledge of the scriptures and right conduct. A
brahmin born to the caste, even if he has mastered the Vedas, must be viewed
as of the lowest caste if his heart is impure.”
There were a hundred or more questions in all. Yudhistira felt faint from
thirst, grief, and suspense, and could only whisper his replies. Finally, the
yaksha said, “Answer four more questions, and you may find your brothers—
at least one of them—revived                                                    Who is really happy?”
“One who has scanty means but is free from debt; he is truly a happy man.”
“What is the greatest wonder?”
“Day after day and hour after hour, people die and corpses are carried
along, yet the onlookers never realise that they are also to die one day, but
think they will live for ever. This is the greatest wonder of the world.”
“What is the Path?”
“The Path is what the great ones have trod. When one looks for it, one will
not find it by study of scriptures or arguments, which are contradictory and
conflicting.”
At the end of these answers, the yaksha said, “From among these brothers
of yours, you may choose one to revive.”
Yudhistira said, “If I have only a single choice, let my young brother,
Nakula, rise.”
The yaksha said, “He is after all your stepbrother. I’d have thought you’d
want Arjuna or Bhima, who must be dear to you.”

“Yes, they are,” replied Yudhistira. “But I have had two mothers. If only
two in our family are to survive, let both the mothers have one of their sons
alive. Let Nakula also live, in fairness to the memory of my other mother
Madri.”
The yaksha said, “You have indeed pleased me with your humility and the
judiciousness of your answers. Now let all your brothers rise up and join
you.”
The yaksha thereafter revived all his brothers and also conferred on
Yudhistira the following boon: “Wherever you may go henceforth, with your
brothers and wife, you will have the blessing of being unrecognized.” The
yaksha was none other than Yama, the God of Justice, and father of
Yudhistira, who had come to test Yudhistira’s strength of mind and also to
bless him with the power to remain incognito—a special boon in view of the
conditions laid down for the last year of exile.
The Pandavas’ final trial seemed to be over. They had recovered and
restored to the brahmin ascetic his churning staff and the burning sticks. Now
they could sit calmly in front of their hermitage and talk of their future.
Yudhistira said, “Our twelve years’ trial is over. We have one more year
to spend. Let us pass it in a city—we have lived in the forests long enough.
Arjuna, you have travelled much; suggest where we could spend the coming
year.”
Arjuna rose to the occasion. “We have the grace of Dharma, your father,
and shall not be recognized wherever we may be. All around, there are a
number of kingdoms abounding in wealth, comfort, and food. I could mention
many prosperous countries—Panchala, Chedi, Matsya, Salva, Avanthi. You
could choose any of these for our remaining year’s residence. Any one of
them will be agreeable and we will not be recognized.”
They thought it over. “No, not Panchala, our father-in-law’s place, that
would be impossible. We must select a place where we may live without
fear. The country should also be pleasant and agreeable.”
“Of all those you mention,” said Yudhistira, “I feel Matsya will be the
most suitable one. Its ruler, King Virata, is a good, generous man. Let us
spend the year there. Let us seek work in his palace. How shall we enter his
service? We have to decide that. As for me, I shall call myself Kanka and
offer to keep the King engaged and amused—playing dice with King Virata
. . .”

“Dice!” his brothers exclaimed in unison. “Oh!”
“No harm in it,” Yudhistira said. “We’ll play without stakes, just to while
away the time.” For a while he was lost in visions of the game. “How
pleasant to roll the dice and the tinted pawns of ivory in one’s palm            ” He
roused himself from the colourful vision and continued, “I have no doubt that
Virata will find my company most engaging. If he questions me at any time,
I’ll have to tell him that I used to keep Yudhistira constant company—it
would not be a falsehood anyway! What would you choose to do?” he asked
Bhima.
Bhima reflected for a moment and said, “I’ll name myself Vallabha and
offer to work in the King’s kitchen.” He indulged in a loud dream of how he
would enjoy this role. “The King will not have tasted such delicacies in his
life. Oh, what a chance to try out my ideas!” He revelled in a vision of
feasting and feeding the royal household with divine food and added, “I will
also show them some physical feats as a side entertainment, controlling their
elephants and bulls, which may prove truculent. I will wrestle with their
champions and put them to shame, taking care not to kill anyone. If I am asked
to explain my past I will tell them that I was a cook in the employment of
Yudhistira and also amused my master with wrestling feats. That wouldn’t be
a lie, would it?” he asked Yudhistira with a sly smile.
Yudhistira turned to Arjuna and asked, “And how will you take it?”
Arjuna said, “It is going to be difficult to hide the deep marks of the
bowstring on my arm, which may betray me. I will have to cover them with a
stack of conch bangles up to my elbow. I shall wear a long braid and brilliant
ear drops, dress like a woman, and call myself Brihannala, and pass myself
off as a neuter. I will seek employment in the ladies’ chambers, to guard
them, teach them dance and music, and to tell them stories.”
“This would be the most complete falsehood!” sighed Yudhistira. “Well,
you have no other course, I suppose . . .”
Arjuna explained, “I was cursed in Indra’s world by Urvasi to be called a
eunuch, and that curse has to be fulfilled. We can’t help these things.”
“I will call myself Granthika,” Nakula declared. “I will take care of the
King’s stables. I love horses, and understand them. At my touch, the most
vicious animal will turn docile and take on a rider or draw a chariot. I can
make them fly like a storm. I will say that Yudhistira had engaged me as his
stable steward                                                                   ”

Sahadeva said, “I will offer to look after the King’s cattle. I know all the
auspicious marks on a bull, and the moods of the milch cow. At my touch,
milk will flow from an udder. I love cattle, and am prepared to spend the rest
of my life in their midst.”
The brothers looked happy for the first time in twelve years, especially at
the prospect of indulging in their favourite hobbies. Yudhistira then thought of
Draupadi. “You are delicate, and unused to drudgery,” he told her. “You
should do no harder job than choosing your perfume or jewellery for the
day.”
“Don’t forget that I have not seen a mirror for twelve years,” answered
Draupadi, catching their light mood of jocularity. “There is a class of women
called Sairandhari who serve as companions or handmaids, mostly in royal
households. I shall be the Sairandhari, one skilled in grooming and dressing
hair, in Virata’s women’s chambers. If questioned, I shall state that I served
as Draupadi’s companion, and that would be as near the truth as need be.”
After this they consulted Daumya, their priest. He said, “I don’t doubt that
you will be happy in the Virata kingdom, but still I warn you. You must take
special care of Draupadi. Do not expose her too much to the public gaze.
Virata himself is a noble person, but there are one or two in his court who
may not be as good. Take special care of her. And another point. In the
proximity of a king, you will have to keep in mind a few important rules.
Being a king yourself, you will not have known them. Only a commoner
serving a king could realise that it is a knife-edge existence. Far happier are
those who never see their king except when he passes along, riding an
elephant, in a procession. One who serves a king is serving an embodiment
of God and must adjust his distance suitably. Never enter the King’s presence
without announcing yourself and seeking his permission. Never occupy a seat
at the court which may rouse the envy of another. Don’t offer any counsel
unasked. Don’t talk unnecessarily or carry any gossip, but remain silent and
alert at all times. Never give any occasion for him to repeat a command. In
the King’s presence one should be gentle in speech and avoid vehemence and
the expression of anger or contempt. One should not laugh too loudly nor
display undue gravity. One should not dress like the King, nor gesticulate
while speaking, nor mention outside what has transpired in the King’s
presence. Be available to the call of the King but don’t be obtrusive.” Thus
Daumya went on expounding the code to be followed by a courtier. Then he
bade them farewell and left to reside in Panchala.

Leaving the forests once and for all, the Pandavas reached the Virata
country. Outside the capital, they bundled up their armour, mailcoats, bows,
arrows, and swords in a sack and tied it to the top branch of a banyan tree
standing in a burial ground. With their hands bare of weapons, they reached
the palace gate and announced that they had come to serve the King, who
summoned them one by one and engaged them. They remained unrecognized
through the grace of Yama.
For almost a year there were no untoward incidents, and they pleased
Virata by their diligence and integrity. Only a few days remained to complete
their term of exile when a last-minute complication arose unexpectedly.
As feared by Daumya, Draupadi came to be noticed by Kichaka, the
Queen’s brother and the general of the army, a handsome, powerful man. He
had suddenly spied Draupadi while she was serving the Queen, and pursued
her with determination as she went about her duties in the palace. Although
her husbands noticed her plight, they could not help her without betraying
their identity. They comforted her in secret and promised to protect her at the
right time. Not only Daumya, but even the Queen had anticipated this
situation. “Men, being what they are, will not leave you alone,” she had said.
“Your beauty frightens me. I fear even my husband, Virata may succumb to
your looks. How can I have you in the palace, and avoid complications?”
Draupadi  had  answered  quickly,                                                   “Have  no  fear;  there  will  be  no
complications. I am married to five gandharvas who are ever watchful though
unseen, wherever I may be. They will protect me, and if anyone molests me
the gandharvas will kill him immediately                                            ” This had somehow satisfied
the Queen, who loved Draupadi’s company. She warned her brother not to go
near Draupadi, but he ignored her in the fever of his infatuation.
Kichaka asked her to send Draupadi to him on some errand, and when she
arrived, tried to take her in his arms. When she repelled him, he was angry
and assaulted her. She went tearfully to the King and complained while he
was playing dice with Yudhistira. Neither the King nor Yudhistira paid any
attention to her, though the latter felt shocked, and checked himself.
She  then  sought  Bhima’s  help,  bitterly  complaining  against  others,
particularly Yudhistira, who would not interrupt his play. Bhima promised
her his help, and they evolved a plan. She was to lure Kichaka to visit a
dance hall late at night, promising to yield to him there. Kichaka fell into this
trap, and when he stepped into the darkened hall, he was hugged by Bhima,
and disposed of quickly.

Kichaka’s death created a sensation in the country since he had been a
powerful man and the head of the army. Draupadi explained that he had been
destroyed by her gandharva husbands. There was public mourning, and the
citizens looked on Draupadi as an evil spirit in their midst, seized her, and
prepared to cremate her on Kichaka’s funeral pyre. Bhima rescued her at the
last minute, secretly destroying, in the operation, Kichaka’s soldiers, who
were carrying her off to the pyre. When she went back to the palace, both the
King and Queen became nervous. The Queen pleaded, “Sairandhari, please
go away. We dare not keep you with us. The fate that overtook my brother
and hundreds of his followers may overtake us too. We are afraid of your
gandharva protectors, not knowing when they will be roused. I like you but I
cannot have you here. Please leave us. Go far away.”
Draupadi  said,                                                                 “Please  don’t  be  harsh.  Your  brother  provoked  my
husbands—otherwise, no harm would have come to him. I assure you they
will not harm you, since you have all been so kind to me. Please let me stay
for only thirteen days more. I have some special reason for making this
request, and I will go away after thirteen days, I promise. Please show me
this consideration.”
The Queen thought it over, looked at Draupadi searchingly, and asked,
“Why thirteen days?”
“I can’t explain now, but you will know . . .”
“Will you keep off your gandharvas?
“I promise on my honour. They will never come near this palace again.”
“You may stay on. I shall trust you.”

10   Servitude
DURYODHANA FELT UNEASY as he realised that only a few more days
were left for the completion of the Pandavas’ thirteenth year of exile. He had
sent his spies to find out their whereabouts, but they came back to report that
they could find no trace of them, producing thereby a general feeling of relief
in the Kaurava camp.
The spies, desiring to add more information to please their masters, said,
“During our journeys, we found that the Virata army chief, Kichaka, had been
slain by certain gandharvas who were enraged at his attempt to molest one of

their  women.”  This  was  especially  welcome  to  the  Trigarta’s  chief,
Susurman, one of Duryodhana’s allies, who had repeatedly suffered defeat at
the hands of the Virata forces. The news also produced some uneasy
reflections in Duryodhana. He kept asking, “Does anyone here believe this
gandharva story? Who was that woman? We should try to learn something
more about those gandharvas.”
Karna suggested, “Let us send out abler spies once again. Let them go
round to search every mountain, village, city, and forest, and the crowds at
every festival and marketplace, keeping their eyes wide open. They must also
pay a second visit to Virata and watch, lynx eyed, any and every group of six.
They must do all this speedily, as we must discover them within a few days.”
Dussasana supported this idea and added as a sort of soothsaying, “The
Pandavas must have perished, there can be no doubt about it. O brother, act
on that basis and enjoy life, and do not bother about them any more.”
Drona, their preceptor, warned, “It is unlikely that persons of the calibre
of the Pandavas could ever perish. When they return, beware; they will come
back with redoubled energy. Your next step should be to make peace with
them, and also to prepare an abode to receive them. This time, send out spies
who will understand the qualities of the Pandavas and look for them                 ”
Bhishma agreed. “You should decide judiciously what must be done at the
end of the short time left, taking into consideration the fact that if Yudhistira
vowed to remain incognito, he would remain so, being a man of firm vows,
and none of your spies will ever be able to track him. When the time comes,
it may be advantageous to receive them in a friendly spirit.” He added
another piece of advice. “Where Yudhistira resides, the country will be
flourishing. The air will throb at all times with the chanting of Vedic hymns,
the clouds will gather and precipitate rain at the proper time. The fruits of the
orchards will be juicy, and the corn ripening in the fields will be full and
nourishing; cows will yield milk that is sweet and will become golden-hued
butter at the slightest turn of a churner; people will be cheerful and contented
and free from malice and pettiness. Fields and gardens will for ever be green
and flowers will be in perennial bloom, the air charged with their fragrance.
Let your spies look for a country displaying these qualities and when the time
comes, send your emissary there with a message of good will. They have
kept their word, and it would not be proper to spy on them and discover them
before their time is up.”

Kripa said, “Take stock of your strength and resources and increase your
own powers in the short time at your disposal so that you may be in a
position to negotiate a treaty with the Pandavas when they appear before you
—or form alliances to fight them, if necessary. There can be no doubt that
you must be in a strong position when you meet them again. After all, they are
going to be deficient in troops and equipment just at this moment.”
Susurman, the ruler of Trigarta, said, “Now that we know Kichaka is dead,
let us invade Virata and acquire their wealth and cattle. I have often suffered
at the hands of that King, and this is just the time for us to act, when they are
left without a commander.” He added that if the Pandavas were alive, they
would be bankrupts and weaklings and not worth their notice. His own
conclusion was that they had all perished and gone to the world of Yama, and
no further thought need be wasted on them. Without any hesitation, he
suggested that they should invade Virata and strengthen their resources and
empire.
Duryodhana turned to Dussasana and said, “Work out the military details
for the campaign immediately. We have no time to lose.” He added, “The
manner of Kichaka’s death leaves no room for doubt—the hand that crushed
his life out must have been Bhima’s and no one else’s. Only Bhima attacks
and kills with bare hands. Sairandhari can be none other than Draupadi. And
all that account about the protecting gandharvas must be fiction. Bhishma has
described the flourishing nature of the country where Yudhistira stays. Our
spies have told us how rich the Virata country is, how green its fields, how
numerous their kine. All indications are there. Within the few days left, we
must attack and subjugate Virata. If we expose the Pandavas before their time
their exile will be extended for thirteen years. On the other hand, if we are
mistaken about their presence there, we may at least enrich our coffers with
the Virata wealth.”
“Undoubtedly,”  added  Susurman,  the  Trigartan  King.                             “Very  wisely
spoken.”
Duryodhana then detailed the course of action. They would form two
columns, one to attack the Matsyas*1 first, and the other to attack their cows
and seize them later. The two objectives would be achieved in the interval of
twenty-four hours.
Susurman was given the special privilege of leading the attack on the
capital of the Matsyas. He took the King prisoner, and carried him off in his

chariot. At this, Bhima went after a tree to pluck its roots and sweep off the
enemy. But Yudhistira cautioned him, “If you go on bearing a tree in your
hand, everyone will know who you are and then we will have to remain
exiled for another period of twelve years. Take a bow and arrow and fight
unrecognized.”
Bhima obeyed him. Carrying a bow, an unusual weapon, in his hand, he
went after Susurman, rescued his patron and friend Virata, and also brought
the other King captive. In the process of capturing Susurman, Bhima had
handled him with such fury that the King presented a sorry spectacle.
Yudhistira said, “Set him free, to go back                                        ” After advising Susurman
not to again engage himself in such adventures, he escorted him back to the
safety of his own camp.
Meanwhile, another column rounded up thousands of Virata’s cattle and
drove them off. Since the Virata King, Yudhistira, and Bhima were still away
on the other front where Susurman had attacked, this news was brought by the
panic-stricken cowherds to Prince Uttara, who spent all his time in the
women’s quarters but always bragged about his military prowess.
He thundered, “How dare they? I will recover every bit of the herd. Bring
me my mail coat and arms, everyone                                                ” He hustled and pranced about in
great rage. “Just watch what I do. I must rush in there and fight, only give me
a proper charioteer capable of piloting the vehicle through the thick of the
battle. When they see me fight, they should think that Arjuna the Pandava is in
action—I have too often been mistaken for him in various campaigns. But
alas, I am sadly handicapped now because I lost my brilliant charioteer in a
recent campaign in which I had to be fighting twenty nights and days
continuously. If I have a charioteer, I will rush like a mad elephant into the
midst of those weaklings, the Kauravas, and it will be only a moment’s work
for me to capture the whole lot of them—Duryodhana, Drona, Kripa, or
anyone else who may be participating in this cattle-snatching adventure. I am
not frightened of names. I will have every one of them chained behind my
chariot and bring them in a run                                                   ” This was a very stimulating promise for
the cowherds, but Uttara hardly made any move in the direction of the
fighting field. He went on fulminating against the Kauravas, whom he called
sneaks and weaklings who could be warriors only where weak opponents
faced them.
All his challenging, aggressive statements were overheard by Arjuna, who
was also in the women’s quarters, and he persuaded Draupadi to suggest to

the Prince, “Brihannala is a good charioteer. He used to drive Arjuna’s
chariot  and  helped  him  in  many  an  expedition,  including  the  famous
destruction of Khandava Vana, that forest which Arjuna destroyed to please
Agni, the God of Fire.”
Brihannala was immediately sent for, and the Prince received him with
great condescension. “I learn that you are a good driver of chariots. Come,
get the chariots ready and come with me. Soon I must get the cattle back and
teach those thieves in the guise of kshatriyas a lesson that they will remember
all their life.”
Arjuna replied modestly, “I am, after all, a singer and dancer and a teacher
of women. How can I ever steer a chariot through a battlefield?”
The Prince said, “Sairandhari and my sister both speak well of you, and I
trust them. Either you are modest or trying to shirk. No time to waste. Come
on. Get ready for the battle. That is my order. Don’t talk back. Battle dress
now, that is my order.” Saying this, he donned a shining coat of mail and
bristled with a variety of arms, commanding Arjuna also to dress himself
appropriately for the martial occasion. Arjuna made many blunders while
putting on his armour and mail coat, pretending that he did not know which
was the right side of each item, all of which made the girls watching him
burst into peals of laughter.
After all these pleasantries, they started for the battlefield, while the
women presented them flowers and lit and circled incense in front of the
chariot to wish them success in their expedition. “Don’t forget to bring us
souvenirs of the battle,” they said.
All along the way, Uttara admonished Arjuna and advised him on how he
should conduct himself in war. As the horses galloped, Uttara commended
his charioteer’s ability. “No wonder Arjuna could fight anywhere with a
driver like you. Well, we will soon return to the capital with those Kauravas
in chains and all the cattle freed. I am sure my father will have a surprise
indeed, when he comes back from his campaign and finds the kind of
prisoners I have brought him.” Thus talking they were soon within sight of the
Kaurava army, arrayed on the boundary line.
At the sight of the serried ranks as far as the eye could reach, Uttara began
to waver. “Brihannala, don’t drive so fast, pull up for a little while: We have
to think a little at this moment. Wait, wait . . . I see Karna and Duryodhana
and the whole lot of them there . . . I never expected all of them would turn
up like this                                                                      We must reconsider our position at once   ” Arjuna did not

slacken his reins but, heedless of the young man’s orders, drove his steeds
faster, where-upon the young Prince became somewhat desperate. “Don’t you
hear me?”
Arjuna said, “Don’t be disheartened yet. Once I set the pace I can never
slacken. Let us see. Let us rush into their midst, and you will see how they
scatter                                                                           ”
The Prince began to wail. “See the hair bristling up on my arms, don’t you
notice it? It means that I am not well. I cannot go out and fight in this
condition. Let us go back. I need some medicine to set me right. I have
forgotten to bring it along with me.”
“You ordered me to take you to the Kauravas; I won’t rest until I do so.
. . .”
“Oh, impossible . . . driver, listen to me . . .”
“No, nothing to argue about now. Fight we must . . .”
“Oh, listen. My father has taken the entire army with him to fight the
Trigartas, leaving me alone in the city. He had no thought for me. If only he
had left a few men to assist me . . .
“Do not be anxious. Why do you already look pale and shaken? You have
not yet begun to fight. You ordered ‘take me to the Kauravas.’ I have to fulfil
your command. I can do nothing less. I am prepared to fight to the death to
recover the cows; or for any purpose. You showed off before the women so
impressively. Now if we return without the cows they will laugh at us. I will
fight, since Sairandhari expects me to attain glory. You keep still if you
cannot fight.”
Uttara became quite desperate. “Let them rob us of our country, if they
like. I would not care. Let the women laugh at me. I don’t care. Let all those
accursed cows perish. I don’t care. Let our city become a desert. It will not
matter. Let my father think the worst of me, and call me a coward and what
not. What if he calls me names?” Saying this, Uttara jumped off the chariot,
flung away his arms, and began to run in the opposite direction.
Arjuna stopped the chariot, ran after the fleeing Prince, and pulled him
back. “Don’t run away. You drive the chariot and I will do the fighting. Don’t
be afraid. Now climb up that tree and fetch the bundle you will find in it.”
“The tree is grown on impure ground. How can one of royal family set foot
in a graveyard? And that thing dangling there looks like a corpse. No
kshatriya can ever pollute himself by approaching a corpse.”

“It is not a corpse,” said Arjuna, “but only a sack done up to look like one
so that people may not go near it. The sack contains all the weapons of the
Pandava brothers. You must go up and bring it down.”
The Prince had no choice but to climb the tree. When he came back with
the sack, Arjuna untied the ropes and took out the weapons while Uttara
watched, letting out many cries of admiration. Arjuna took out his Gandiva,
his own bow, and explained, “This is the largest and greatest weapon, equal
to one hundred thousand weapons, capable of adding kingdoms to its owner
and  devastating  armies  single-handed.  With  this  Arjuna  achieved  his
victories. It was a weapon worshipped by the gods. Shiva held it for a
thousand years, and then, one by one, all the gods, and finally Arjuna got it
from Agni. No mightier weapon was ever known.” And then he explained the
nature and origin of all the other weapons—scimitars, bows and arrows, and
swords—which were used with special competence by each one of his
brothers.
Uttara was overwhelmed by the spectacle before him and could not help
asking,                                                                           “Where are those eminent warriors? I had heard that they lost
everything and became wanderers. Why, with these weapons they could have
conquered the world!”
“They will,” said Arjuna firmly. “And this Gandiva will soon come out of
its cover.”
“Where is the wielder of Gandiva?” asked the young man.
“Here,” declared Arjuna, and explained who the others were.
Uttara was thrilled and cried, “My cowardice is gone. I can now fight the
celestials themselves. Let me have the honour of driving your chariot; I will
steer the horses like Indra’s own charioteer, Matali.”
Arjuna tied up his hair and put on his shoulder plates and wristlet, and all
the war paraphernalia. Uttara was aghast at the transformation that occurred
in the other’s personality, and felt so reassured that he said again and again,
“Now I will dash through any army at your command.”
In spite of this brave statement, when Arjuna blew on his conch, he began
to shake with fear and collapsed on the floor of the carriage. He was unable
to hold the reins because his hands trembled. Arjuna explained, “When my
conch is blown, its sound always makes my enemies tremble, but you are no
enemy, be calm                                                                    ”
“It is no ordinary sound, sir. The earth seems to shake, the trees sway as in
a storm, and the birds in the air, whether it be an eagle circling high or a

sparrow, collapse on their wings.”
“Get up, get up,” said Arjuna. “You will be all right. I will drive the
horses, you just hold on firmly. I am blowing on the conch again                   ”
The sounding of the conch shook Uttara again, but he rallied himself and
soon took charge of the horses. Arjuna had hoisted his own banner on the
chariot in place of the Prince’s. When the banner, a divine gift from Agni,
decorated  with  a  likeness  of  the  monkey-god,  Hanuman,  was  hoisted,
different types of supernatural beings took their seats on the chariot, uttering
war cries, all of which reached the enemies’ ears.
Drona was the first to say, “That conch is surely Arjuna’s. He is here. We
must be ready to face him now.”
Duryodhana replied, “The terms were that they should spend the thirteenth
year undiscovered. The thirteenth year is still running, which means they must
be exiled for another twelve years. Whether it is due to their miscalculation
or ours, it is up to our grandsire, Bhishma, to tell us. We did not come here to
spy on them, but for a different purpose-only to carry off the cattle of the
Matsya King, and to support Susurman, who may be joining our columns any
minute now, bringing Virata in chains. We need not waste time in speculation;
fighting is our only course. We have come prepared for it.”
As usual, Karna supported his view, and revelled in visions of taking
Arjuna single-handed. But Aswathama, Drona’s son, sneered at Karna and
Duryodhana, remarking, “I am not prepared to fight Arjuna now. No need to.
After all, they have kept their pledge, and what reason have we now to fight
them?” He turned to Karna and Duryodhana. “Once again, unless you employ
your crafty uncle to perform a mean trick, you will have no chance against
Arjuna or his brothers.”
While they discussed all aspects of the question, Bhishma suggested that
instead of anyone fighting or facing Arjuna, the six of them should stand
together and attack him. All agreed that Duryodhana should not be exposed to
this risk, and they urged him to leave the field and go back to Hastinapura.
Arjuna watched closely every movement of his cousins across the field,
and the massing of their forces, and directed his charioteer to steer his way to
each group. He observed the movement of Duryodhana particularly and
decided to corner him.
Since Yudhistira was not there to restrain him, Arjuna was in the flush of
freedom, freedom to reveal himself and act as he pleased, and to follow his
inclination to rush and fight and try out all the astras he had recently

acquired. Drona had been his master. He launched several arrows which
brushed past Drona’s ears and several others which fell at his feet. This
pleased the master.                                                               “The arrows at my ears were to convey Arjuna’s
salutations and the arrows at my feet are his homage. This is the language of
arrows. How great an archer he has turned out to be!”
Arjuna said, “I will not shoot unless Drona himself shoots first,” and when
he took his chariot close to him, Drona attacked him, and a well-matched,
sophisticated fight ensued. Drona admired Arjuna’s tactics. He matched astra
for astra and Arjuna was able to attack and counter-attack with such grace
that the gods gathered above to watch the fight. It was exciting, academic,
and free from hatred or malice. Kripa, Bhishma, and Drona loved Arjuna but
still had to participate in the battle out of a sense of duty towards Dur-
yodhana.   Their   encounters   with   Arjuna   had   the   appearance   of   a
demonstration of the art of war, a friendly bout. But not so the encounter with
Karna.
“You have boasted all your life of how great you are. Now prove it in
action,” cried Arjuna. Reminding himself of Karna’s savagery towards
Draupadi at the gambling hall, he mauled Kama, who withdrew in a bloody
state.
Next, Arjuna noticed Duryodhana slipping away, and suddenly veered
round to block the route of his escape. Duryodhana’s supporters surrounded
him protectively, as he had swooned. At this, one of Arjuna’s mystic astras
put everyone in the field in a coma, whereupon Arjuna ordered Uttara to take
the glittering clothes off every person, leaving them with a minimum of
covering, and carried the booty off as souvenirs for the girls in the Virata
palace.
Arjuna felt happy that he could thus, to some extent, redress the indignity
perpetrated on Draupadi that fateful day. “The war has ended, and the cattle
have been recovered,” Arjuna announced, and started back for the capital.
Arjuna returned to the banyan tree at the graveyard, and put away the
weapons again. Hoisting Uttara’s ensign back on the chariot, he advised him,
“Let the messengers go in advance and announce our victory. Don’t reveal
who we are; it may disturb the King. Let the messengers announce that you
have fought and won.”
On receiving the news of victory, the King became jubilant. “My son has
been victorious over the cream of the Kauravas; single-handed he has fought
them.” He ordered public celebrations, but Yudhistira went on interrupting

him with the statement, “Yes, yes, of course, if Brihannala was his charioteer,
nothing but success could be expected.” The King was so thrilled by his
son’s achievement that he did not like Yudhistira’s comments.
There was public jubilation, and festivities at the palace. Crowds lined the
roads to receive the hero of the day—Uttara. While awaiting his arrival
anxiously and proudly, Virata thought of whiling away his time by playing
dice with Yudhistira, who resisted the idea. He was in no mood for the game,
but Virata compelled him with all his authority, and they played. The King
continued to praise the valour of his son, while Yudhistira praised his
charioteer. Finally, this annoyed the King so much that he flung a dice piece
at Yudhistira’s head, and blood began to flow from the cut. Yudhistira
stanched it with a cloth and Draupadi immediately placed a vessel below the
wound to prevent the blood from dropping to the ground.*2
Meanwhile Uttara had returned and, noticing the blood, asked, “Who has
done this?”
“I did,” replied the King. “I wanted to teach this fellow a lesson for his
obstinacy                                                                         ”
Uttara was aghast. Although he could not yet reveal Kanka’s identity, he
scolded his father. “You have done a grievous wrong, the brahmin’s curse
will shrivel you up.”
Virata at once apologised to Yudhistira and ministered to his wound.
Yudhistira said,                                                                  “O King, I understand. Those who are in authority
naturally act with unreasonable severity when they are angry. However, I
bear no grudge for what you have done. I have already forgotten it.”
The King now turned to his son to ask for details of his encounters with
warriors of the stature of Drona, Karna, and Duryodhana. Uttara explained,
“I did nothing; it has all been accomplished by the son of a deity                ” And he
went on to describe how various figures collapsed on the battleground.
The King asked, “Where is that son of God?”
“He vanished immediately after the war, but may appear again tomorrow
or the day after.”

11   Warning Shots
ON THE THIRD DAY after the battle, Virata was shocked when he entered
the assembly hall. On the seats meant for the kings were seated Yudhistira
and his brothers: the courtier, cook, eunuch, and cattle and horse keepers,
dressed in costly robes and wearing jewellery. Outraged at this impropriety,
he ordered them all to get up and leave. Then Yudhistira announced himself
and his brothers.
Virata was so overcome that he offered his wealth, cattle, and the entire
kingdom to Yudhistira as a recompense for having treated them as servants.
He then proposed his daughter Uttarai (Uttara was the prince) to Arjuna, but
he replied, “I have been moving closely with her for a whole year in the
women’s chambers, and I view her as a daughter. I would rather accept her
as a daughter-in-law, married to my son Abhimanyu,*1 who will be a worthy
husband for her.”
After all the tensions of thirteen years of exile, the wedding of Abhimanyu
and Uttarai was a welcome change. Many kings and princes were sent
invitations.*2 The most distinguished among the guests was Krishna, who had
brought with him his sister and her son, the bridegroom. From Dwaraka,
Krishna had also brought ten thousand elephants and ten thousand chariots, as
well as horses and soldiers. Krishna distributed presents to the Pandavas:

several measures of gems, gold, and robes, and a large number of female
slaves.
Conchs, cymbals, horns and drums, and other musical instruments were
played in the palace courtyard. Delicate venison and other kinds of rare meat
were  provided  in  sumptuous  feasts.  Several  kinds  of  wine  and  the
intoxicating juices of rare plants flowed profusely. Bards and minstrels
waited upon the kings and chanted their praise.
At the auspicious hour, the bride was presented by the King and accepted
by Arjuna on behalf of his son. As a dowry for the nuptial ceremony, Virata
gave Abhimanyu seven thousand horses which had the speed of wind, two
hundred picked elephants, and wealth of many kinds. The sacred fire roared
with enormous quantities of clarified butter, poured in to the chanting of
Vedas and mantras.
On the following day, the hall of assembly was filled with distinguished
guests occupying their seats of gold and ivory, according to their importance.
The jewellery on their persons scintillated and the hall looked like a
firmament spangled with brilliant stars. When the assembled guests had
greeted one another and engaged for a little while in general talk, a silence
ensued. Everyone knew that this silence was only a prelude to discussions of
the utmost importance.
All eyes were now turned to where Krishna, with his brother Balarama,
was seated. It was a significant moment, the starting point of Krishna’s
leadership in the impending conflict with the Kauravas. Krishna addressed
the assembly: “You all know how Yudhistira was defeated in a dice play by
foul means. Deprived of his kingdom, he and his family were made to
wander and suffer, all because he had given his word to remain in exile for
twelve years, and then for a year more in hiding, which was perhaps the
hardest part of their trials. They had to perform menial services and remain
in constant dread of being discovered. Now having fulfilled their pledge to
the last letter, the time has come for them to get back their kingdom, wealth,
home, and royal dignity. But will they receive their due by fair means? Will
Duryodhana respond to their appeal to give them back their kingdom? I doubt
it. But still the Pandavas have the welfare of their cousins at heart and will
not act precipitately. We must decide what we must do to regain our rights, if
possible, without losing our desire for peace. Please consider the matter
deeply, discuss it among yourselves and advise us. It is not possible to guess
what Duryodhana may do, wants to do, or thinks of doing. I feel it will be

difficult to plan anything at this stage, when we cannot fathom the mind of the
other party. So I would suggest sending someone to Hastinapura, an able
ambassador of courage and character, who can be persuasive as well as firm
in speech, to get Duryodhana to give up half the kingdom to Yudhistira, who
is not asking for more.”
After his speech, Balarama, who was Krishna’s elder brother, said,
“Remember that Duryodhana has complete hold on the entire kingdom.
Yudhistira in his generosity is asking for only half of it. But will Duryodhana
give up one half? We must try to know what he has in mind and then decide
on the course of action. I do not at all think that any firm speech by an
ambassador is going to help; it may only provoke a conflict. Duryodhana will
not easily yield what he has possessed so long. Let a messenger be chosen
who can appeal with humility and win a concession; if we challenge, the
Pandavas will not gain anything. Our messenger’s language must appeal for
an understanding. After all, Yudhistira had his kingdom but chose to gamble it
away out of his own choice, in spite of advice from well-wishers who knew
that he was a poor player. Yet he challenged, of all persons, the son of
Suvala, known for his cleverness and deceit. There were many others in the
assembly whom Yudhistira could have challenged, but he chose to play
against only Sakuni, not once, but repeatedly. And so who is to be blamed for
the present situation? Let us remember our own weakness and adopt a
language of conciliation and not one of challenge.”
A ruler named Satyaki, a kinsman of Krishna and also his charioteer, said,
“I do not agree with your statements, sir. They are not true. Yudhistira did not
seek to play, but was challenged. As a kshatriya he had to accept. He did not
ask  Sakuni  to  play,  Duryodhana  had  arranged  it  thus.  They  deceived
Yudhistira. However, it is all past. Yudhistira has fulfilled his pledge. Still
they dispute and hold on to their ill-gotten possessions at any cost, making
hair-splitting arguments in regard to the calculation of the time at which the
Pandavas had revealed themselves after the period of incognito. I would ask
for no charity. Let our messenger go up and say that Yudhistira in his
generosity is prepared to take back only half his kingdom. They should yield
to him or face the consequences. The way to appeal to them will be with
arrows and not words. I will gather my forces and send the Kauravas to the
world of Yama if they do not bow at the feet of Yudhistira.”
Drupada, father-in-law of the Pandavas, added his voice. “Duryodhana
will not give up anything by peaceful means. He is the kind to treat anyone

speaking mildly as an imbecile. We cannot expect any improvement if
Dhritarashtra intervenes; he will support his son in every way. Drona and
Bhishma, whatever their personal views, will always support Duryodhana.
The important step now must be to prepare for war. We must send our
messengers without a moment’s delay to all the kings—north, south, east, and
west, so that we may be the first to get their promises of support.” He
mentioned over fifty rulers who should be approached at once. “In addition
to all this,” he suggested, “a man of learning and intelligence should be sent
to the other camp to convey our demand clearly and firmly, without fear or
ofFensiveness. Our envoy should not be aggressive or servile.”
Krishna made preparations to return to Dwaraka with his retinue, feeling
satisfied that a proper beginning had been made to reestablish the Pandavas.
Before leaving he repeated, “Let us try to maintain a friendly relationship,
but if Duryodhana spurns us, call me first, and then summon our allies. Then
the Gandiva and all our other weapons can go into action.”
The Pandavas selected a priest who was scholarly, well versed in the
science of politics, to go to Hastinapura as their envoy. Simultaneously they
dispatched  messengers  to  various  principalities  to  seek  allies.  Arjuna
himself set out to Dwaraka to formally request Krishna’s help. Duryodhana,
who was aware through his spies of all the plans brewing at the Pandava
camp, also sent his messengers far and wide to seek allies, and set out
himself to Dwaraka to appeal to Krishna for his help. Both Arjuna and
Duryodhana arrived at the same moment, while Krishna was asleep, and
entered his chamber together. Duryodhana chose a good seat placed at the
head of Krishna’s cot and Arjuna sat down at his feet, both waiting for
Krishna to wake up. When Krishna opened his eyes, the first person he saw
was Arjuna and, being aware of the visitor at the head also, he spoke words
that were applicable to both, general greetings and enquiries of welfare.
Arjuna stood with folded hands and bowed to him. Duryodhana spoke
first. “Both Arjuna and I are your kinsmen and you must treat us with equal
consideration. I was the first to arrive. The inflexible rule is that whoever
comes first should receive the first attention. I am turning to you for help in
the war which is threatening to break out.”
“I do not know if you were the first to arrive, but Arjuna was the first to be
seen by me when I opened my eyes. He is the younger one, and the code lays
down that the younger person, under these conditions, should always get the

first choice. I am willing to assist you both. I have in my control over a
million soldiers, strong and aggressive; I could say they are stronger than I
am. These soldiers shall be available to one of you, this army of a million
men. To the other, I shall be available as an individual person, but I will not
fight; I will just be on the side of the one who chooses me, that is all. Now
tell me your choice: The junior, Arjuna, shall first speak his mind.”
Arjuna immediately answered, “You must be on my side, even if you do
not fight. I do not want the million soldiers.”
Duryodhana was happy to get the million soldiers, feeling that Arjuna must
be a fool to choose one person, who was not going to fight, instead of a
million soldiers. He thanked Krishna profusely and left.
Hearing of the preparations for war, Salya, one of the most powerful kings
and father of Madri, the second wife of Pandu, left his capital with his
retinue and troops to meet Yudhistira and offer his support. Knowing of his
movements through his spies, Duryodhana organized receptions for him all
along the way. Arches were put up with floral decorations, luxurious
pavilions were constructed where Salya and his retinue could rest, and
where food and drinks were served liberally by Duryodhana’s servants, well
trained in hospitality.
Salya assumed these were all arranged by Yudhistira and said, “Let those
responsible for these excellent arrangements come before me, as I wish to
reward them.”
The servants rushed to convey this request to Duryodhana, who lost no
time in coming before Salya to declare that he had made all the arrangements
for  his  comfortable  journey.  Salya  was  surprised,  but  pleased.            “Your
arrangements are heavenly. What can I do for you in return?”
Duryodhana had been awaiting that question and immediately replied, “I
want you to lead our army.”
Salya was again surprised but said, “Very well, I shall be the leader of
your army. What else?”
“I need nothing more,” replied Duryodhana.
At this, Salya said, “I must first visit Yudhistira and greet him, and will
join you afterwards.”
Duryodhana replied, “Come back soon, and don’t let Yudhistira hold you
on any pretext.”

Salya met Yudhistira, and they had a long talk. On hearing of Salya’s
promise, Yudhistira said, “You have given your word to Duryodhana and
have to keep it, no doubt; but I must ask a favour of you. Will you grant it?”
“Yes,” replied Salya.
“Although what I am proposing is not quite ethical, you will have to do it
for my sake,” said Yudhistira. “As I foresee it, there will be a single combat
during the war, between Arjuna and Karna. At that time, you must drive
Karna’s chariot, and utilize that occasion to utter remarks and warnings that
will dispirit Karna and make him feeble and irresolute. I want Arjuna to win.
This is an improper request, I know, but please do it for my sake.”
Salya gave his assurance that he would discourage Karna at a crucial
moment and, after wishing the Pandavas victory in the coming conflict, he
left.

12   War or Peace?
THE PRIEST who had been sent to Duryodhana’s court was received with
due honour and respect and seated properly. After all the formal preambles
and the exchange of respectful greetings, the priest launched into a narrative
of the situation. “Our Pandavas are not eager for a war; all that they want is
their share of the kingdom, legitimately due to them. In all justice they should
be invited to take their share. There need be no war; it is unnecessary. But if
the Kauravas prefer a war, it will be their end, let me assure you. Seven
akshaunis*1 have already assembled, ready to fight the Kauravas, only
waiting for the command. There are others, each one with the strength of a
thousand akshaunis of troops, such as Satyaki, Bhimasena, and the twins. Add
to these the mighty Arjuna and Vasudeva’s son, Krishna, whose wisdom is
worth all the might of eleven and more divisions. I am only mentioning that

they are all there. They will return to their peaceful avocations if you so
decide.”
Bhishma was the first to answer. “How fortunate that they desire only
peace. What you have said is all true; but your words are rather sharp.
Perhaps because you are of the priestly class and employ words as a
weapon, and also perhaps you have been instructed to speak thus. Everyone
knows that lawfully the Pandavas must get back everything, and Arjuna is
invincible once he is provoked                                                   ”
At this point Karna interrupted angrily, “Oh, Brahmin, don’t forget that
Sakuni played on behalf of Duryodhana as agreed by Yudhistira, won the
game, and Yudhistira went into exile as stipulated. If the Pandavas had won,
Duryodhana would have experienced the same fate. But he would have
respected the pledge, unlike Yudhistira who has now the support of Matsyas,
Panchala, Yadavas,*2 and the rest, and on the strength of it wishes to demand
the kingdom. Know you, O Brahmin, if it is a matter of justice, and properly
approached, Duryodhana would yield the whole earth. If the great Pandava
brothers wish to get back their kingdom, they should spend the stipulated time
in the forests, and then come and ask. If they are hot-headed enough to want a
war, they will learn their lesson.”
Bhishma replied, “Your talk in this manner will not help. How could you
forget even the recent encounter, when Arjuna fought the six of us single-
handed? If we act rashly we shall suffer.”
Dhritarashtra silenced everyone, and said, “No more discussion on this
subject. O Brahmin, our answer will be brought by Sanjaya. You don’t have
to wait any further for our reply. You may depart                                ” And he immediately
ordered all the honours due to a departing messenger.
Sanjaya was summoned and briefed elaborately, and the concluding advice
was, “Say nothing to them that may be unpalatable or provoke a war.”
In due course, Sanjaya reached Upaplavya, on the outskirts of the Virata
capital, where the Pandavas were residing. There he presented ceremonial
greetings and good wishes from Dhritarashtra, an inevitable formality even in
the worst of times. After these courtesies Yudhistira, seated in the midst of
his allies and supporters, ordered Sanjaya to speak openly of his mission.
Sanjaya said, “This is what our King and his wise counsellors, Bhishma
and the rest, desire—peace, long-lasting peace between the Pandavas and the
Kauravas.”

Yudhistira said, “Of course, peace is preferable to war. Who would wish
it otherwise? But Dhritarashtra is like one who has flung a burning faggot
into dry, crackling undergrowth in a forest and now, surrounded by flames,
does not know how to escape. King Dhritarashtra knows what is right, but
would please his son at any cost, and encourage him in his wicked course.
The only sane adviser he had with him who could speak with courage was
Vidura, and he always ignored his advice. Well, you know the whole history,
Sanjaya. I shall seek peace as you advise. Give me back my own creation,
Indraprastha. Advise Duryodhana to do this immediately and I assure you that
there will be no war.”
Sanjaya replied, “Life is transient, and your fame and name will live
forever. I will convey your demand in strong terms, but here is my own
suggestion—if they will not yield your share, I think it would be preferable
for you to live on alms anywhere than acquire sovereignty by force. If you
had so wanted, you once had the whole army under your control and could
have easily defeated your gambling cousins and stuck to your throne. But you
let  that  opportunity  pass.  Why?  Because  you  would  not  commit  an
unrighteous act, and the same principle should be observed even now. Please
avoid a war, which will result in the death of Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, and all
our elders in addition to Karna, Duryodhana, and Aswathama. Think for a
moment. What happiness will you get out of this strife and victory, O Great
One, tell me?”
“As a kshatriya,” Yudhistira said, “I would be failing in my duty if I did
not take back my kingdom by persuasion or . . . if driven to it, by force. Now
I have no misgivings or doubts on this issue. However, here is Krishna, the
Omniscient. Let him say what would be right, whether to fight or seek peace
on any condition.”
Krishna turned to Sanjaya.                                                       “Yudhistira has displayed all these years
nothing but forbearance, while Dhritarashtra’s sons have displayed nothing
but covetousness, and now it is time to act and seek proper remedies. The
entire universe and all nature functions and keeps life growing only by a
proper balance of action and reaction. Otherwise, creation will collapse.
You can’t pretend to be better informed in codes of conduct than either I or
Yudhistira. If you were so fully versed in niceties of behaviour, why did you
look on when Draupadi was humiliated before the assembly hall? You never
lectured on morality or law at that time. Did you make any effort then to
arrest that lewd speech of Karna’s? Why do you wax eloquent now on

righteousness? The sons of Pandu are ready to wait upon Dhritarashtra, but
they are also prepared for war. Let Dhritarashtra decide.”
Yudhistira said, “We want our share of the kingdom or at least a gesture of
fair play. Give us five villages, one for each of us brothers, and leave us
alone. Even that will end our quarrel.”
After this, Sanjaya bade a ceremonious farewell and left.
Sanjaya reached Hastinapura at night and immediately went to the palace.
He told the gatekeeper of the inner apartments, “Inform the King that Sanjaya
is come. It is a matter of urgency. If the King is not resting, but awake, make
it known that I have arrived from the Pandavas and must see him. Do not
delay.” The porter came back and asked him to go in.
The King greeted him. “Oh, welcome back; why should you have waited
for permission to enter, one who needs no permission, but may at all times
enter?”
Sanjaya immediately began his report. “Pandu’s son desires the return of
his kingdom forthwith.” Then he launched into a praise of Yudhistira’s
firmness in the grasp of virtues and concluded, “O King, you have earned a
bad reputation everywhere, and will reap the rewards of it in this and the
next world. Supporting your evil-minded son, you hope to keep your ill-
gotten wealth and territories. When your son goes to perdition, he is going to
drag you along with him                                                            ”
Dhritarashtra was disturbed by Sanjaya’s talk. He turned to an attendant
and said, “Bring Vidura at once. I must see him this very second.” When
Vidura came, the King felt relieved, hoping that he would have some soothing
words for him, although Vidura always spoke the blunt truth. Dhritarashtra
said, “Tell me what may be done for one who has lost sleep, burning with
anxiety. Advise me properly, Vidura. What course should I adopt now, in
justice to the Pandavas and beneficial to the Kauravas? I am aware of my
lapses in judgement, and I come to you with an anxious heart. Tell me truly
what you think Yudhistira has in mind.”
“Even unasked, one should speak only the truth, O Great King. Do not
pursue a line of action which is clearly unjust; happiness lies only in doing
the right action. He whom the gods wish to destroy will first be deprived of
his good sense, and then he will stoop to perform the worst act. Endowed
with qualities that make him fit to rule the three worlds, Yudhistira is waiting
for your word and will be obedient to you if you are fair and just. Let him

rule the world; banish your viper-like sons. Yudhistira is your rightful heir.
Give him his kingdom and also yours without any delay, and you will be
happy. Disown Duryodhana and you will be happy.”
Dhritarashtra, somehow, did not mind this advice, but changed the topic
and went on to examine some subtle philosophical points. “Sacrifice, study,
charity,  truth,  forgiveness,  mercy,  and  contentment  constitute  the  eight
different paths of righteousness, they say, but which one is most important?”
After answering his enquiry and occasionally throwing in an ancient tale to
illustrate his point, Vidura would come back to the same refrain, asking, “If
you rely on Duryodhana, Sakuni, and Dussasana to rule your kingdom, how
can you hope for happiness or peace of mind?”
Dhritarashtra would dodge the issue, replying, “Man is not a disposer of
his destiny. The Creator has made man a slave to fate and so what is . . . ?”
Whatever the question, Vidura would have a ready answer, and at some
point sandwich it with advice to cast away Duryodhana.
Dhritarashtra got quite used to this kind of response, but slurred over it.
“How are men to be classified?” he would ask, and Vidura would say,
“Manu the Lawgiver has classified seventeen kinds of foolish men, such as
those who strike the air with their fist or attempt to bend the rainbow. O
King, the Pandavas will be your real saviours.”
“The gods, men of equanimity, and the learned, prefer ‘high families’ . . . I
ask you, Vidura, what are those ‘high families’ they speak of?”
Vidura  would  immediately  start  reciting,                                       “Asceticism,  self-restraint,
knowledge of the Vedas, etc., etc.; those families in which these seven virtues
exist are regarded as high,” and would return to this theme . . . “On that
fateful day of gambling, did I not tell you, but Your Majesty spurned my
words.  O  King,  cherish  the  sons  of  Pandu  who  have  suffered  untold
privations in exile.”
And Dhritarashtra would ask, his appetite for spiritual enquiry seeming
insatiable, “What are the true marks of a Yogi?” or “When does desire cease
to operate?” For all questions Vidura found detailed answers. The major part
of the night was thus spent in philosophical enquiries.
Finally Dhritarashtra admitted, “I agree with everything you say. My heart
is inclined towards the Pandavas exactly as you desire, but as soon as I am
near Duryodhana, it goes the other way. I am helpless, I do not know what to
do. I cannot escape fate, which will finally drag me where it will. My own

efforts will be futile, I know. If there is still any subject untouched by you,
please continue. I am ready to listen. Your talk calms my mind.”
Vidura felt quite exhausted by this time, but did not want the King to lapse
into apathy and so said, “I will invoke that ancient rishi Sanat-suja, who
leads a life of celibacy in the woods. He will expound to you on many other
themes.” He summoned by thought that ancient rishi, and after courtesies
Vidura said to him, “O holy one, there are doubts in the King’s mind which
are beyond my competence to answer. Will you please discourse to him so
that he may overcome his sorrows?”
And then Dhritarashtra asked, “O holy one, I hear that you are of the
opinion that there is no death. Gods and asuras alike practise austerity in
order to avoid death, which means that they believe in death. Of these which
is the right view?”
Sanat-suja said, “The soul that is constantly being affected by the pursuit
of objects and experiences becomes clouded.” All this abstraction seemed to
act as a tonic on the King. He questioned the rishi on the nature of Brahman,
the Ultimate Godhood, how to attain it, and so on and so forth. The entire
night was spent thus, and when morning came, Dhritarashtra was ready to
take his seat at his court.
When everyone was seated, a messenger entered who announced, “There
comes Sanjaya in the chariot dispatched to meet the Pandavas. Our envoy has
returned swiftly, his vehicle drawn by well-trained Sindhu horses.” Sanjaya
was now officially back from his mission. There were formalities to be
observed in his speech: “Know you, Kauravas, I am just returning from the
Pandavas. The sons of Pandu want me to present their greetings before I utter
any other word.”
Dhritarashtra asked formally,                                                     “What message have you brought from
Dhananjaya and his brothers?”
Sanjaya gave a candid account of his visit. Amidst much else, he said,
“When the eldest son of Pandu chooses to draw the bowstring, his arrow will
fly charged with the wrath accumulated over the years, and the sons of
Dhritarashtra will then repent the war.”
Bhishma agreed with Sanjaya’s words, and described the divinity of both
Krishna and Arjuna, who were twin souls of a divinity in a previous life. He
described their background and origin, and how together they dwelt in
different planes and were born and reborn together when wars became
necessary, and how they were invincible. He warned Duryodhana, “You turn

a deaf ear to every word of advice except that of Karna, the low-born son of
a charioteer; Sakuni, the vile serpent; and your mean and sinful brother,
Dussasana.”
Dhritarashtra asked, “Give us an estimate of the military strength of the
Pandavas and a list of those who will be their allies.”
Sanjaya could not immediately answer the question; he remained in deep
thought for a long time, began a sentence, paused, and fainted. Vidura cried,
“O King, Sanjaya has fallen unconscious!”
“Why?”   said   Dhritarashtra.                                                     “What   could   be   the   reason?   Is   he
overwhelmed by the might of the Pandava forces he has witnessed?”
When Sanjaya was revived, he described in exact terms the Pandavas’
strength. There was no ambiguity.
Dhritarashtra was so upset on hearing it that he bewailed his fate. “I am
tied to the wheel of time, I cannot fly away from it. Oh, cursed time! Tell me,
Sanjaya, where shall I go? What shall I do? The Kauravas, the fools, seek
destruction and will doubtless be destroyed; their time is up. How can I bear
the wailing of women when the hundred sons of mine are killed? Oh, when
will death come to me? As a fire blazing in summer wind consumes dry
grass, so shall I be destroyed with all my family when Bhima lifts his mace
and Arjuna wields his Gandiva. What fool will voluntarily jump into a
blazing fire, like a moth? I do not feel it would be proper to fight. You
Kauravas, think it over. Let us avoid this war. I have no doubt that Yudhistira
will be reasonable.”
Duryodhana tried to calm his father: “You should not grieve for us in this
manner, as if a catastrophe had overtaken us. Do not fear, we are confident.
Some days ago, I consulted Drona, Bhishma, Aswathama, and our master
Kripa as to what would happen to us if war came, with Krishna on the
Pandavas’ side, and the whole world talking ill of us through the rumours
they have spread. And do you know what the masters said? ‘If there is a war,
we will be with you, don’t fear. When we take the field no one can defeat
us,’ they assured me with one voice. You must know that these giants among
men  will  enter  the  sea  or  fire  for  my  sake,  and  they  laugh  at  your
lamentations. Bhima will never be able to bear the blows of my mace.
Arjuna is no match—even with Krishna on his side—to any three of us; do
not overrate him because of some other experience when he defeated us at an
unprepared moment. We have eleven ak-shaunis of troops, they have only
seven                                                                              Has not Brihas-pati said, ‘An army which is less by a third may

easily be confronted’? . . . Yudhistira knows our strength; that is why he has
come down from a whole kingdom to half and is now cringing for just five
villages. Why will a strong man ask for less? Both the Pandavas and
ourselves are of the same kind, yet why should you think that they alone will
win? I promise you that the Pandavas will be seized by my friends as deer in
a hunter’s net, and then I will show you a spectacle grander than the one you
witnessed years ago in the gambling hall.”
“My son talks like a madcap or one in a delirium. Now I feel that we
Kauravas are already dead. Oh, Sanjaya, tell me exactly who are the allies
that are kindling the fire in Yudhistira? How is Yudhistira?” In his panic the
old man could not even phrase his questions, could not even be clear as to
what he wished to ask. He moaned, “Alas, that I should have a son mad
enough to want to fight Yudhistira, Arjuna, and Bhima! Duryodhana, give
back to them their legitimate share. Half a world is enough kingdom for you.
Bhishma, Drona, Aswa-thama, and Salya, whose support has been promised
you, do not approve of what you are doing. I know that by yourself you
would not want this war. You are being egged on by those evil-minded
companions of yours: Kama, Sakuni, and Dussasana.”
“If you think that the elders are unwilling fighters for my cause, I will drop
them,” said Duryodhana. “I will challenge the Pandavas to a battle relying
only on Kama and Dussasana; I will not want anyone else. Either I will slay
the Pandavas and rule the earth, or they will slaughter me and rule the earth.
It will have to be one or the other. I will sacrifice everything, but I will not
live side by side with the Pandavas. And, my beloved father, please
understand that I will not yield to them even as much territory as will be
covered by the point of a needle. Let us end this useless discussion, going
round and round the same subject. It is time to act.”
Karna announced, “I have the Brahma Astra among my weapons, obtained
from Parasurama, who imparted it to me with certain reservations. I can
employ this weapon and eradicate the Pandavas single-handed.”
“Your mind is clouded with conceit, Karna,” said Bhishma. “You and your
weapons will be squashed when Krishna decides to strike.”
Karna was incensed by the remark and said, “All right, I will not fight . . .
at least until you fight and die. I will not touch my arms as long as you are
alive.” He dramatically threw down his bow. “My grandfather, Bhishma! You
will hereafter see me only at the court, not in the battlefield. When you and
all the rest have been silenced and laid away, I will pick up my arms again

and demonstrate what I can do                                                  ” With these words, he walked out of the
assembly in a rage.
Bhishma turned to Duryodhana and said, “There goes your ally, who has
promised you so much support. Without his bow, how will he help you? He
has forgotten how he barely escaped with his skin at Virata,” he said with a
laugh, and left the hall.
When they were alone, Dhritarashtra asked Sanjaya again, “Tell me truly
now, Sanjaya, your honest appraisal of the strength and weakness of both
sides. Does Duryodhana have as good a chance as he thinks? It must be,
otherwise he wouldn’t be so confident of victory. What do you think?”
Sanjaya said, “Master, forgive me; I will not say anything to you in secret.
Please let your Queen, Gandhari, and the sage, Vyasa, be present when I
speak to you again. They will be able to remove any ill will that my words
may cause in you.”
Vyasa could be summoned by a thought. When he arrived, Gandhari was
called, and Sanjaya repeated over again all that he had said, assessing the
strength of both sides as well as he could estimate. Gandhari vehemently
denounced the idea of war, as well as her son and his allies. Vyasa, who
could read the future, assured Dhritarashtra that their end was coming.

13   Action
YUDHISTIRA had a qualm of conscience. Sitting with his brothers and
Krishna, he suddenly asked, “Is it worth all this conflict?” He explained his
ideas again. “We should avoid a war at all costs, especially when we are
certain of victory. They are our kinsmen, after all. We must make yet one
more attempt to find a way which would help both the Kauravas and
ourselves to live in peace. By exterminating the Kauravas, we shall regain
our territories, but will that bring us lasting happiness? O Krishna, we have
numerous kinsmen and elders on their side; how can we slaughter them? You
will say that it is the duty of a kshatriya. Alas, I curse being born in this
caste.  The  waves  of  violence  never  cease.  Victory  creates  animosity;
hostilities lie dormant, but continue. Even if there is one little baby left in the

other camp, it will retain a small smouldering ember of hate, which could
kindle later conflagration. To prevent this, it is considered necessary to
exterminate the opposite camp totally. My whole being shudders at the
thought. Enmity is never quenched by enmity. Confidence in one’s prowess is
like an incurable disease that eats away one’s heart. We are ready to drench
the earth in blood to establish our claims and might. It is not unlike the
encounter of two hostile dogs, as the learned have observed. At first two
dogs meet, tails are wagged, then comes a growling and barking, snarling and
barking in answer, and then the circling around each other, the baring of
fangs, and repeated growling and snarling. Then they fight and bite and then
the stronger dog kills the other and tears his flesh and eats it. The same
pattern is observed in human beings, too. We must make one more attempt to
bring the Kauravas to their senses. Oh, Krishna, what shall I do? Advise me,
guide me, please.”
Krishna replied, “For your sake I will visit the Kauravas at their court. If I
can obtain peace without compromising your interest, I will do so.”
At this juncture, Yudhistira had another misgiving. “All the supporters of
Duryodhana, vicious men, will be assembled there. I feel nervous to let you
go into their midst. They may harm you                                            ”
Krishna, who was, after all, a god and confident of himself, said, “Do not
worry about me. If we make this one last effort to avoid war, we shall escape
all blame. If they try to injure me, I can take care of myself. Do not worry
about me. I am going there only to remove any doubt others may have about
the complete vileness of Duryodhana, that is all. I do not hope in any manner
to convert him. I am going only for your sake. Get ready, work out the details,
gather everything that you may need for a war.”
“Krishna, do not threaten them,” said Bhima. “Duryodhana is hostile and
arrogant, but he should not be roughly addressed. Please be mild with him.
All of us, O Krishna, would rather suffer in obscurity than see the Kuru
dynasty destroyed.”
Hearing these words from Bhima, Krishna laughed aloud and remarked,
“Who is speaking? Is it Bhima, also called Vrikodhara,*1 or is it someone
else? The hills have suddenly lost their weight and height and the fire has
grown cold. How often have I seen you sitting apart, muttering vengeance,
curling your fingers round your mace, and uttering the most fearsome oaths at
those in Hastinapura! Is it the same man who speaks now? When the time to
fight approaches, you are seized with panic. Alas, you display no manliness,

but talk like a frightened child. What has come over you all? Recollect your
own strength and promises, Bhima, and do not weaken. Be firm.”
Bhima hung his head in shame and said, “If I have to face the whole world,
I will not flinch. But now I speak out of compassion and a chance to save our
race—that is all.”
Arjuna said, “Peace, if it is attained without compromise, is certainly to be
tried. So, Krishna, please make a last attempt.” Nakula also advocated
mildness in approach.
Sahadeva alone among the brothers wanted an ultimatum to be given by the
envoy. “Even if the Kauravas want peace, provoke them to a war. How can I,
remembering the plight of Panchali the other day at the assembly, feel
satisfied with anything less than the death of Duryodhana? Even if all my
brothers are disposed to practise virtue and morality, I will go up alone and
kill Duryodhana. It is my life’s greatest aim.”
Satyaki applauded Sahadeva and added, “I will not rest until I draw
Duryodhana’s blood in battle and I speak for all the warriors assembled
here.” At this the company raised a great shout of joy.
Draupadi came forward to express her views. The backsliding of the four
brothers made her indignant. “O Krishna, the scriptures declare that it is a sin
to kill a harmless person, and the same scriptures declare that not to kill one
who deserves it is a sin. Has there been any woman on earth like me? Born
out  of  fire,  daughter  of  the  great  Drupada,  sister  of  Dhrishtadyumna,
daughter-in-law of Pandu, wife of five heroes of the world, and by them
mother of five sons.*2 Still, I was dragged by my hair and insulted by
depraved men under the very nose of these heroes, and they sat silently
watching my distress. I do not know what would have happened if you,
Krishna, had not responded to my call for help. And now even Bhima speaks
of morality. There is no one to help me . . . even if my husbands abandon me,
my sons are worthy of taking up arms to avenge our wrongs                          ” She was
choked with tears and concluded, “O Krishna, if you wish to do me a favour,
let your wrath not be mitigated by what my husbands say, and let it scorch the
sons of Dhrita-rashtra.” She broke down and wept.
Krishna comforted her with the promise, “Have no doubt. The wrongs you
have suffered will be avenged. It will soon be their turn, unfortunately, their
women’s turn, to wail and weep. The day is coming. Do not fear.”

When Krishna departed for Hastinapura, various omens were noticed
there. Out of a clear sky came rumbling thunder and streaks of lightning;
fleecy clouds poured down rain; seven large rivers reversed their direction
and flowed westward; the horizons became hazy and indistinguishable. Loud
roars were heard from unseen sources in the sky; a storm broke out and trees
were uprooted. However, where Krishna’s chariot passed, flowers showered
down and a gentle cool breeze blew.
Spies had carried reports of Krishna’s departure to Hastinapura, and
Dhritarashtra became quite excited. He immediately ordered arches of
welcome to be erected all along the route and pavilions to be put up,
luxuriously  furnished  and  stocked  with  food  and  refreshment,  offering
entertainment of every kind for the visitor and his retinue.
Dhritarashtra summoned Vidura and said to him, “I want to honour our
visitor with gifts of the finest kind—sixteen decorated chariots of gold,
drawn by the finest horses, each with attendants; ten elephants with tusks like
ploughshares; a hundred maidservants of the complexion of gold, all virgins,
and as many men-servants; eighteen thousand blankets, soft as swan feathers,
which were presented to us by men from the hills who spun the wool of
Himalayan sheep; a thousand deerskins brought from China; and the finest
gems in our possession. All are worthy of the great, honourable visitor. All
my sons and grandsons except Duryodhana will stand at the city boundary to
receive Krishna. Let all our citizens with their wives and children line the
route, which must be well watered so the dust is kept down.” He went on
elaborating his plans.
Vidura, ever a candid critic, said, “He deserves all this and more. But, O
King, I know your secret purpose. The Pandavas desire to be given only five
villages; you can please our visitor by yielding those five villages rather than
all these luxuries and gems. You only plan to win Krishna’s support with all
your bribes. You will not succeed. Give him rather what he comes for . . .
peace and justice. Behave like a father to the Pandavas also, as they always
treat you with the utmost filial respect and affection. Krishna is trying to
speak to you about the need to let the Pandavas and Kauravas live in peace.
You must try to achieve it rather than offering him virgins, gems, and the other
gifts.”
Duryodhana understood Vidura’s statement in his own way and declared,
“I agree with Vidura. You must not give Kesava*3 anything more than a
welcome of honour. And then . . . ,” he chuckled to himself as he added, “We

will keep him as our honoured . . . prisoner. When he is confined, the
Pandavas will collapse and become our slaves. Now if you wish to advise,
tell me how best to achieve my purpose without rousing Krishna’s suspicion
when he arrives tomorrow morning.”
Dhritarashtra felt shocked at his son’s words. “Never talk in that strain
again. He is coming as an ambassador and has done no harm to anyone. What
undreamt-of evil comes to your mind!”
Krishna was received on the outskirts of the capital by Bhishma, Drona,
Kripa, and others, and citizens thronged there by the thousands. On his
arrival, Krishna went straight to the palace to formally call on Dhritarashtra.
Then he visited Kunthi at her residence to give her news of her sons, from
whom she had been separated for over thirteen years.
She said, “When I think of it, my daughter-in-law’s fate fills me with more
grief than my sons’. Married to these heroic men, she yet had neither
protection nor peace, and has been separated from her children all these
years! How she could have borne this particular anxiety, in addition to all
else, is unimaginable. Tell my sons that it is time to act. If they hesitate and
delay, they will be making themselves contemptible and I will give them up
for ever.”
Krishna said, “You will soon see them as the lords of the earth, with their
enemies routed and buried.”
At the first opportunity, Duryodhana said to Krishna, “O Great One, you
must eat in my house today. I have prepared a grand banquet in your honour.”
Krishna replied, “No, I cannot accept your hospitality.”
“Why so? With you we bear no ill will. Your reply is unbecoming.”
“One should accept food only if one is desperate or loves the person who
offers it. I am in no desperation. Nor have you endeared yourself to me by
any act of yours. For no known reason you hate the Pandavas, who have done
you no injury. He who hates the Pandavas hates me; those who love them
love me; that is all. I cannot eat your food, which seems to me contaminated
with evil.”
Instead, Krishna went to Vidura’s home and ate there. Vidura had a
warning for him: “This fool, Duryodhana, already thinks his purpose is
achieved with the assembling of his huge army. He is in no mood to listen to
anyone. I dread your going into that wicked assembly and speaking your

mind. No purpose will be served by your going into their midst again. Please
keep away from them.”
Krishna was untouched by these fears and appeared next day at the full
assembly. There he gave vent to his feelings, and explained his mission
unambiguously, offering peace with one hand and an ultimatum with the other.
Duryodhana was angered by Krishna’s words.                                           “I see nothing to be
apologetic about. What have I done? I won the game. I do not see why you
people find fault with me all the time, as if I had committed a heinous deed.
The Pandavas were defeated in the game by Sakuni and lost their kingdom,
that is all. I gave them back everything at the end of it, but they lost again and
went into exile. Whose fault is it? Who compelled Yudhistira to come back
and play a second time? Why do they think of me as their enemy? For what
reason? Why should I be blamed for all their rotten luck and incompetence in
playing? Now they seek a fight with us as if they were strong. Please
dissuade them from taking this suicidal step. Tell them, O Kesava, as long as
I breathe I will not give them any land, not even enough to cover a
needlepoint. That is final.”
“Oh, you have a blunted conscience,” said Krishna. “You think that you
have done no wrong. Let the eminent men assembled here judge                         ” He
recounted the history of the conflict from beginning to end, every now and
then warning Duryodhana of the consequences.
Dussasana, seeing that all the elders were supporting Krishna, said
cynically to his brother, “If you do not make peace with the Pandavas, Drona,
Bhishma, and your own father will bind us, hand and foot, and deliver us
over to the Pandavas.” At this, Duryodhana glared angrily at the assembly
and walked out of the hall. Following him went his brother, his allies and
counsellors, leaving the ambassador without an audience for his message.
Krishna said, “King, the time has come for you to bind and confine this son
of yours with his accomplices, as Dussasana himself suggests. Deprive him
of his authority and make peace with the Pandavas. Save the race from
extinction.”
Dhritarashtra  became  nervous  and  told  Vidura  to  fetch  Gandhari
immediately. “If she has any influence on this demon, we may still be able to
save ourselves.”
Gandhari  was  brought  in  hurriedly,  and  Dhritarashtra  explained  the
situation to her. She ordered an attendant to fetch Duryodhana at once. Then
she  scolded  her  blind  husband,  blaming  him  for  the  recklessness  of

Duryodhana, for the indulgence he had always shown him. When Duryodhana
came back, she lectured him, although he breathed heavily (“like a snake”)
and with eyes red (“as copper from wrath”). Gandhari spoke on the futility of
war and the sin of avarice, but Duryodhana spurned her advice and, even
while she was talking, walked out again.
Outside the hall he consulted Sakuni, Dussasana, and Kama, and came to
the conclusion that it was time for them to act. “We shall seize this Krishna
by force, confine him in prison, and then fight and eliminate the Pandavas in a
trice. Let Dhritarashtra cry and protest, but we shall execute our plan.”
Satyaki, coming to know of this plan, assembled his troops in readiness to
protect Krishna, and entered the assembly hall to warn him.
When Krishna heard the news he said to Dhritarashtra, “If they wish to
seize me violently, let them. I can chastise all these misguided men, but I will
refrain from such acts in your august presence. I give them permission to try
and seize me if they wish.”
Dhritarashtra became desperate, begging for time to make one more
attempt to dissuade Duryodhana from his evil plan. When Duryodhana re-
entered, surrounded by his group of supporters, Dhritarashtra spoke once
more to him strongly, but it had no effect. Vidura also spoke to him at length.
Finally Krishna himself said, “Suyodhana,*4 you are a deluded being. You
plan to seize and hold me, thinking that I am alone!” He burst into laughter
and said, “Now see                                                                 ” He produced a multidimensional vision of his
stature and personality, surrounded by the Pandavas and all the gods, and all
the armies of the world. It was impossible to seize any part of him. It is said
that Dhritarashtra regained his sight for a moment to behold the grand vision
and then begged to be left sightless again so that later he might not see the
destruction of his race with his own eyes.
After granting this vision, Krishna resumed his mortal form and walked out
of the assembly. When he was ready to start back for Upaplavya, all the
Kauravas at the court bade him a respectful farewell. Before leaving,
Krishna turned to Kama and suggested, “Why don’t you come into my chariot
and ride with me?” Karna immediately obeyed, with his own chariot
following him.
During the ride Krishna spoke to him with extreme tenderness and tried to
wean him away from the Kauravas. He explained to him his parentage; how
he was to be considered the eldest of the Pandavas; how he would be the
successor, as soon as the war was won; and how Yudhis-tira, being his

junior, would be the heir apparent. Karna simply said, “I understand your
love, which makes you promise me these, but, Janardana, I cannot accept
your suggestion. I am indebted to Duryodhana for his support all these years.
How can I give him up, although I know we are all doomed?”
“Your loyalty is understandable, but destructive, unnatural. You are gifted
and brilliant, but you must have discrimination and understand right and
wrong. Your friendship is no help to Duryodhana; you are only supporting his
unholy decision, for which his death is certain.” Krishna stopped his chariot
so that Kama might get into his own and return to Hastinapura. Before
parting, Kama said, “If I am killed in the war, I shall attain the heavenly seat
kept for warriors. Once there may I hope to have the honour of meeting you
again and retaining your grace?”
Krishna said, “Let it be so,” and gave him a parting message. “When you
get back, tell Drona and Bhishma that this month is suitable. Food, drink, and
fuel are abundantly available; the roads are dry, free from slush; the weather
is pleasant and moderate. After seven days we will have the new moon. We
will commence the battle then.”
The next day, Kunthi arrived at Karna’s home to try to persuade him to
give up Duryodhana. Again she explained Karna’s origin, and how he was to
be considered one among the Pandavas.
Karna said, “I respect and believe you, but I cannot accept your words
with the authority of a mother. You found it possible to desert me and float
me down the river. The parents I have known are the Suta and his wife who
saved and nourished me. I will fight for Dhritarashtra’s son until a wisp of
breath is left in me. However, in deference to your wishes, I shall fight only
with Arjuna and no one else. I will never encounter the other four at any time.
I promise, whether I survive or Arjuna survives, you will have five sons left
at the end.”
Kunthi embraced him and wept and said, “Very well, you have pledged to
spare four of my other sons. Only remember this pledge at the time you draw
your bowstring. Fate, fate, what can one do? My blessings and farewell.”

14   Hesitant Hero
WHEN KRISHNA CAME BACK and reported the results of his mission,
Yudhistira turned to his brothers and said, “You have heard the final word
from the other side. We have assembled seven akshaunis of troops. We have
seven distinguished warriors who could each lead a division: Drupada,
Virata, Dhrishtadyumna, Sikandi, Satyaki, Chekithana, and Bhima; all of them
conversant with the Vedas, brave, and accomplished in the science of
warfare; all of them familiar with the use of every kind of weapon. Now I
want your advice as to who should be the Commander-in-Chief. On the other
side, Bhishma is certain to be the Generalissimo.” Many names were
suggested,   but   finally,   on   Krishna’s   advice,   Draupadi’s   brother,
Dhrishtadyumna, was made the Supreme Commander.
As the time for battle approached, troop movements began, creating a
tremendous din—horses neighing, elephants trumpeting, their riders shouting

and urging them on over the noise of drums, conchs, and rolling chariot
wheels. Yudhistira personally supervised the transportation of food supplies
and fodder. He gathered a stock of tents, cash chests, war machines,
weapons, and medicines, and made arrangements for surgeons and physicians
to follow the army. He left Draupadi behind at Upaplavya, with a strong
contingent to guard her.
Yudhistira marched at the head of the advancing troops. In the rear were
Virata, Dhrishtadyumna, Virata’s sons, forty thousand chariots; cavalry and
infantry.  Yudhistira  encamped  on  the  levelled  part  of  a  field  called
Kurukshetra, which was at a fair distance from cemeteries, temples, and
other consecrated ground. Krishna dammed a little river nearby for water
storage, and stationed a strong body of troops to protect it. Thousands of tents
were pitched all around, stocked with plenty of food and drink. Huge
quantities of weapons and coats of mail were heaped in mounds.
At Hastinapura, the troops were mustered in millions and moved to the
front. Duryodhana arranged his eleven akshaunis of troops—men, elephants,
chariots, and horses—into three classes—superior, middling, and inferior. In
addition to normal weapons, his military store consisted of earthen pots
filled with poisonous snakes or inflammable material, strange devices for
throwing hot treacle, poison darts, and huge syringes for shooting boiling oil.
He placed akshaunis of troops under Kripa, Drona, Salya, Dussasana, and
others.  His  Supreme  Commander,  as  expected,  was  Bhishma.  Kama
reminded everyone of his vow not to fight until Bhishma should be slain in
battle.
Duryodhana ordered musicians to play their instruments, sound the drums,
and blow conchs. Suddenly, amid these celebrations, there were bad omens.
The sky was cloudless, but blood-coloured showers fell and made the ground
slushy. Whirlwinds and earthquakes occurred. Meteors fell. Jackals howled.
Dhritarashtra received a description of the armies through Sanjaya, who
had been granted an extraordinary vision by which he could watch the
progress of the battle from his seat in the palace hall. Sanjaya reported on the
formations of troops facing each other on the east and west of Kurukshetra
Field. At dawn all the arrangements were complete and both sides were
ready to fight.
Piloted by Krishna, Arjuna’s chariot was stationed at a strategic point in
the front line from which he could survey fully the personalities opposite. He
recognized each one, and suddenly lost heart. All his kinsmen, his guru, his

uncle, grandfather, and cousins were there waiting to be hurt and killed. He
suddenly felt weak and irresolute. He confessed to Krishna, “I cannot go on
with this war. My grasp on Gandiva slips, my mind wanders; how can I
slaughter my kith and kin? I do not want the kingdom; I do not want anything.
Leave me alone. Let me go away.” The Gandiva slipped from his hand, and
he sat down on the floor of his chariot and began to sob. “How can I direct
my arrow at Bhishma or Drona, whom I ought to worship? I do not know if
any kingdom is worth winning after so much bloodshed. What is that gain
worth?” Thus he lamented.
When Arjuna fell into a silence after exhausting his feelings, Krishna
quietly said,*1 “You are stricken with grief at the thought of those who
deserve no consideration.”
Krishna then began to preach in gentle tones, a profound philosophy of
detached conduct. He analysed the categories and subtle qualities of the mind
that give rise to different kinds of action and responses. He defined the true
nature of personality, its scope and stature in relation to society, the world,
and God, and of existence and death. He expounded yoga of different types,
and how one should realize the deathlessness of the soul encased in the
perishable  physical  body.  Again  and  again  Krishna  emphasized  the
importance  of  performing  one’s  duty  with  detachment  in  a  spirit  of
dedication. Arjuna listened reverently, now and then interrupting to clear a
doubt or to seek an elucidation. Krishna answered all his questions with the
utmost grace, and finally granted him a grand vision of his real stature.
Krishna,  whom  he  had  taken  to  be  his  companion,  suddenly  stood
transformed—he was God himself, multidimensional and all-pervading.
Time, creatures, friends and foes alike were absorbed in the great being
whose stature spanned the space between sky and earth, and extended from
horizon to horizon. Birth, death, slaughter, protection, and every activity
seemed to be a part of this being, nothing existed beyond it. Creation,
destruction, activity and inactivity all formed a part and parcel of this grand
being, whose vision filled Arjuna with terror and ecstasy. He cried out,
“Now I understand!”
The God declared, “I am death, I am destruction. These men who stand
before you are already slain through their own karma, you will be only an
instrument of their destruction.”
“O Great God,” said Arjuna, “my weakness has passed. I have no more
doubts in my mind.” And he lifted his bow, ready to face the battle. Krishna

then resumed his mortal appearance.
When Arjuna was seen to take up his bow again, great relief swept through
the ranks of the Pandavas. Just when this happened and the battle was about
to begin, much to everyone’s surprise, Yudhistira was seen crossing over to
the other side, after taking off his armor and mail coat. The Kauravas thought
at first that he was approaching to sue for peace, having become nervous at
the last moment. But Yudhistira went directly to his master, Drona, and
bowed to him, touched the feet of his grand-uncle, Bhishma, and the other
elders, and returned to his post. Wearing again his coat of mail and armour,
he gave the signal for attack.
The battle was to rage for eighteen days on the field of Kurukshetra,
sometimes in favour of one side and sometimes in favour of the other. It was
strictly understood that action should begin at sunrise and end with the setting
sun, but as the days passed this restriction was not always observed.
Sometimes battle was prolonged into the night when the armies fought with
the help of flares and torches. Normally they ceased to fight at sunset, and
retreated to their respective tents to assess the day’s action and plan the
following day’s strategy. The soldiers relaxed at night with song and dance.
Each day the troop formations were altered. Both sides tried to obtain
information as to the intentions of the other and plan a counter-move. Several
types of troop formations were ordered by the generals according to the need
of the hour. If the troops on one side were formed in makara, the fish, the
other adopted the form of krauncha, the heron, so that the formation and the
attack thereon might follow a logistical law. The commanders chose how the
troops should be placed, deployed, or formed. Each unit commander had to
decide for himself how best to act under a given circumstance. On the third
day, Bhishma had the Kaurava army in the eagle formation. For this the
antidote was the crescent formation, with Bhima and Arjuna at each tip of the
crescent, which could close from both sides in a pincer movement.
Each day there was exultation on one side and despair on the other—a
see-saw of hope and despair. Counting their losses, the Pandavas sometimes
felt hopeless, but Krishna, always beside Arjuna, kept up their spirits with
his encouraging words. Every day on both sides there were disheartening
losses of men, horses, and leaders, and the ground became soaked with
blood.

15   Delirium of Destruction
ON THE FIRST DAY of battle*1 the initial move was made by Bhima,
leading his regiment. He sprung into action with gusto, breaking out of the
bonds and repressions of fourteen years. Abhimanyu, Arjuna’s son, the
youngest warrior in the field, joined the fray and his targets were well
defined. Bhishma, his great-grandfather, was his first target, and his arrows
pierced him in nine places. Bhishma, while admiring the young man’s pluck,
retaliated mercilessly.
Arjuna said to Krishna, “Steer me close to Bhishma. Unless we put an end
to the grand old man, we will not survive—he is proving deadly.” Although
Bhishma had a special bodyguard of picked warriors, Arjuna’s attack was
unrelenting.
Duryodhana, watching the course of battle, became nervous. He appealed
to his elder, Bhishma, almost reprimanding him,                                 “This combination of
Krishna and Arjuna threatens to wipe us out. Karna, on whom I could always
depend, will not fight, but only stand aside as long as you are alive.”
Bhishma said, “Do you suggest that I immolate myself and leave the way
clear for Karna?”

Duryodhana became apologetic and explained, “Please act quickly and get
Arjuna out of the way.”
At this, Bhishma shot an arrow which drew blood from Krishna’s chest,
but left him unaffected. The sight of it, however, enraged Arjuna and
strengthened his determination to destroy Bhishma, whose bodyguards were
collapsing one by one. They attacked and counter-attacked and came so close
to each other that at times the chariots could be identified only by the
pennants fluttering above them. But the engagement was inconclusive.
At another sector, Drona and Dhrishtadyumna were engaged in a deadly
combat.  Dhrishtadyumna  had  waited  for  this  chance  all  his  life.*2
Dhrishtadyumna’s charioteer was killed by Drona’s shaft. Dhrishtadyumna
took his mace, jumped down from his chariot, and advanced on foot. Drona’s
arrow knocked off the mace from his hand, but Dhrishtadyumna drew his
sword and sprang forward. Drona neutralised him again. At this moment,
Bhima came to Dhrishtadyumna’s rescue and carried him off in his chariot.
The Kauravas concentrated their attack on Arjuna and surrounded him, but
he always kept himself within a sheath created by a perpetual stream of
arrows rotating around his person. At another part of the battlefield, Sakuni
led a force against Satyaki and Abhimanyu.
Bhima and his son Ghatotkacha*3 fought against Duryodhana’s unit, but
Bhishma and Drona combined to rescue his forces and rally them. Again
Duryodhana reproached Bhishma, “You were looking on with admiration
when Bhima’s forces were taking their toll. You are so fond of the Pandavas
even at this stage! I know you can deal with them if you make up your mind.”
Bhishma just smiled and said, “Do you know how old I am? I am doing my
best, that’s all, that’s all.” But he was stung by Duryodhana’s graceless
remarks, and went into action, attacking the enemy with renewed vigour. The
Pandava army began to scatter.
Krishna urged Arjuna to action. “If you fail to attack your grandsire at
once, everything will be lost. You are hesitant to encounter him. You must
overcome your reluctance to touch him.” As Arjuna’s chariot approached
Bhishma, he subjected it to a hail of arrows, but they were warded off with
such skill and speed that Bhishma, although the target of Arjuna’s own
arrows, cried, “Bravo! Bravo!” Arjuna managed to break Bhishma’s bow,
but he simply picked up another.

It seemed to Krishna that they were play-acting, and he was dissatisfied
with Arjuna’s performance. Krishna stopped the chariot and jumped out of it,
raising his discus.**4 “I’ll kill this grand warrior myself. You will not do it, I
know.”
As he advanced towards Bhishma, the latter said ecstatically, “Welcome,
Lord of the Universe. Let my soul be released by your divine hand; that will
be my salvation.” Arjuna followed Krishna, desperately pleading,                     “No,
don’t. Remember your vow not to use your weapon. Stop. I promise, I’ll
attack Bhishma
Krishna was assuaged, and by that evening Arjuna had destroyed a great
part of the Kaurava forces.
At the start of the next day, in spite of their losses, the Kauravas looked
extremely well ordered and optimistic. Arjuna observed their disposition
and  saw  his  son  Abhimanyu  plunge  into  the  attack.  He  was  at  once
surrounded by Salya, Aswathama, and a number of experienced warriors.
Arjuna  went  up  to  his  support,  joined  by  Dhrishtadyumna.  In  turn,
Duryodhana  and  his  brothers  helped  Salya,  and  Bhima  and  his  son
Ghatotkacha came up to support the Pandavas.
Duryodhana met this array with an attack by elephant forces. Bhima got
down from his chariot with his iron-clad mace in hand and attacked and
destroyed the elephants. Their carcasses lay about like mountains; those that
survived ran amuck in a grim stampede. While retreating, they trampled
down the soldiers on their own side, thus creating a scene of immeasurable
confusion. As arrows came flying, Bhima climbed into his chariot again. He
said  to  his  driver,                                                               “Ahead  I  see  all  those  evil-minded  brothers  of
Duryodhana. Drive on, we will dispatch them all; they are ready for Yama’s
world.”  He  accounted  for  eight  of  Duryodhana’s  brothers  that  day,
commenting with satisfaction, “The old man had forethought in bringing forth
a hundred sons.”
Duryodhana fought with vigour—even Bhima was hit and stunned for a
moment. At this, his son Ghatotkacha hit the Kaurava army like a cyclone,
and smashed them. “We cannot fight this rakshasa any more,” said Bhishma.
“We must stop for the day. Our troops are tired and weary.”
On the sixth day, Arjuna decided to put an end to Bhishma, whose attack
was causing tremendous damage. He brought in Sikandi,*5 placed him in

front of himself, and advanced to the attack. Bhishma realised that his end
had come—he could neither fight nor shoot his arrows at Sikandi, as he knew
this warrior had been born a woman. Bhishma stood still while Sikandi’s
arrows came flying at him. From behind Sikandi, Arjuna’s arrows probed for
the weak points in Bhishma’s armour. When he recognized the arrows coming
from Arjuna, Bhishma retaliated by hurling a javelin, which was parried by
Arjuna.
Bhishma decided to end the combat. Clutching his sword and shield, he
attempted to dismount from his chariot, but fell headlong to the ground. The
arrows shot at him were so closely pinned to his body that when he fell, a
bed of arrows supported him above the ground. On noticing this, both sides
stopped the fight.
Arjuna went up to Bhishma and, finding his head hanging down, stuck three
arrows in the ground, lifted his head tenderly, and supported it on the stakes.
Bhishma then said he was thirsty. Arjuna shot an arrow down into the earth
on the right side of the fallen man and immediately a jet of water gushed out
to the Bhishma’s lips. It was Ganga, Bhishma’s mother, who had arrived to
quench his thirst.
Bhishma announced that he would lie on his bed of arrows for many days
to come until his time to depart arrived. He enjoyed the boon of being able to
live as long as he wished, and dying according to his own decision. After
lying there a time in meditation, he summoned Duryodhana. “I hope this war
will end with my departure,” he said. “Make peace with your cousins
without delay.”
Karna arrived on hearing of Bhishma’s end. He begged to be forgiven his
rash words and the vow not to fight until Bhishma died. Bhishma replied
graciously,                                                                       “Your   hatred   of   the   Pandavas   seemed   too   severe   and
unwarranted, and that was the reason for my harshness to you. You are not the
son of the charioteer, but of Surya. You are Kunthi’s eldest son. Go back to
the Pandavas, and end this strife                                                 ”
Karna, however, declined to act on this advice. “I’ll pay Duryodhana with
my life for all his kindness and help. I cannot change my loyalty under any
circumstance.” Karna paid his homage to Bhishma, and lost no time in
donning his battle dress and equipment. Seeing him ascend his chariot,
Duryodhana felt revived. His troops felt that victory was within their grasp,
now that Karna was back in action. Before resuming battle, Drona was
installed as the Commander-in-Chief after Bhishma.

Duryodhana suddenly developed the notion that if Yudhistira could be
captured alive, victory would be his. “Yudhistira’s capture should have
priority,” he ordered Drona. “I do not even want a total victory in this war; if
I could have Yudhistira in my hold, it would be enough.” He entertained a
hope that he could involve Yudhistira in another gambling bout, exile him
again for twelve years, and thus end the war.
Next day, all the Kauravas joined in the attempt to get at Yudhistira. Drona
led the sortie personally. As the Pandavas knew of his plan, Yudhistira was
strongly guarded at all hours of the day and night. Yudhistira repulsed a well-
mounted attack by Drona with some special astras, and then Arjuna appeared
and dispersed the attacking body.
Drona  confessed,                                                                  “As  long  as  Arjuna  is  there  we  can  never  take
Yudhistira. Something must be done to divert him and draw him away.”
In order to attract Arjuna’s attention, the Chief of Trigarta formed a suicide
squad. A body of men, clad in a fabric woven of dharba grass, performed
funeral obsequies for themselves and took a deadly oath before a roaring
sacred fire—“We will either kill Arjuna or be killed.” Marching southward,
which was the direction of the world of Yama, they uttered loud challenges to
their foe. Arjuna heard them and announced, “I must go now. It is my duty to
accept the challenge.”
Yudhistira cautioned him, “You are aware of Drona’s plans to capture me.
Remember this.” Arjuna left a strong guard for Yudhistira and hurried away.
Krishna drove Arjuna’s chariot into the midst of the Trigarta force. At first
they were hemmed in by the suicide squad, but soon it scattered away before
Arjuna’s hail of arrows.
At the same moment, Drona approached the point where Yudhistira stood,
guarded by Dhrishtadyumna. Drona avoided Dhrishtadyumna, since he knew
that the young Prince had been born to destroy him. Wheeling about, he
carried on his attack from another direction; but in spite of several attempts,
Drona could not capture Yudhistira.
The next day, Duryodhana bitterly complained, “Yudhistira was within a
few paces of you and yet you let him go. I know that you are unwilling to
come to grips with the Pandavas. It is the same as it was with Bhishma. I
cannot understand why you will not carry out your promises to me!
Drona was irritated by this remark and said, “You cherish unworthy
sentiments. I have already explained to you how we cannot get at Yudhistira
as long as Arjuna is nearby. We will try again. Be patient and trust me.”

On the thirteenth day of the battle, the suicide squad once again challenged
Arjuna from the southern sector of the battlefield. Arjuna went away to deal
with it, although the Pandavas could not afford such a diversion that day.
When Arjuna left, Drona regrouped his army in a lotus formation, a sort of
maze in which an entering enemy would be hopelessly lost. Yudhistira felt
concerned at this turn of events, and realized that Drona’s onslaught was
fierce and irresistible. All his supporters were desperately engaged in an
attempt to crack the lotus maze, but could make little progress. Young
Abhimanyu, Arjuna’s son, was their only hope.
“In your father’s absence,” Yudhistira told him, “the responsibility falls on
you. You must try to breach this formation.”
Abhimanyu was willing to try, although he felt diffident. “My father has
only taught me how to break into this formation and not how to come out of
it.”
Bhima, Satyaki, Dhrishtadyumna, and all the rest urged him on, promising
to follow closely through the breach once it was effected. Abhimanyu’s
arrowhead pierced the formation, much to the wonder of all the veterans on
both sides. He smashed his way through, overcame every obstacle, and
proceeded far into the breach. But, unanticipated, Jayadratha, ruler of Sindhu
and son-in-law of Dhritarashtra, moved his contingent and completely sealed
the breach, preventing the advance of Bhima and the rest in the wake of
Abhimanyu. He stormed his way through the enemy ranks. At one point
Duryodhana  himself  came  down  to  tackle  the  young  warrior.  Drona,
Aswathama, Kripa, Kama and Sakuni, and a great many others combined to
eliminate the young man. He met all their attacks as long as he could, but was
finally killed.
On returning to his camp later in the evening, after defeating the suicide
squad, Arjuna learnt of Abhimanyu’s death. He broke down and cried, “I had
only taught him how to break into a lotus formation, but not how to come out
of it. I swear that I shall kill Jayadratha, who trapped him, before the sun sets
tomorrow.”
The next day, having learnt of Arjuna’s vow, Jayadratha remained behind a
fortress of chariots, elephants, horsemen, and soldiers until late evening.
Arjuna battled his way through and reached Jayadratha, who was anxiously
watching the western sky for the sun to set. The sky darkened and Jayadratha,
feeling certain that he had passed Arjuna’s time limit, emerged from his
shelter, whereupon Arjuna felled him with a single arrow. Now the skies

brightened again. It was still daylight; a false sunset had been created by
Krishna, holding up his discus against the sun. He had adopted this strategy
as it seemed to him the only way to bring Jayadratha out of hiding, and end
that terrible day’s events.
The battle had raged at many other points too. Bhima and Karna faced each
other. Bhima was in his element, as Duryodhana had sent his brothers to help
Karna and Bhima managed to kill twelve of them that day. Bhima felt he was
born to ravage and diminish Duryodhana’s prolific brotherhood, who had
watched with glee Draupadi’s shame at the assembly.
Karna was beaten back several times and was also disheartened at the loss
of so many of Duryodhana’s brothers. But he soon rallied himself and
destroyed not only Bhima’s bows and weapons, practically disarming him,
but also his chariot, charioteer, and horses. Thus Bhima was compelled to
run from shelter to shelter, even behind the carcasses of elephants, and to
defend himself with whatever article he could lay hands on, such as horses’
limbs, broken wheels, and pieces of wood.
Karna taunted him, “You glutton, go back to the forests and chew grass.
You are not a kshatriya, but a savage unfit for a regular battle.”
On this day their tempers had so much worsened that the armies found it
impossible to respect the conventions of the war. Both sides discarded the
time limit and fought at night with the help of thousands of torches. Bhima’s
son, Ghatotkacha, felt especially strengthened at night-time, as was the nature
of rakshasas. He and his army harassed the Kauravas in a thousand ways.
They had supernatural powers, and their strategies could not be anticipated
through normal calculations. They rained arrows from unseen quarters, fought
from the air above, withdrew from sight at will, and caused great damage to
the  Kaurava  armies.  The  Kauravas  became  desperate,  as  they  felt
Ghatotkacha with his incalculable moves would destroy them completely,
and they begged Kama to put an end to him.
Karna himself had been wounded by one of Ghatotkacha’s missiles and
was smarting with pain. He possessed a magic spear, a gift from Indra
himself, which could be sent on its errand after an elusive enemy; but its
potency was limited to only one use. Kama had been reserving it for Arjuna,
but this day he had so far forgotten himself through pain and desperation that
he hurled it on and ended the career of Ghatotkacha. Arjuna was no doubt
saved from this peril, but the price paid for it was Ghatotkacha’s life.

That was a crucial night all round, with fighting going on unceasingly.
Drona was here, there, and everywhere, spreading death and destruction.
Krishna watched his activity and declared, “We must put an end to this
terrible man. He is invincible, and he can go on like this for many, many days
and nights till the last member of our army is eliminated. We have to stop his
fighting by every means possible. His spirit must be damped. His only
sensitive spot is his attachment to his son, Aswathama. Aswathama cannot be
vanquished, but if an announcement could be made that he is dead, that would
be enough to make the old master pause. Who will now go and inform him
that Aswathama is dead? At this moment he is quite far away in another part
of the field, and we can get away with the statement.”
Arjuna refused to take part in this game of deceit. One by one, each was
asked and declined to utter the lie even to save themselves. They stood
brooding. Time was running short. It was a matter of survival for their men
and families and themselves, since Drona’s attacks were unabating.
Yudhistira gave deep thought to the proposal and the situation warranting it
and said, “I will go and speak to Drona. If this piece of falsehood takes me to
hell, I shall deserve it, but our cause is compelling. Krishna, I trust you.
When you make a suggestion, it must be accepted. There is no other way for
us at this juncture.”
In order to create a situation which could give the plan a semblance of
truth, Bhima picked up his mace and smashed the skull of an elephant which
had been named Aswathama. Bhima then cried in his stentorian voice, “I
have killed Aswathama!”
Drona heard it as he was about to discharge the deadliest of the astras in
his power, the Brahmastra, which would have wiped out all the Pandavas
and their armies in a second. He asked Yudhistira, believing that he was one
who would never utter a lie, “Yudhistira, you must tell me, has Aswathama
been killed?”
Yudhistira answered back, “Yes, it is true,” and added, “but it is an
elephant called Aswathama.” He lowered his tone to a soft whisper while
uttering the last part of the sentence, so Drona did not hear it and lost heart.
He felt that there was nothing left for him to live for.
Bhima chose this moment to arraign him.                                            “You are a brahmin, and
deserting the duties of your caste, you have chosen to become a warrior like
a kshatriya. You have betrayed the duties of your birth. Instead of propagating
knowledge and peace, you have taught people how to use weapons for mutual

destruction. You have revelled in the profession of killing. It was your
misfortune that you should have degraded yourself thus.”
The veteran warrior was greatly hurt by this speech, but the news of his
son’s death had benumbed his senses. He flung down his weapon, threw off
his armour, and sat on the floor of his chariot in meditation, actually in a
trance. Just at this moment, Dhrishtadyumna jumped on his chariot, and
before anyone could understand what was happening, he drew his sword and
cut off Drona’s head, thus avenging the humiliation his father had faced years
ago.
Next Karna was made the Commander-in-Chief of the Kaurava armies.
Arjuna found this a propitious hour for challenging him, and resumed the
battle, supported by Bhima behind his chariot.
Dussasana now approached to attack Bhima with a shower of arrows.
Bhima was thrilled at this opportunity, and cried, “Now is the moment of
fulfilment.”  He  recollected  the  scene  of  Draupadi  dragged  before  the
assembly, jumped down from his chariot, and sprang upon Dussasana.
Pulling him down, he tore at his hand, crying, “Is this not the hand that
dragged Draupadi by her hair?” He flung the bleeding limb out to the
battlefield into Duryodhana’s face. Then he sucked the blood gushing out of
Dussasana’s body in fulfilment of his vow, shocking the onlookers, including
Duryodhana.
Karna was shaken at the spectacle and stood transfixed for a moment at
this exhibition of Bhima’s wrath.
Salya, driving Karna’s chariot, said, “I notice that you are hesitant and
wavering. The situation warrants it, no doubt, but now, as a General, you
must act resolutely. Don’t lose heart. After Dussasana, the responsibility
rests fully on you.”
Karna had his chariot driven towards Arjuna and sent his choicest
weapons across. A dazzling fiery arrow, called the Serpent, came spitting
fire, searching out Arjuna’s head. In the nick of time, Krishna pressed down
the chariot and sunk it five fingers deep into the ground. The arrow missed
Arjuna’s head, but knocked off his crown. Red with anger, Arjuna fixed an
arrow to finish off his opponent. At this moment, Karna’s fated hour having
approached, his chariot’s left wheel stuck in the bloody mire of the ground,
and he descended to lift it out of the rut. While struggling with it, he pleaded,
“Wait till I set my chariot right; I depend upon your honour. Do not . . .”

Krishna cried, “Honour! How late you are in remembering this word!
Where was this honour on that day when you made fun of a helpless woman
dragged into your midst through no fault of her own? You did, of your own
free will, choose to associate with evil-minded men, even when you could
have avoided it. You revelled in evil acts, cruelty, uncharitableness, and your
hatred of your brothers was blind and without cause. When all of you
surrounded and butchered that child Abhimanyu, warriors thrice his age,
where was this honour you talk about?” Denouncing him thus, Krishna urged
Arjuna to give the final blow.
Karna now got back to his chariot, adjusted his arrow to a bow, and shot
it. Arjuna was stunned by its force. As he paused, Karna got down again to
lift the wheel of his chariot. When it still would not budge, he became
desperate, and tried to send the ultimate astra, the Brahmastra. But at this
moment, an earlier curse laid on him by his guru Parasurama—that he would
forget the astra at the critical hour—became effective. He became desperate
as he realised that the mantra was eluding his memory. Arjuna hesitated,
since he did not really like to take advantage of this awkward moment, but
Krishna urged, “Waste no more time, go on, shoot                                  ” At this, Arjuna raised
his Gandiva and sent an arrow, which cut off Karna’s head.
Duryodhana was advised at this point to sue for peace. “No,” he said.
“How can I have peace with the Pandavas, who have spilled the blood of
those dearest to me, one by one, relentlessly. I will fight them to the last
breath,” and he did it literally, after making Salya the Commander-in-Chief.
Yudhistira personally led his forces against Salya and struck him down.
Everyone was amazed at the martial capacity of Yudhistira, who was thought
to be mild. Salya was one of the stoutest warriors, but in that engagement,
Yudhistira displayed astonishing pertinacity and power, and did not stop till
Salya’s body rolled off into the dust.
Dhritarashtra’s remaining sons combined to attack Bhima, but he destroyed
them all with gusto, and cried, “Still the foremost enemy is alive; I will deal
with him.” He went off in pursuit of Duryodhana, who had lost all hope when
he learnt that even Sakuni was gone, having been dispatched by Sahadeva,
the youngest of the Pandava brothers.
At this point, Aswathama and Kripa came in search of Duryodhana.
Aswathama was installed as the General, although only three were left alive
on the Kaurava side, and seven on the other. Deeply moved by Duryodhana’s

plight, Aswathama took a pledge that he would wipe out the Pandava race
without a trace.
Duryodhana could no longer rally his army. He picked up his mace, which
was his mightiest weapon, and walked towards a lake. He churned the water
apart by his mystic powers and stayed at the bottom, where Yudhistira and
his brothers later tracked him down.
Yudhistira said, “Are you not ashamed to hide yourself underwater now,
after all the destruction of our race that you have engineered?”
Duryodhana haughtily replied, “I was not trying to hide. I have stepped
into the water to cool the fire that is still raging within me. What am I to fight
or live for? All those whose friendship I cherished are gone. I have no desire
to hold any kingdom. The earth is yours, take it, you have had to slaughter so
many lives to get it. Take it.”
“You are indeed generous, having refused me space to cover a needle-
point!”
Duryodhana came out of the water, mace in hand. “I am single; I will fight
you all, one by one,” he said. “Surely, you have enough chivalry left not to
fall on me in a pack. I am alone, without support or armour.”
“Ah, how sensitive,” said Yudhistira. “Did you fight one by one with that
child Abhimanyu? You did indeed act like a pack of wolves. All right, put on
your coat of armour, choose any of us for a fight. If you die, you will go to
heaven; if you live, you can be a king again.”
Krishna felt that Yudhistira was blundering in making such an offer to
Duryodhana. Since Bhima alone could prove a match for him, Krishna
hurriedly urged, “Bhima, be ready.”
They gave Duryodhana time to come out of the lake, and the fight began.
Both Bhima and Duryodhana were experts in the use of the mace, and the
fight was well matched. Sparks flew off when their weapons clashed. The
fight was prolonged and looked as though it could never conclude.
While watching the duel, Krishna said to Arjuna, “Do you think Bhima
will have forgotten his vow to smash Duryodhana’s thigh?” Bhima overheard
this at the same time that Arjuna too made a sign, and he recollected the
ancient scene when Duryodhana had bared his thigh for Draupadi. He
pounced on Duryodhana, brought his mace down, and smashed his thigh. As
Duryodhana collapsed on the ground, Bhima stamped on his head and

pressed it down with his heels, almost executing a dance over the fallen
body.
Yudhistira intervened at this stage and admonished Bhima, “Enough, you
have fulfilled your vow. Duryodhana was, after all, a king and our cousin.”
“Let us not tarry here,” Krishna said. “Soon the wicked soul of this wicked
man will depart. Why linger? Come on, back to our chariots.”
Duryodhana looked up helplessly, following them with eyes blazing in
anger, and said, “Your base tricks, Krishna, have brought these warriors their
victory.  Drona,  Bhishma,  Karna,  and  Jayadratha  would  not  have  been
destroyed but for your deviousness. Don’t you feel repentant and ashamed?”
Krishna replied, “Your greed and hatred without reason have brought you
and all your supporters to this pass. Remember, for your own good, how you
won at the dice game. Don’t talk of my trickery, without which you and your
friends would still be burdening the earth. I have put an end to it, and see
nothing wrong in stopping a war which was itself unnecessary. Now at least,
let your last minutes be spent in repentance.”
But Duryodhana was defiant till the end. “You profess to be a god, which I
denounce  completely.  You  allied  yourself  with  those  mendicants  and
weaklings and tried to prop them up. Think of me. I have lived well, never
less than a king, and living as I pleased. I have enjoyed everything in life, and
have nothing to regret. I have been loyal to my friends and a terror to my foes
till my last second. I don’t mind Bhima dancing on my body, stamping on my
head—after all, my body is going to perish in a moment. What a fool to be so
vindictive on a near-corpse! I do not mind all this because my future is
heavenward, where warriors reach, and I know my well-wishers are there
and will welcome me. You and your wretched Pandavas will be earthbound,
spurned by all kshatriyas to come, when your sly, untruthful tactics are
remembered. No warrior ever hit another on the thigh! Such was your
advice!”

16   Victory and Sorrow
AT THE END OF THE WAR, the Pandavas returned to Hastinapura. It was
difficult for them to face King Dhritarashtra and his wife, Gandhari, who had
lost all their hundred sons.
Dhritarashtra asked, “Where is Bhima? I wish to greet him.”
Krishna, who knew the workings of the old man’s mind, presented to him
an image of Bhima cast in iron. Dhritarashtra drew the image to his heart and
gave it a paternal hug, putting into it all the strength of his desperation and
grief.  The  image  was  crushed  to  pieces  and  fell  from  his  embrace.
Whereupon he lamented, “Oh, Bhima, alas! My embrace has proved too
much for you. I hope you are not hurt.”
Krishna was familiar with the hypocrisy of the old King and said, “You
have only crushed an iron image of Bhima. I hope that it has satisfied your
longing for revenge.”
Now Dhritarashtra understood his position and said, “I am happy to know
that Bhima is alive. My grief made me thoughtless. Krishna, I am grateful that

you saved Bhima’s life from my thoughtless act.” This exercise exhausted the
old man’s inward rage and resentment. Now he could take a realistic view of
the situation, and discuss the future for re-establishing peace in the country.
But Gandhari’s grief was unabated. She turned to Krishna and lashed him
with her tongue. “Are you happy now to see us all in this state? Your trickery
has brought this great sorrow in our family. You have perpetrated heinous
crimes on my sons.”
“It was all fated thus,” replied Krishna. “This was all the consequence of
your sons’ karma. Now that they are purged of their sins, please feel happy
that they are in the heaven reserved for warriors who die heroically.”
Gandhari continued to weep. “Your words hardly console me. I will know
no peace until you also suffer in the same measure the consequences of your
own treachery. In the thirty-sixth year from today, may all Vrishnis*1 destroy
each other and leave you alone to die suddenly.”
Krishna laughed and said, “I hope it makes you feel better to say so. I
know what is ahead. Exactly in the thirty-sixth year, with or without your
curse, our Vrishnis will destroy themselves in strife. I know exactly how I
shall leave this world.”
Now the one-month period of mourning was to be spent by the Pandavas
outside the city of Hastinapura. They camped on the banks of a sacred river
with Vidura, Sanjaya and Dhritarashtra, and all the women of the palace in
their company, where they performed various rites for the salvation of the
departed souls. When they were camping there, all the rishis including
Narada and Vyasa visited them.
Narada said to Yudhistira, “Now that you have conquered the world and
perpetuated your name, do you rejoice at your victory? I hope you have
overcome your grief.” Narada, being what he was, knew exactly what effect
this enquiry would have on Yudhistira.
“My victory!” said Yudhistira. “I have done so little to deserve it. The
grace of Krishna and the physical prowess of Bhima and Arjuna brought us
victory. But for me personally, it is the defeat of my whole life’s purpose. All
the sons born to Draupadi are slain. How shall I face Subhadra, who has lost
her son, Abhimanyu? How shall I face all the mothers and fathers and
kinsmen of those for whose death I was responsible?
“Apart from all this, there is one particular subject which is most painful
and shocking. Till a little while ago, I was not aware that Karna was Kunthi’s

son. I had known him only as the son of a chariot-driver, but Kunthi has now
told me his history. I have manoeuvred the death of my own brother to gain
his kingdom. How shall I expiate this sin, the greatest sin among all others? I
recollect I felt a tenderness for Karna whenever I looked at him. Even in his
furious moments on the battlefield, even in that gambling assembly when he
was so reckless in speech, I felt angry, no doubt, but I remember when I
looked at his feet they resembled Kunthi’s so much that I could not continue
to feel angry. None of us knew him to be a brother. I had always reflected on
the resemblance between him and my mother, but without understanding the
reason. Why was he cursed? What is the reason for the wheels of his chariot
sinking in at the last moment? You know the past and the future. Please tell
me why, so that I may understand the workings of fate. Why could he not
shoot the Brahmastra?”
In answer to this question, Narada narrated an early history concerning
Karna. When Karna was a young acolyte, he had gone to Parasurama to learn
from him the use of Brahmastra. Since Parasurama had set himself up as an
implacable enemy of all kshatriyas (and attempted wholesale extermination
of that community), Karna had announced that he was a brahmin in order to
be admitted as Parasurama’s pupil. One afternoon in the woods Parasurama
was very tired and, resting his head on Karna’s lap, fell soundly asleep under
a tree. At this time a monstrous insect, an abnormal centipede which was
actually a rakshasa in insect shape, fastened its teeth on Karna’s thigh and
sucked his blood. Karna bore the pain without moving a muscle for fear that
it might disturb his master’s slumber. Parasurama woke up to find blood
gushing  and  drenching  him  and  demanded  an  explanation,  and  said
immediately, “None but a kshatriya could have borne this pain in silence.
You have deceived me by calling yourself a brahmin, and for this grave lapse
I decree that the Brahmastra I have taught shall remain in your memory until
you actually find an occasion to employ it; at the crucial moment, you shall
forget the mystic syllables.” And Narada explained that this was the reason
why Karna could not remember the Brahmastra when he tried to employ it
against Arjuna.
Narada also explained why Karna’s chariot wheels stuck at the last
moment. “Once upon a time, Karna had inadvertently killed a cow belonging
to a hermit. The hermit, enraged at this loss, decreed, ‘The earth shall
swallow up your chariot wheels at a critical moment,’ and as a result of this
curse Karna could not advance towards Arjuna on the battlefield.”

These explanations mitigated to some extent Yudhistira’s grief, but still his
heart was heavy with repentance. He turned to Arjuna and said, “Our so-
called enemies have acquired merit and are in heaven now, while we are
made to live long in this hell of repentance for all the slaughter. Grief alone
is our reward! Don’t tell me again it is the duty of a kshatriya to kill. I do not
want to be called a kshatriya if slaughter alone is the rule of life. Let me be a
mendicant, far happier if I could think that I had exercised compassion and
forgiveness than attained all this victory. Like dogs fighting for a piece of
meat, we have fought and destroyed our blood relations. We were driven to it
through Duryodhana’s reasonless, undiminishing hatred, but now we have no
joy outliving him in this manner. Oh, Arjuna, you become the King of this
country. Let me go to the forests to lead a life of renunciation. I will live with
no possessions, no aim, with only trees and innocent creatures of the forest
for company.” He revelled in a vision of ascetic life—to live on fruits and
roots, enough to keep one’s body alive; renouncing speech; renouncing all
judgement of good and bad, never telling anyone what to do, never resisting
anything; walking in one direction, without looking back or forward with
head bowed in humility, never noticing in which direction or country he was
moving.
Yudhistira went on elaborating the picture of his life as a recluse in such
detail that Arjuna could not help interrupting him in anger. “Oh, that will do,”
he said. “Having sacrificed so much, so many lives, and acquired a kingdom,
it is your duty to rule it, lest it should fall into lesser hands than yours and
suffer. It is your duty to rule and enjoy, support the poor, support sacrifices,
and maintain God’s justice as a ruler. You will never be able to achieve this
unless you have kingly power, acquired by the legitimate means decreed for a
kshatriya. You will never be able to discharge your duties in this respect
unless you have prosperity and wealth. A pauper can never help others, a
weakling can be of no use to his fellow men. A life of renunciation is only
for mendicants and not for us. A man possessed of wealth is regarded as
learned and worthy of respect; wealth brings about more wealth. Religious
activities, pleasure, enjoyment, and every fulfilment of life proceed from
wealth. He who has no wealth is spurned in this world as well as in the next.
Quarrels and differences of opinion have their place even in heaven among
the gods. When this is so, what is wrong if, in our human society too, there
are also differences and fights. It is by fighting that glory is earned and from
glory proceed all the good things of life. It is all known as the gift of the

goddess Lakshmi, and he who spurns such a gift offends the Goddess.
Remember, we can never see wealth acquired without some harm or injury to
others.”
Yudhistira  still  repeated  his  philosophy  of  renunciation.  His  ascetic
outlook infuriated Bhima, who said, “Great brother and elder, please stop
your narration. Your mind is unbalanced and you have lost sight of realities.
You are like the parrot-like repeaters of the Vedas, who go on babbling
without relevance. If you think so ill of the duties of a king, all the slaughter
of Dhritarashtra’s family which you led us to perpetrate was uncalled for. If
we  had  known  that  this  was  your  philosophy,  we  would  never  have
consented to take up arms against anyone. Having slain our enemies, it is
your bound duty to take up the reins of this kingdom and rule like a true
kshatriya. However much you may dislike it, you cannot alter your caste now.
Your action is similar to that of a man who has dug a well, and, after
smearing himself with wet mud, retreats from the activity just when water is
springing up. You are like a man who, having killed all his fearful enemies,
finally also commits suicide. We have followed you and now realise that
your intelligence is questionable. Please consider our position also. You are
selfish in pampering your own feelings. A life of renunciation should be
adopted only by kings who are incurably diseased or suffering from defeat. If
renunciation and passivity are the greatest of virtues, then mountains and
trees should be the most virtuous in creation, for mountains and trees always
lead a life of aloofness and do not cross anyone’s path.”
The twins, the most junior, added their voices, also with great trepidation.
And Draupadi, who had been listening all along, added, “These brothers of
yours have been lecturing and crying till their throats have dried up. You
make  them  unhappy  by  your  obstinacy.  These  brothers  of  yours  have
continuously suffered for so many years, all because of their devotion to you.
Why, when you were at Dwaitavana suffering all the cold and the heat and
the wind, did you not say to me, ‘We shall fight for our rights, slaughter
Duryodhana, and enjoy this earth as rulers once more.’ You promised that our
hardships would be forgotten when we reattained our kingdom. You yourself
swore so much; why do you back out of it now? My mother-in-law one day
addressed me and said, ‘Yudhistira will always keep you happy and well
provided.’ Now, after slaying thousands of men, I see that you are attempting
to make that promise futile. When the eldest brother is mad, all those who
follow him are also compelled to become mad. If your brothers had their

own judgement left, they should have immobilised you, kept you in captivity,
and taken upon themselves the sovereignty of the earth. The man who is
afflicted with madness must be treated by a physician and not obeyed. I am
the most miserable among all, but still I have the desire to live, even though I
have lost all my children. You should not ignore my words or those of your
brothers.”
Arjuna now expounded the duties of a king as a chastiser. “What a king
holds in his hand is called danda, because it restrains and punishes the
wicked; it is only the fear of punishment that will keep most persons on the
path of truth, obedience, and discipline. Without piercing, no fisherman can
ever succeed in catching a fish. Without slaughter nothing can be achieved.
Those among the gods who are fierce are most respected—Rudra, Skanda,
Agni, and Varuna are all slaughterers. All people quail before them. I see no
creature in this world that supports life without injuring another. Animals
live upon animals, the stronger upon the weaker. The cat devours the mouse,
the dog devours the cat, the dog is eaten by the leopard, and all things again
are devoured by Death. Even ascetics can never support their lives without
killing creatures. In water, on earth and vegetables there are many lives
which are minute and invisible, but they are killed when the ascetic takes his
nourishment. This kingdom is ours now. Our duty is to cultivate happiness
and rule the earth, employing the danda when necessary.”
Yudhistira allowed everyone to express his views, but rejected the outlook
and philosophy of his brothers and wife, doggedly repeating his plan to go
into the woods and do penance. At this moment Vyasa intervened. “You must
practise the duty enjoined upon you as a king. There is no other way.
Retirement is not for your order. You must adopt a kingly life, a domestic
life, and a kshatriya life. Stop thinking negatively. You have to rule the
kingdom that has come to your hands. There is no choice for you. Be cheerful
and accept it.”
Yudhistira went on lamenting the death of each one of his adversaries, one
by one, and kept asking, “How am I to atone for this, how am I to atone for
this?” He thought particularly of Bhishma, on whose lap he had played as a
child. “When I saw him attacked by Sikandi, and found him trembling and
shaking throughout the attack, when I saw his body pierced by arrows and
falling down like a stricken tower on the floor of his chariot, my head reeled
and my heart was wrung in pain. He had brought us up and I had to arrange
for his destruction through my covetousness. Drona, my master, who took my

hand and taught it to hold a bow . . . how can I forget these scenes and parade
myself as a king?” He tormented himself with such memories again and
again. More than all other memories, the echo of the lamentations of the
women on receiving news of the casualties was too much for Yudhistira.
Krishna finally lost patience with him. “It is unseemly to pamper your
grief. You cannot go on like this for ever. Forget yourself and your own
feelings and act for the sake of those who have gone through so much
suffering in obedience to your orders. You will have to accept the kingdom.”
Yudhistira suddenly realised the reasonableness of their arguments and
said, “O Krishna, my mind is clear now. I obey your command, as well as
our grandsire, Vyasa’s. Let us now proceed as you desire.”
After offering prayers to the gods, Yudhistira ascended a chariot yoked
with sixteen bullocks bearing special auspicious marks, covered with satin
and silk, and sanctified with mantras. Bhima held the reins of the animals,
Arjuna held an umbrella over the King’s head, Nakula and Sahadeva stood
on the sides and fanned the King with yak tails. Kunthi and Draupadi
followed in a chariot driven by Vidura. Krishna and Satyaki and many others
were in the procession. The streets were festooned with greenery and
flowers and perfumed water was sprinkled all along the path, and the gates
of the city were adorned as never before when Yudhistira entered. The city
was alive with music and the roar of cheering from the crowds.
Passing through the multitudes jostling in the main streets, Yudhistira
finally entered the palace of Dhritarashtra. Yudhistira, as the King, went up to
the household gods and worshipped them. He then took his seat on a golden
throne, facing east. On another golden seat, facing him, sat Krishna and
Satyaki. On either side of the throne were Bhima and Arjuna. On an ivory
seat Kunthi sat, with Nakula and Sahadeva by her side. Dhritarashtra was
given a special seat. Yuyutsu, the only son of Dhritarashtra left alive, who
had crossed over to the Pandava camp at an early stage of the battle, was
seated beside him with Sanjaya and Gandhari. Important citizens approached
the King with presents. Jars of holy water and vessels of gold and silver
inlaid with gems were arrayed around the altar.
Yudhistira, with Draupadi at his side, lit the holy fire and poured libations
into it, repeating the mantras chanted by the priests. Krishna poured holy
water out of his conch and anointed Yudhistira. Drums were beaten and
Yudhistira was cheered again and again.

Acknowledging it all, Yudhistira warmly proclaimed, “King Dhritarashtra
is still the head of our country. If you wish to please me, show him your
respect and obedience as unwaveringly as ever. You must bear in mind this
request of mine. The whole world, including ourselves, belongs to him,
remember.”
Yudhistira announced that Bhima was the yuvaraja, his next in command.
He appointed Vidura his counsellor in all matters pertaining to war, peace,
defence, and administration. Sanjaya was to look after the finances of the
state. Nakula was in charge of the register of the armed forces. Arjuna was to
defend the country and “chastise the wicked,” a task appropriate to his
philosophy. Dhaumya was to be the Chief Royal Priest, managing all the
religious affairs of the palace and the state. Yudhistira chose Sahadeva to be
his personal companion and aide at all times, feeling that the youngest needed
his own protection. He appointed Yuyutsu, the only son left to Dhritarashtra,
to be in special charge of the old King and to see that his wishes were
fulfilled at all times.

Epilogue
WITH THE CORONATION of Yudhistira and all the tranquillity following
it, one would have thought there was nothing more to say; but it is not so. The
writer of the epic has a disinclination to conclude a story. Just as all the
action seems to be ending, one suddenly realises that the last line is only the
beginning of a new phase of the narrative, of fresh thoughts and experiences.
There is a reluctance to close the subject. This may be one way of creating a
semblance of life itself, which is apparently endless. Nothing is ever really
conclusive.
Yudhistira, after his enthronement, found Krishna rather reflective and
moody and enquired as to the cause of this state. Krishna said, “I realise that
with the coming of Uttarayana,*1 Bhishma will give up his life. He is a
storehouse of knowledge of the world, kingship, and human conduct; and
when he passes away, it will be gone with him, and the world will be the
poorer. I want you to meet with him. There is not much time left.” Yudhistira
was doubtful how he would be received by Bhishma, but Krishna went in
advance and prepared the old master for this meeting.
Lying on his bed of arrow heads, Bhishma received Yudhistira with much
affection and spoke to him on the duties of a king.*2 The discourse continued
for several days. At the end of it, Bhishma bade everyone farewell and
breathed his last. Yudhistira took his body off the arrows and performed the
obsequies due the eldest member of the family. He cremated the body on the
banks of the Ganges, where the deity of the river, Ganga, Bhishma’s mother,
once again appeared to receive his soul and conduct it to his original home in
the realm of the celestials.
Yudhistira ruled for thirty-six years, at the end of which his old uncle,
Dhritarashtra, expressed a desire to adopt vanaprastha and retire into the
woods with Gandhari and his brother’s wife, Kunthi, to spend the rest of his
life  in  contemplation.  Yudhistira  made  every  arrangement  for  such  a
retirement and visited them often at their retreat and looked after their
welfare—until one day, a forest fire started, and in that conflagration,
Dhritarashtra, Gandhari, and Kunthi perished.

Krishna’s clan, the Vrishnis, destroyed each other in a civil war, and
became less than a memory, leaving no trace of themselves. Krishna himself
departed as he had prophesied. On the bank of a river, while he was resting
in deep thought, lying on the sands, a hunter from a distance mistook the soles
of his feet for a bird and shot an arrow, thus ending the tenure of the eighth
avatar of Vishnu on earth.
Depressed by the news of the death of Krishna and the Vrishnis and the
submerging of Dwaraka in the sea, the Pandavas decided to leave the world.
One by one, the Pandava brothers and Draupadi died. Vidura had such a
devotion to Yudhistira that at one point by his yogic power he transmigrated
into Yudhistira’s soul and merged with it.
Yudhistira alone was gifted with the power to reach heaven in his physical
body. The story describes Yudhistira’s passage to heaven, the peep he has
into the glooms of hell, and his discovery of many familiar faces there.
At the end of The Mahabharata story, the stage becomes blank and not a
single familiar character is left except Abhimanyu’s child, who had had the
protection of Krishna even when he was in his mother’s womb. He grew up
to be crowned the King of Hastinapura and thus continue the Pandava
lineage.

NOTES
Introduction
*1. King Parikshit, who became the ruler of Hastinapura after the Pandavas, was cursed to die of a
snakebite for playing mischief on a hermit, who was in deep meditation. On the fulfilment of this curse,
Parikshit’s son, Janamejaya performed a sacrifice, in revenge, which caused the extinction of all the
snakes on earth. At this sacrifice Vysampayana narrates the story of The Mahabharata as he had
heard it from Vyasa himself.
Incidentally, we may note that with the introduction of Parikshit as a successor to the Pandavas,
Vyasa composed a fresh narrative called The Bhagavata, which has almost the stature of an epic.
1. The Eighth Baby
*1. In the present-day geographical context, this is in the state of Uttar Pradesh, about 100 kilometers
northeast of Delhi.
*2. A class of deities, eight in number, attendants of Indra.
*3. Salwa rejected Amba. When she came back to Bhishma and offered to marry him, he refused
her owing to his vow and sent her back to Salwa, who rejected her again. So back and forth she was
shuttled. Amba became desperate and, holding Bhishma responsible for all her humiliations and
sufferings, she vowed, after a final appeal to him, to kill him. Her transformation into a male warrior
named Sikandi, who was responsible for Bhishma’s end, is explained elsewhere.
**4. “Kurus” and “Kauravas” sometimes seem to be interchangeable terms in the original text, but
“Kauravas” specifically indicates Duryodhana and his brothers, while “Kurus” indicates both the
Kauravas and the Pandavas.
2. Enter—the Players
*1. Another name for Arjuna.
5. Uncle’s Gift
*1. Sage Narada moved with ease in the several worlds of gods and men, taking an interest in all
their affairs, involving himself and enjoying the involvement. Often he carried information and secrets
from one quarter to another, stirring up challenge, controversy, and conflict. Though he enjoyed the
agitations and troubles, ultimately, being a seer, he resolved them for their own benefit. Most episodes in
the legends, such as Harischandra and Viswamitra, arise from the complications created by Narada’s
talk.
7. Stakes Unmatched
*1. Another name for Arjuna.
*2. Another name for Sakuni.

*3. A derogatory term in this context.
*4. Draupadi.
10. Servitude
*1. Viratas.
*2. According to a benediction enjoyed by Yudhistira, if his blood spilled on the ground, it would mean
death to whoever caused it.
11. Warning Shots
*1. Abhimanyu was born to Subhadra, the sister of Krishna whom Arjuna had married earlier and
had left behind at Dwaraka.
*2. The names of kings who had come as guests, with their followers, runs to several hundred lines in
the original text.
12. War or Peace?
*1. An akshauni was a fighting unit comprising chariots, elephants, horses, and infantry, running to
several thousands in numbers.
*2. Krishna’s clan.
13. Action
*1. Vrikodhara means “the unflinching.”
*2. The five sons of the Pandavas were growing up in Krishna’s custody at Dwaraka.
*3. Another name for Krishna.
*4. Another name for Duryodhana.
14. Hesitant Hero
*1. This part of the epic is known as The Bhagavad-Gita, an eighteen-chapter classic of Hindu
philosophy.
15. Delirium of Destruction
*1. I have omitted many of the daily details of the battle, passed over routine movements, and
touched upon only the more important personalities, their strategies, and the results of their actions, as
vignettes of the war. Otherwise the reader is likely to feel confused and weary because of the sheer
quantity of material found in the original.
*2. His birth itself, as one may remember (page 31), was for restoring his father’s honour. An old
score was to be settled. The dishonour, defeat, and lifelong animosity between Drupada and Drona was
coming to a head at this moment.
*3. Ghatotkacha, one must remember (page 27), was Bhima’s son by Hidimba, a demoness who had
loved him during his sojourn in the forests. He always arrived whenever Bhima needed his help.
**4. The discus is used here as a weapon. Propelled by a mantra, it seeks out the enemy target and
destroys by sawing off the person’s head.

*5. Sikandi (page 5) was actually Amba, a princess once rejected by Bhishma, who had assumed a
male incarnation in order to fulfil her vow to kill him.
16. Victory and Sorrow
*1. Krishna’s tribe.
17. Epilogue
*1. Uttarayana is the time in the middle of January when the sun changes its direction from south to
north.
*2. This part of The Mahabharata is known as The Shanti Parva (the section that calms), and
contains the essentials of human conduct and outlook, as expounded by the dying Bhishma.

GLOSSARY
ashram—hermitage
astra—weapon, missile, or arrow powered by supernatural forces
aswametha—grand sacrificial ceremony performed by victorious kings
asura—a demon
bhiksha—alms
brahmin—a member of the priestly caste
Brihaspathi—the High Priest and preceptor of gods, known for his intelligence and wisdom
danda—staff of authority (mace)
desa—country
dharba—a stiff grass generally collected for ritual purposes
dharma—established order, rule, duty, virtue, moral merit, right justice, law (in an eternal sense)
gandharva—a supernatural being
Gandiva—Arjuna’s bow
guru—teacher
karma—Fate; also consequences that follow from one’s actions in this as well as previous lives
Kaurava—the clan to which the chief characters belong
kshatriya—a member of the warrior caste
Kuru—another name for the clan to which the chief characters belong
mantra—syllables with magic potency
parva—part
Puranas—source books of mythology, said to be older than the Vedas
rajasuya—grand sacrificial ceremony performed by victorious kings
rakshasa—a demon
rishi—a saintly man
sama vedas—scriptures
shastra—scriptures
suta—a chariot driver
swayamwara—the occasion when a girl makes her choice among suitors
tapas—concentrated meditation over a prolonged time for spiritual growth, spiritual powers; penance
Upanishads—Sanskrit spiritual treatises
vana—forest
vanaprastha—a forest hermit
Vedas—scriptures
yaksha—a demi-god
yuga—any of the four ages in the duration of the world, each of which lasts for 3,000 celestial years
(one celestial year equals 3,600 years of human time) and possesses special characteristics of good
and evil
