Section Ninety-Three

MOUSALA PARVA
This section has 273 shlokas and 9 chapters.
Chapter 1979(1): 11 shlokas
Chapter 1980(2): 20 shlokas
Chapter 1981(3): 22 shlokas
Chapter 1982(4): 46 shlokas
Chapter 1983(5): 25 shlokas
Chapter 1984(6): 15 shlokas
Chapter 1985(7): 22 shlokas
Chapter 1986(8): 74 shlokas
Chapter 1987(9): 38 shlokas
In the 18-parva classiﬁcation, Mousala Parva is the 16th. In the 100-parva classiﬁcation, Mousala Parva constitutes Section 93. The word musala means club or mace. The
Yadavas are cursed by sages that they will be destroyed by clubs. Grass turns to clubs
and the Yadavas kill each other with these. Balarama and Krishna give up their lives on
earth. Arjuna’s powers vanish. In the numbering of the chapters in Mousala Parva, the
ﬁrst number is a consecutive one, starting with the beginning of the Mahabharata. And
the second number, within brackets, is the numbering of the chapter within Mousala
Parva.

Chapter 1979(1)
said, ‘When thirty-six years had passed, Yudhishthira, descendant of the Kuru lineage, saw conV aishampayana
trary portents. Rough and violent winds began to blow, showering stones. Birds began to circle around on the
left.1 The giant rivers retraced their courses. The directions were covered in mist. From the sky, meteors showered
down on the ground, with blazing coals. O king! The solar disc was covered in dust. When it arose, the sun always
seemed to be without any rays and headless torsos could be seen in it. The sun and the moon were seen to be enveloped in terrible circles. These had three colours, black and rough at the extremities and with red and hues like
ash elsewhere. There were many other omens, signifying fear and terror. O king! These could be seen continuously
and caused anxiety in the minds. After some time, Yudhishthira, king of the Kurus, heard of the carnage that had
occurred among the Vrishnis because of the clubs. Pandava heard that only Vasudeva and Rama2 had escaped. He
summoned his brothers, to discuss what should be done. Having heard that the Vrishnis had been destroyed because of the force of the brahmana’s staff,3 the Pandavas were distressed and consulted each other. The brave ones
could not believe the death of Vasudeva, the wielder of the Sharnga bow.4 It was like the drying up of the ocean.
Hearing about the incident with the clubs, they were overcome by sorrow and grief. Distressed and devoid of resolution, the Pandavas sat down.’

Chapter 1980(2)
asked, ‘O illustrious one! While Vasudeva looked on, how were the Andhakas, the Vrishnis and the
J anamejaya
maharatha Bhojas destroyed?’
Vaishampayana replied, ‘After thirty-six years passed, there was a great destruction of the Vrishnis. Goaded by
destiny, they killed each other with clubs.’
Janamejaya asked, ‘Who cursed the brave Vrishnis, Andhakas and Bhojas and caused their destruction? O best
of brahmanas! Tell me in detail.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘One day, those brave ones, Sarana and the others,5 saw Vishvamitra, Kanva and Narada,
store of austerities, when they came to Dvaraka. They placed Samba ahead of them and dressed him up as a
woman. Goaded by the rod of destiny, they approached them and said, “This is the wife of the inﬁnitely energetic
Babhru and desires a son. O rishis! O virtuous ones! Do you know how she can give birth?” O king! Speaking in
this way, they sought to deceive those brahmanas. O lord of men! Listen to what those sages said in reply. “Vasudeva’s son, Samba, will give birth to a terrible and iron club for the destruction of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas. You are evil in conduct, cruel and insolent. With the exception of Rama and Janardana, you will exterminate
your entire lineage. The one with the plough as his weapon6 will go to the ocean and cast aside his handsome body
there. When the great-souled Krishna is lying down on the ground, Jara will pierce him.” They spoke in this way to
the evil-souled ones who had tried to deceive them. The eyes of the sages were red with rage and they glanced towards each other. Having said this, the sages went off to see Keshava.
‘Madhusudana told the Vrishnis what he had heard. The intelligent one knew about the end and told them that it
would indeed happen in this way. Having told them this, Hrishikesha again entered his own house. The lord of the
universe did not desire that the end should come about in any other way. Next day, Samba gave birth to a club.
This was for the destruction of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas and looked like Yama’s giant messenger.7 Because
of the terrible curse, he gave birth to this and this was reported to the king.8 The king was distressed and instructed
that this should be crushed into tiny fragments. On the instructions of the king, men ﬂung these into the ocean.
Ahuka’s instructions were proclaimed throughout the city. “From today, for all the residents of the city, in the
houses of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, there will be no drinking of liquor. If there is any man who does not lis-

ten to this and prepares liquor, he will himself be impaled alive on a stake and so will his relatives.” Out of fear for
the king, everyone followed this rule. The men obeyed the commands of the great-souled king.’

Chapter 1981(3)
said, ‘The Vrishnis and the Andhakas tried in this way. But Death always wandered around, in
V aishampayana
all their homes. His embodied form was that of a ﬁerce and malformed man, dark and tawny, and with a
shaved head. Sometimes, the Vrishnis saw him looking into their houses. At other times, they couldn’t see him.
Day by day, ﬁerce and terrible winds began to blow and there were many other evil portents for the destruction of
the Vrishnis and the Andhakas and these made the body hair stand up. Rats covered the roads and the pots9 were
shattered. Sarika birds shrieked outside their houses and even inside the homes of the Vrishnis. Whether it was
night or whether it was day, those sounds did not cease. The cranes made sounds like owls. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The goats made sounds like jackals. Pigeons wandered around in the houses of the Vrishnis and
the Andhakas. Goaded by destiny, there were other birds, pale in complexion and red of feet. Asses were born
from cows and elephants from donkeys. Cats were born from bitches and mice from mongooses. When they committed wicked deeds, the Vrishnis no longer repented. They hated and disrespected brahmanas, ancestors, gods and
seniors. Rama and Janardana were alone the exceptions. Wives deceived their husbands and husbands cheated
their wives. When a ﬁre was lit, the ﬂames circled to the left. Sometimes ﬂames ﬂared out and these were separately blue and red. When the sun was setting or rising, those wicked men always saw that it was surrounded by headless torsos. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O lord of men! When clean food was cooked in the kitchen, at the
time of eating, it was seen to be full of worms. When great-souled ones meditated and chanted, instead of those
sounds, the sounds of running feet could be heard, though no one was seen. The nakshatras repeatedly clashed
against each other. No one could any longer see his own planet.10 When Panchajanya11 was blown in the houses of
the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, in every direction, instead of its sound, one could hear the terrible sounds of donkeys braying. ‘On seeing this Hrishikesha realized that the time of catastrophe had arrived. He saw that the thirteenth lunar tithi had merged into the night of the new moon and said, “Rahu has devoured the fourteenth and ﬁfteenth lunar tithis. This happened at the time of the Bharata war and has again occurred for our destruction.” Remembering that time, Janardana thought. The slayer of Keshi reﬂected,12 “Thirty-six years have passed since the
time when Gandhari was tormented by sorrow on account of her sons and the slaying of her relatives. She was afﬂicted and the time has arrived. On an earlier occasion, when the battle formations were arrayed, Yudhishthira saw
similar extremely terrible portents and spoke about them. That kind of time has arrived.” Thinking in this way, Vasudeva wished to make this come true.13 The scorcher of enemies instructed that they should leave for a visit to a
tirtha. On Keshava’s instructions, the men issued such a proclamation. The bulls among men prepared to visit a
tirtha on the shores of the ocean.’

Chapter 1982(4)
said, ‘In their sleep during the night, the women saw a dark lady with white teeth enter Dvaraka
V aishampayana
and run around there, laughing and plundering. Extremely terrible rakshasas were seen to steal ornaments, umbrellas, standards and armour. Krishna’s chakra had been given to him by Agni.14 Its handle was made out of iron
and it was as ﬁrm as the vajra. While the Vrishnis looked on, it disappeared into the sky. His chariot was divine
and was like the sun in complexion. While Daruka15 looked on, the four horses, supreme among horses and as
swift as thought, dragged it away along the turbulent surface of the ocean. Rama and Janardana’s great standards
had a palm tree and Suparna respectively and were greatly honoured by them.16 They were taken away by apsaras
who, day and night, asked the maharatha Andhakas and Vrishnis to go on a visit to a place of pilgrimage. With the
women from the inner quarters, those bulls among men desired to set out on a visit to a tirtha. The Andhakas and

the Vrishnis prepared food, drink, many kinds of liquor and large quantities of meat. They were addicted to liquor.
Those handsome and ﬁercely energetic ones emerged from the city on vehicles, horses and elephants. With their
wives and with large quantities of food and drink, the Yadavas went to Prabhasa and began to dwell in that region,
just as they had done at home.
‘The brave Uddhava17 was accomplished in matters of artha and knew about yoga. While they dwelt on the
shores of the ocean, he came and sought permission18 to depart. Hari knew that the Vrishnis were about to be destroyed and did not wish to restrain him. He joined his hands in salutation and greeted the great-souled one who
was about to leave. The time had come for the maharatha Vrishnis and Andhakas. They saw Uddhava leave, enveloping heaven and earth in his energy. Food had been cooked for the great-souled brahmanas. They mixed this
with the scent of liquor and gave it away to monkeys. Those ﬁercely energetic ones then started a great festivity of
drinking in Prabhasa. There were hundreds of trumpets and there were actors and dancers. In Krishna’s presence,
Rama, Kritavarma, Yuyudhana,19 Gada and Babhru started to drink. In the midst of the assembly, Yuyudhana became intoxicated. He disrespected Kritavarma and said, “Is there anyone who thinks himself to be a kshatriya who
will kill those who are asleep and are therefore almost as if dead? O Hardikya! The Yadavas will not tolerate what
you have done.” When Yuyudhana said this, Pradyumna, foremost among warriors, praised these words and dishonoured Kritavarma. Kritavarma became extremely enraged. He stretched out his left hand in contempt and
replied, “When Bhurishrava was in a state of praya in the battle, you severed his arm. How could a brave person
have brought him down and slain him in such a cruel fashion?”20 Hearing these words, Keshava, the destroyer of
enemy heroes, cast an angry and oblique glance of anger.21 Satyaki reminded Madhusudana about the Syamantaka
gem that used to be with Satrajit.22 Hearing this, Satyabhama was enraged. In her rage, she approached Janardana
and sat on his lap. In his rage, Satyaki arose and spoke these words. “I truthfully take a pledge this one will go
where the ﬁve sons of Droupadi, Dhrishtadyumna and Shikhandi have gone. While they were asleep, this evilsouled one killed them in their sleep. This wicked Kritavarma was aided by Drona’s son. O slender-waisted one!
His lifespan and fame have come to an end.” Speaking in this way, he angrily picked up a sword and though he
was near Keshava, attacked him23 and angrily severed his head. Once Yuyudhana had killed him, he attacked the
others in all directions and began to kill them, though Hrishikesha sought to restrain him.
‘O great king! All of them were goaded by destiny. The Bhojas and the Andhakas united and surrounded Shini’s
descendant.24 Janardana saw them descend, angrily and forcefully. But knowing that the time had come, the greatly
energetic one was not enraged. They were driven by intolerance and were intoxicated by the liquor. They began to
strike Yuyudhana with the vessels from which they had been eating. Seeing that Shini’s descendant was being
struck, Rukmini’s son25 became angry. He rushed forward to free Satyaki, Shini’s descendant, who was engaged
with the Bhojas and the Andhakas. However, while Krishna looked on, those two were slain by the many. On seeing that Shini’s descendant and his own son had been killed, Keshava, the descendant of the Yadu lineage, angrily
picked up a clump of eraka grass in his hand. This turned into a terrible club that was as ﬁrm as the vajra. With
this, Krishna slew all those who were in front of him. Goaded by time, in that tumult, the Andhakas, the Bhojas,
the Shinis and the Vrishnis slew each other with clubs. O king! O lord! Whenever anyone plucked out a clump of
eraka grass, this was seen to turn into something like the vajra. The grass was seen to turn into clubs there. O lord
of the earth! Know that all this happened because of the brahmana’s staff. O king! Whenever a blade of grass was
hurled, it was seen to become a ﬁrm club that was like the vajra and became something that could pierce even impenetrable objects. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Son killed father and father killed son. They were intoxicated. They descended on each other and crushed each other. The Kukuras and the Andhakas were like insects falling into a ﬁre. While they were being killed, they didn’t entertain any thoughts of running away. Knowing that the
time of destruction had come, the mighty-armed Madhusudana stood there, looking on and with the club upraised.
Madhava saw that Samba had been killed and so had Charudeshna. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With
Pradyumna and Aniruddha also killed, he became angry. Seeing that Gada was lying down, he became extremely
wrathful. The wielder of Sharnga, chakra and the club slew all those who were left. When they were killed, the
greatly energetic Babhru, the destroyer of enemy cities, and Daruka spoke to Dasharha. Listen. “O illustrious one!
All of them have been killed by you. Let us follow Rama’s footsteps and go where he has gone.”’

Chapter 1983(5)
said, ‘Daruka, Keshava and Babhru left and followed Rama’s footsteps. They saw the inﬁnitely
V aishampayana
valorous Rama seated in a desolate spot, at the foot of a tree. Krishna approached the great one and gave Daruka the following instruction. “Swiftly go to the Kurus and tell Partha about this great destruction of the Yadus. On
hearing about how the Yadavas have died because of the curse of brahmanas, let Arjuna come here quickly.” Thus
addressed, Daruka, who was senseless in grief, left on a chariot for the Kurus. After Daruka left, Keshava saw that
Babhru was still near him and spoke these words. “Go quickly and protect the women. Greedy for riches, let the
bandits not cause any violence to them.” He was still intoxicated with liquor and distressed because of the slaughter of his relatives. However, instructed by Keshava, he departed. Babhru had gone only a short distance away
from Keshava. He has also been covered in the curse of the brahmanas. Suddenly and swiftly, a club released from
a hunter’s hand arrived and slew him. On seeing that Babhru was now dead, Krishna spoke these words to his elder brother. “O Rama! Wait here for me, until I have handed over the care of the women to our kin.” Janardana entered the city of Dvaravati and spoke these words to his father. “Wait for Dhananjaya’s arrival and protect all these
women. Rama is waiting for me on the outskirts of the forest. I have to go to him now. I foresaw this slaughter of
the Yadus even before I foresaw that of the kings and the bulls among the Kuru lineage. Without the Yadus, I am
incapable of looking at this city of the Yadavas. Listen to me. I will go to the forest and practise austerities, together with Rama.” Having said this, Krishna touched his feet with his head and quickly departed.
‘Loud sounds of lamentation arose from the women and the children who were in the city. Hearing the sounds of
the weeping women, Keshava returned and said, “Savyasachi will arrive in the city. That foremost among men will
free you from your grief.” Keshava went and saw Rama in that desolate spot in the forest. He saw him immersed in
yoga and a giant serpent was emerging from his mouth. Its complexion was white and that great being headed towards the great ocean. It possessed one thousand heads, was as large as a mountain and was an inhabitant of
Bhogavati.26 Its face was red and it freed itself from the former body. It moved towards the ocean. Divine serpents
and sacred rivers were there to receive it. O king! Karkotaka, Vasuki, Prithushrava, Varuna, Kunjara, Mishri,
Shankha, Kumuda, Pundarika, the great-souled naga Dhritarashtra, Hrada, Kratha, Shitikantha, Agrateja, the nagas
Chakramanda and Atishanda, Durmukha and Ambarisha, the best among nagas and King Varuna himself came forward to welcome and honour it.27 They worshipped it with padya, arghya and other rites.
‘Vasudeva possessed divine sight. When his brother had departed, he knew that everyone was gone. For some
time, he wandered around in that desolate forest, thinking. The greatly energetic one then sat down on the ground.
He thought about all the words that the excellent Gandhari had spoken to him earlier. Krishna also remembered
what Durvasa had said when his body had been smeared with payasam.28 The great one thought about the destruction of the Andhakas and the Vrishnis and the destruction of the Kurus. Having decided that the time had come, he
restrained his senses. He restrained his senses and his speech. Krishna lay down, immersed in great yoga. A ﬁerce
hunter named Jara arrived at that spot, searching for deer.29 The hunter saw Keshava lying down in yoga and took
him to be a deer. With an arrow, Jara swiftly struck him on the sole of the foot. He then quickly advanced, desiring
to seize what he had struck. The hunter saw a man immersed in yoga, with many arms and attired in yellow garments. He thought he had committed a grave sin and severely distressed, touched his feet with his head. The greatsouled one comforted him. Enveloping heaven and earth in his prosperity, he rose upwards. He reached heaven and
was welcomed by Vasava, the Ashvins, Rudra, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Vishvadevas, the sages, the siddhas, the
foremost among gandharvas and the apsaras. O king! Then, the ﬁercely energetic, powerful, undecaying, greatsouled and illustrious Narayana went to his own region, which is impossible to fathom. O king! Krishna met the
gods, the rishis and the charanas. The best among gandharvas and apsaras and the siddhas and the sadhyas bowed
down and worshipped him. O king! The gods, the best among sages and their eloquent followers worshipped the
lord of everything. The gandharvas served and praised him. Delighted, Puruhuta30 also honoured him.’

Chapter 1984(6)

said, ‘Daruka went to the Kurus and met the maharatha Parthas. He told them how the Vrishnis
V aishampayana
had destroyed each other with clubs. On hearing that the Varshneyas, the Bhojas, the Kukuras and the Andhakas had been destroyed, the Pandavas were tormented by grief and their minds were terriﬁed. Arjuna, Keshava’s
beloved friend, took their leave and went to see his maternal uncle, saying, “Nothing remains.” With Daruka, the
lord went to the abode of the Vrishnis. The brave one saw Dvaraka, which looked like a woman with her husband
dead. Earlier, the protector of the world used to be the protector of those women. Partha saw them shrieking there,
without a protector and bereft of protection. There were sixteen thousand of Vasudeva’s wives. When they saw Arjuna arrive, they began to wail loudly. On seeing them, Kouravya Arjuna’s eyes became full of tears. They were
without Krishna and without their sons and he was incapable of looking at them. The Vrishnis and the Andhakas
were like water.31 The horses were ﬁsh and the chariots were rafts. The sounding of musical instruments and the
clatter of chariots were like the roar of the currents. The houses were tirthas and giant crocodiles. The jewels were
accumulations of moss. The ﬁrm fortiﬁcations were like garlands. The roads were like ﬂowing whirlpools in the
water. The crossroads were large lakes. In the river of Dvaraka, Rama and Krishna were giant crocodiles. Devoured by the noose of destiny, that river was now terrible, ﬂowing towards Vaitarani.32 The intelligent Arjuna saw
that it was now without the bulls among the Vrishnis. It was without prosperity and cheerless, like a lotus during
the winter. Partha saw Dvaraka and Krishna’s wives. He wailed loudly, eyes overﬂowing with tears, and fell down
on the ground, senseless. O lord of the earth! Satya,33 Satrajit’s daughter, and Rukmini also wept and fell down,
alongside Dhananjaya. They raised him and made him sit on a golden seat. They surrounded the great-souled and
spoke words of praise about Govinda. They spoke to Pandava, who comforted the women and then left, wishing to
meet his maternal uncle.’

Chapter 1985(7)
34

said, ‘The brave and great-souled Anakadundubhi was lying down. The bull among the Kurus
V aishampayana
saw him, tormented by grief over his son. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Partha’s chest was broad and
his arms were mighty. With his eyes overﬂowing with tears and with his voice afﬂicted with grief, he seized his
feet. The mighty-armed and aged one embraced Arjuna with his arms. Remembering his sons, his brother’s sons,
and all his sons’ sons, daughters’ sons and friends, he was extremely distracted and wept. ‘Vasudeva said, “O Arjuna! There were hundreds of times when they conquered kings and daityas. O Arjuna! Though I am alive, I do not
see them. Death will come to me with great difﬁculty. Those two35 were your disciples. O Arjuna! You always
loved them and showed them a great deal of respect. O Partha! It is because of their sins that the Vrishnis have
faced destruction. Among the best of the Vrishnis, those two were held to be atirathas. In speaking about
Pradyumna and Yuyudhana, you used to boast. O tiger among Kurus! In addition to Krishna, they were always like
my sons. O Dhananjaya! Those two are the main reason behind the destruction of the Vrishnis. O Arjuna! However, I do not censure Shini’s descendant or Hardikya, or for that matter, Akrura or Rukmini’s son. The curse was the
true reason. The lord of the universe used his valour to defeat Keshi and Kamsa. O Partha! He beheaded the lord of
Chedi,36 who was proud of his valour. Madhusudana defeated the nishada Ekalavya, Kalingas, Magadhas, Gandharas, the king of Kashi, kings from the desert regions and kings from the east, the south and the mountainous regions. Why did he disregard what was going to happen? On seeing his sons, grandsons, brothers and friends slain
and lying down, he told me, ‘O bull among men! The time for the end of our lineage has arrived. Bibhatsu will
come to this city of Dvaravati. Tell him about the great carnages that has happened among the Vrishnis. O lord!
When that greatly energetic one hears about the destruction of the Yadus, without thinking about it, he will swiftly
arrive here. Know that I am Arjuna and Arjuna is me. O Madhava! Know that you must do whatever he asks you
to. Pandava will know what the occasion demands for the women and the children. Bibhatsu will also perform
your funeral rites. When Dhananjaya has left, this city, with its walls and mansions, will instantly be swallowed up
by the ocean. I will go to some sacred spot and resort to the rituals. With the intelligent Rama, I will wait for the
right time.’ Hrishikesha, whose valour is unimaginable, told me this. The lord then left me with the children and
went to whichever direction he desired. I have thought about those two great-souled brothers37 and about the terri-

ble destruction of the kin. Afﬂicted by grief, I have not eaten. O Pandava! I will not eat. Nor will I live. It is
through good fortune that I have met you. O Partha! Do everything that Krishna spoke about. O Partha! This kingdom, these women and these jewels are yours. O slayer of enemies! I wish to cast aside my breath of life.”’

Chapter 1986(8)
said, ‘Bibhatsu, the scorcher of enemies, was thus addressed by his maternal uncle. He was
V aishampayana
cheerless and distressed in his mind and replied to Vasudeva, “O maternal uncle! O lord! Without the foremost
among the Vrishnis and the Madhus, I am incapable of looking at the earth for a long period of time. The king,38
Bhimasena, Pandava Sahadeva, Nakula and Yajnaseni as the sixth, hold the same kind of view. It is certain that the
time has also come for the king to depart. O supreme among those who know about time! Know that the time has
also arrived for you. O scorcher of enemies! By all means possible, I will ﬁrst take the women, the children and the
aged among the Vrishnis to Indraprastha.” Having said this, Dhananjaya spoke these words to Daruka. “I wish to
quickly see the advisers and the brave ones among the Vrishnis.” Having said this, the brave maharatha Arjuna,
who was sorrowing, entered the assembly hall of the Yadavas, known as Sudharma. When he arrived there, all the
ordinary people, the brahmanas and the citizens, surrounded him there. All of them were distressed in their minds
and were almost unconscious. Partha was himself distressed and spoke these words. “I will myself take the Vrishni
and Andhaka people to Shakraprastha.39 Everything in this city will be ﬂooded by the ocean. Arrange vehicles and
all kinds of jewels. This Vajra40 will be the king in Shakraprastha. Seven days from now, we will depart when the
sparkling sun rises. Make arrangements without delay and let all of us dwell outside.”41 Thus addressed by Partha
of the unblemished deeds, the citizens anxiously made arrangements for saving themselves. Partha spent that night
in Keshava’s house. He was suddenly overwhelmed by great grief and confusion. When it was next morning, the
powerful Shouri Vasudeva united himself in great energy and left for the supreme destination. A great sound was
heard in Vasudeva’s house. The women shrieked terribly and wept. All of them had dishevelled hair and they cast
aside their ornaments and garlands. The women beat on their breasts with their hands and lamented piteously. Devaki, Bhadra, Rohini and Madira, supreme among women, seated themselves with their husband.42 O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Shouri’s body was covered with many garlands. Partha arranged for it to be drawn out of
the city, on a large vehicle dragged by men. O bull among men! All the citizens and residents of Dvaraka were
ﬁlled with grief and sorrow and followed it. The umbrella of a horse sacriﬁce43 was held aloft, ahead of the vehicle. The ofﬁciating priests advanced, with kindled ﬁres. The ornamented wives followed the brave one. They were
surrounded by thousands of women and thousands of daughters-in-law. There was a spot that the great-souled one
had loved while he was alive. It was resolved that the funeral rites for the father would be performed there. The funeral pyre of the brave one from the Shura lineage was ignited by his son.44 The four beautiful women also ascended the ﬁre, with the body of the husband who had departed. The four women also followed him. The descendant of
the Pandu lineage ignited it, with sandalwood and other diverse kinds of fragrant wood. A loud sound arose from
the kindling and the ﬁre. There was the sound of chants from Sama hymns and men weeping. The brave children
from the Vrishni lineage, with Vajra as the foremost and all the women offered water to the great-souled one. Phalguna arranged for dharma where there was no longer any dharma possible.45 O bull among the Bharata lineage! He
then went to the place where the Vrishnis had been destroyed. On seeing that they had been brought down in the
carnage, he was extremely miserable. However, Kourvaya did everything that was appropriate for the occasion.
All the rites were performed according to seniority, for all those who had been slain through the curse of the brahmanas and the generation of the clubs. He searched out the bodies of both Rama and Vasudeva46 and had them cremated by men who were accomplished in such tasks. Following the ordinances, Pandava performed the funeral
rites.
‘On the seventh day, he mounted a chariot and swiftly departed. There were other chariots yoked to horses and
vehicles drawn by bulls, mules and camels. The wives of the brave Vrishnis followed on these, afﬂicted by grief
and weeping. They followed the great-souled Dhananjaya, Pandu’s son. On Partha’s instructions, the servants of
the Andhakas and the Vrishnis, horse riders and chariot riders surrounded the women, the aged, the young and the

citizens, who were without any brave ones to defend them, and advanced. Elephant riders advanced on elephants
that were as large as mountains. There were foot soldiers for protection. They also raised their weapons and advanced. All the sons of the Andhakas and the Vrishnis followed Partha. There were prosperous brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras. Ahead of them were Vasudeva’s sixteen thousand wives, his great riches and the intelligent Krishna’s grandson, Vajra. Bhoja, Vrishni and Andhaka women also advanced, with their husbands killed.
There were thousands of them, indeed tens of millions. That group of Vrishnis was like an ocean. Partha, foremost
among warriors, great in his knowledge of dharma and the conqueror of enemy cities, escorted it. After the people
departed, the ocean, the abode of makaras, ﬂooded Dvaraka, which was still full of jewels, with its waters. The
people who were residents of Dvaraka looked at this extraordinary sight. They said that this was nothing but destiny and advanced faster and faster.
‘Dhananjaya made the Vrishni women rest in beautiful groves, mountains and near rivers. The intelligent one
arrived at the prosperous land of the ﬁve rivers. The lord arranged for them to dwell there, in a region that was full
of cattle, other animals and grain. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Some bandits saw that the husbands of
these women had been killed and that they were being led by Partha alone. They became greedy. Greed robbed
those evildoers of their senses. Those abhiras47 saw the opportunity to do something wicked and consulted each
other. “Arjuna is the only warrior. There are the aged and the young. The husbands have been killed. The other
warriors are without energy and are passing through our territory.” Thousands of bandits descended and began to
strike them with sticks. Desiring to steal the property, those people attacked the Vrishnis. As if goaded by the
progress of time and desiring the riches, they attacked. With his followers, Kounteya swiftly returned. The mightyarmed Arjuna laughed and said, “O wicked ones who do not know about dharma! If you wish to be safe and do not
wish to die, retreat. Otherwise, you will have to sorrow when my arrows mangle your bodies and you are killed by
me.” When the brave one spoke in this way, they paid no attention to his words. Arjuna repeatedly tried to restrain
the foolish ones who had attacked.
‘Arjuna then tried to string the giant, undecaying and divine bow, Gandiva. To be able to string it, he had to
make a great deal of effort. While that tumultuous engagement was going on, he struggled and ﬁnally strung it. He
then thought of his weapons, but couldn’t remember them. In the engagement, he witnessed this great calamity of
the strength of his arms having disappeared. The great and divine weapons no longer manifested themselves and
he was ashamed. All the Vrishni warriors, those who were ﬁghting on elephants, horses and chariots, were unable
to prevent those men from stealing their possessions. As they attacked from different directions, they abducted
many women. Though Partha made great efforts, he couldn’t protect the people. While all the warriors looked on,
in every direction, the best of women were seized. There were other women who voluntarily went with the robbers. Supported by the servants of the Vrishnis, the lord Partha Dhananjaya, forcefully shot arrows from Gandiva
and struck the bandits. O king! However, in a short while, his arrows were exhausted. Earlier, his quivers used to
be inexhaustible. But now, the arrows were exhausted. Seeing that his arrows were exhausted, he was ﬁlled with
sorrow and grief. The son of Paka’s chastiser used the ends of the bow to kill bandits. O Janamejaya! However, in
every direction, while Partha looked on, the mlechchhas seized the best of the Vrishni and Andhaka women. The
lord Dhananjaya thought that this could be nothing other than destiny. He was full of sorrow and grief and sighed
deeply. The weapons had disappeared and the valour of his arms had been destroyed. The bow was no longer under his control and his arrows had been exhausted. Partha was cheerless and thought.
‘O king! He started to retreat and said, “This is nothing but destiny.” The immensely intelligent one collected
the remaining wives and the remaining jewels and went to Kurukshetra. Kouravya Dhananjaya arranged for the
wives of the Vrishnis, with the remaining possessions, to reside there. There was a city named Martikavat. Partha,
supreme among men, instated Hardikya’s son48 there and left the remaining wives of the king of Bhoja there. Pandava collected all the other old, young and women, those who were without brave ones to protect them, and made
them reside in Shakraprastha. The one with dharma in his soul honoured the aged and the young and made the
beloved son of Satyaki Yuyudhana reside along the banks of the Sarasvati. The slayer of enemy heroes gave the
kingdom of Indraprastha to Vajra. Though Vajra tried to restrain them, Akrura’s wives left for the forest. O king!
Rukmini Gandhari,49 Shaibya Haimavati and the queen Jambavati entered the ﬁre. O king! Satyabhama and the
other queens, honoured by Krishna, made up their minds to perform austerities and entered the forest. There were

the men who had resided in Dvaravati and had followed Partha. Jaya divided them into different groups and handed them over to Vajra. The time having arrived, his eyes overﬂowing with tears, Arjuna did all this. O king! He
then went and visited Krishna Dvaipayana in his hermitage.’

Chapter 1987(9)
said, ‘O king! Arjuna, truthful in his speech, entered the hermitage. He saw the sage who was
V aishampayana
Satyavati’s son seated alone. Knowing about dharma, he approached the one whose vows were great. As is
proper, he reported, “My name is Arjuna” and waited. The sage who was Satyavati’s son spoke words of welcome.
Cheerfully, the great sage asked him to sit. He could see that Partha’s mind was cheerless and that he was sighing
repeatedly. Seeing that he was overcome with sorrow, Vyasa asked, “Have you been stained in any way? Have you
been struck? Have you stolen a brahmana’s possessions? Have you been defeated in a battle? It can be discerned
that your prosperity has vanished. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I do not know what has transpired. O Partha!
I deserve to hear it. You should quickly tell me what has happened.”
‘Arjuna replied, “His complexion was like that of a cloud. He was handsome and large, with eyes like lotus
petals. That Krishna, with Rama, has given up his body and has gone to heaven. Because of a curse imposed by
brahmanas, the brave ones among the Vrishnis have destroyed themselves with clubs. There was an encounter in
Prabhasa that led to the death of brave ones and it made the body hair stand up. O brahmana! They were brave.
They were great-souled. They were proud as lions and extremely strong. The Bhojas, the Vrishnis and the Andhakas have killed each other in a clash. Their arms were like clubs and they could withstand clubs, maces and
spears. Behold the progress of time. They have been slain by eraka grass. There were ﬁve hundred thousand ones,
with the strength of arms. They attacked each other and have been killed. Because of the destruction of those inﬁnitely energetic ones, I am repeatedly suffering. I keep thinking of the Yadus and the illustrious Krishna. It50 is
like the drying up of the ocean, the moving of the mountains, the falling down of the sky or the cooling down of a
ﬁre. I think that the death of the wielder of the Sharnga bow cannot be believed. Without Krishna, I do not wish to
remain in this world any more. O store of austerities! Listen to something else that is even more painful. When I
repeatedly think about this, my mind is shattered. O brahmana! In the region of the ﬁve rivers, while I looked on,
thousands of Vrishni women were abducted by abhiras. Though I picked up my bow, I found that I was unable to
string it. The valour in my arms is no longer like that in former times. O great sage! All my diverse kinds of
weapons have been destroyed. In a short while, all my arrows were exhausted. That man’s soul was immeasurable.
He was the wielder of the conch shell, the chakra and the club. He was four-armed and attired in yellow garments.
He was dark and his eyes were as large as the petals of lotuses. Earlier, the extremely radiant one used to be ahead
of me, on my chariot, when I burnt down the enemy soldiers. I am unable to see him now. He was the one who ﬁrst
burnt down the enemy soldiers with his energy. With the arrows released from Gandiva, I brought them down later.
O excellent one! Since I am unable to see him, I am distressed and my mind is whirling. I am depressed and cannot
ﬁnd any peace. Without the brave Janardana, I am not interested in remaining alive. When I heard that Vishnu had
departed, the directions disappeared before me. My kin and my valour have been destroyed. I am like one empty
and am running around. O excellent one! You should instruct me about what is best for me.”
‘Vyasa replied, “The maharatha Vrishnis and Andhakas were consumed because of the curse of brahmanas. O
tiger among Kurus! They have been destroyed and you should not grieve about this. Know that this was bound to
happen. This was the destiny of those great-souled ones. That is the reason why, despite being able to counter it,
Krishna ignored it. Krishna is capable of countering everything in the three worlds, mobile and immobile, not to
speak of a curse imposed by learned ones. The wielder of the chakra and the club used to advance in front of your
chariot. He was affectionate towards you. He is the ancient rishi, the four-armed Vasudeva. The one with the large
eyes desired to reduce the burden of the earth. Having freed the entire universe, he went to his own supreme destination. O bull among men! O mighty-armed one! With you as his aide and with the help of Bhima and the twins,
he accomplished a great task for the gods. O bull among the Kurus! I think that you have been extremely successful. Know that the time for your departure has arrived. In my view, that is the best thing for you. O descendant of

the Bharata lineage! Strength, intelligence, energy and power remain for as long as the time of adversity does not
come. O Dhananjaya! Time is the root of everything. It is the seed of the universe. As it wishes, time also draws
everything back again. A person who was strong can subsequently become weak. One can possess prosperity, or
one can be commanded by others. Having accomplished their tasks, your weapons have now returned to wherever
they came from. If time should so ordain, they will arrive in your hands again. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The time has come for you to attain the greatest end. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I think that this will
bring supreme beneﬁt for you.”’
Vaishampayana continued, ‘Having heard these words of the inﬁnitely energetic Vyasa, Partha took his leave
and went to the city of Nagasahvya. The brave one entered the city and met Yudhishthira. Concerning the Vrishnis
and the Andhakas, he told him everything that had happened.’
This ends Mousala Parva.

