Section Ninety-Four

MAHA-PRASTHANIKA PARVA
This section has 106 shlokas 3 chapters.
Chapter 1988(1): 44 shlokas
Chapter 1989(2): 26 shlokas
Chapter 1990(3): 36 shlokas
Maha means great and prasthana means journey or departure. Thus, maha-prasthana
literally means great journey, but stands for departure from this world, or death. MahaPrasthanika Parva is about the departure of the Pandavas for the Himalayas and their
deaths, one after another. It has the story of Dharma disguised as a dog and Yudhishthira’s ascent to heaven, in his physical body. In the 18-parva classiﬁcation, MahaPrasthanika Parva is the 17th. In the 100-parva classiﬁcation, Maha-Prasthanika Parva
consists of Section 94 alone. In the numbering of the chapters in Maha-Prasthanika
Parva, the ﬁrst number is a consecutive one, starting with the beginning of the Mahabharata. And the second number, within brackets, is the numbering of the chapter within
Maha-Prasthanika Parva.

Chapter 1988(1)
asked, ‘On hearing about the duel with the clubs in the lineage of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas and
J anamejaya
on hearing that Krishna had ascended to heaven, what did the Pandavas do?’
Vaishampayana replied, ‘Hearing about the great carnage caused among the Vrishnis, King Kourava made up
his mind to give up his life and spoke these words to Arjuna. “O immensely wise one! Time cooks all creatures. I
think all this has happened because of that. You should also consider that.” Thus addressed, Kounteya1 only uttered
the words, “Time! Time!” He agreed with the words his valiant elder brother had spoken. Discerning Arjuna’s intention, Bhimasena and the twins also agreed with the words that had been spoken by Savyasachi. Desiring dharma, they decided to depart and summoned Yuyutsu. Yudhishthira handed over the entire kingdom to the son of a
vaishya.2 Parikshit was instated as the king in his own kingdom.3 The king who was the eldest of the Pandava sorrowfully told Subhadra, “This son of your son will be the king of the Kurus. The last of the Yadus, Vajra, has also
been made a king. Parikshit will rule in Hastinapura and the Yadava in Shakraprastha. King Vajra should be protected by you and do not think of adharma in your mind.”4 Having said this, the intelligent Dharmaraja, with dharma in his soul, together with his mothers,5 attentively offered water to Vasudeva, his aged maternal uncle, Rama
and the others. Following the prescribed rites, he instructed that the funeral ceremonies should be performed for all
of them. He gave away jewels, garments, villages, horses and chariots, women and hundreds and thousands of cattle to the best among the brahmanas. The supreme among the Bharata lineage honoured Kripa and reverentially
instructed that he would be the preceptor, handing over Parikshit to him as a disciple.
‘Yudhishthira honoured all the ordinary people. The rajarshi told all of them what he desired to do. On hearing
his words, all the people of the city and the countryside were extremely anxious in their minds and did not welcome these words. They told the king, “This should not be done.” However, knowing about the progress of time
and about dharma, the king did not listen to them. The one with dharma in his soul took the permission of the residents of the city and the countryside. He had made up his mind to leave and so had his brothers. Dharma’s son,
Kouravya, King Yudhishthira, took off the ornaments from his body and donned the bark of trees. O lord of men!
Bhima, Arjuna, the twins and the illustrious Droupadi—all of them donned garments made from the barks of trees.
O bull among the Bharata lineage! They performed all the recommended beneﬁcial rites. All the bulls among men
then cast the sacred ﬁre into water.6 On seeing the bulls among men, all the women wept. They departed, with
Droupadi as the sixth, just as in earlier times, they had left after being defeated in the game with the dice. But at
the prospect of departure, the brothers were cheerful. After seeing the destruction of the Vrishnis and ascertaining
Yudhishthira’s view, there was no other course.
‘There were the ﬁve brothers. Krishna was the sixth and a dog joined as the seventh. Including him, there were
seven and the king left Gajasahvya.7 For some distance, the citizens and the ladies of the inner quarters followed
them. However, none of them was capable of speaking to them and urging them to return. Then, all the men who
resided in the city returned and stood around Kripa, Yuyutsu and the others. O Kouravya! Ulupi, the daughter of a
serpent, entered the waters of the Ganga. Chitrangada left for the city of Manipura. All of Parikshit’s mothers8 surrounded him and began to instruct him.
‘O Kouravya! The great-souled Pandavas and the illustrious Droupadi fasted and headed in an eastern direction.
The great-souled ones immersed themselves in yoga, having decided to follow the dharma of renunciation. They
passed through many countries, rivers and mountains. Yudhishthira walked in front, followed by Bhima. Arjuna
came after him, followed by the twins, in the right order. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The beautiful
Droupadi, best among women, was at the rear. She was dark and her eyes were like the petals of lotuses. When the
Pandavas left for the forest, a dog followed them. Gradually, the brave ones reached Louhitya,9 an ocean full of
water. O great king! Because of his love for precious things, Dhananjaya had still not let go off the divine bow,
Gandiva, or the two inexhaustible quivers. They saw Agni standing before them, like a mountain. He stood there,
barring their way, adopting a human form. The god with the seven ﬂames addressed the Pandavas. “O sons of Pandu! Listen! O brave ones! Listen! Know me to be the god of ﬁre. O mighty-armed one! O Yudhishthira! O scorcher

of enemies! O Bhimasena! O Arjuna! O brave sons of the Ashvins! Listen to my words. O best among the Kurus!
Using the powers of Arjuna and Narayana, I burnt down Khandava.10 Your brother, Phalguna, can only go to the
forest after casting aside the supreme weapon, Gandiva, not otherwise. The jewel, the chakra, which used to be
with the great-souled Krishna, has vanished. When it is time, it will again appear in his hands. For Partha’s sake, I
had earlier brought Gandiva, best among bows, from Varuna. It should now be returned to Varuna.” At this, all the
brothers urged Dhananjaya to do this. He ﬂung it into the water, together with the two great and inexhaustible
quivers. O best of the Bharata lineage! After this, Agni vanished. The brave Pandavas now headed in a southern
direction. O tiger among the Bharata lineage! On the northern shores of the salty ocean, they proceeded in a southwestern direction. Then they again headed in a western direction. They saw Dvaraka, ﬂooded by the ocean. The
supreme among the Bharatas then again headed towards the north. Devoted to the dharma of yoga, they desired to
circle the entire earth.’

Chapter 1989(2)
said, ‘Restraining their souls and immersing themselves in yoga, they headed in a northern diV aishampayana
rection. They saw the giant mountains, the Himalayas. Having passed beyond it, they saw an ocean of sand.
There, they saw the giant mountain of Meru, with an excellent summit. All of them proceeded swiftly, devoting
themselves to the dharma of yoga. However, Yajnaseni deviated from yoga and fell down on the ground. On seeing
that she had fallen down, the immensely strong Bhimasena glanced towards Yajnaseni and spoke to Dharmaraja.
“O scorcher of enemies! This princess never committed an act of adharma. O king! Why has Krishna11 fallen down
on the ground?” Yudhishthira replied, “O supreme among men! She had a great partiality for Dhananjaya. She has
reaped the fruits of that.” Having said this, the king who was Dharma’s son didn’t look back. The intelligent bull
among men, with dharma in his soul, controlled his mind. The intelligent Sahadeva also fell down on the ground.
On seeing that he had fallen down, Bhima spoke to the king. “Without any pride, he served all of us. Why has
Madravati’s12 son fallen down on the ground?” Yudhishthira replied, “He thought that there was no one who was
his equal in wisdom. O son of a king! It is because of that sin that he has fallen down.” Having said this, he left Sahadeva there and proceeded. Kounteya Yudhishthira went on, with his brothers and the dog. On seeing that
Krishna and Pandava Sahadeva had fallen down, the brave Nakula, who loved his relatives, was afﬂicted and also
fell down. Seeing that the handsome and brave Nakula had fallen down, Bhima spoke to the king again. “He had
dharma in his soul and his adherence to it never suffered. He followed the words of his brothers. In the world,
Nakula was unmatched in his beauty. Yet, he has fallen down on the ground.” Thus addressed by Bhimasena, Yudhishthira replied, “Nakula possessed dharma in his soul and was supreme among all the intelligent ones. However,
he held a view, like Diti’s offspring,13 that there was no one who was his equal in beauty. In his mind, he thought
that there was no one who was superior to him. O Vrikodara! Understand. This is the reason why Nakula has fallen
down. O brave one! Anything ordained for a person is bound to happen.” On seeing that they had fallen down,
Pandava, the one with the white horses and the scorcher of enemies,14 was tormented by grief and also fell down.
That tiger among men possessed Shakra’s energy. On seeing that the invincible one had fallen down and was about
to die, Bhima spoke to the king. “I cannot remember any falsehood that this great-souled one has wilfully uttered.
What is the transgression, as a result of which, he has fallen down on the ground?” Yudhishthira replied, “Arjuna
always said that he would burn down the enemy in a single day. Though he was proud of his valour, he wasn’t able
to accomplish that. That is the reason he has fallen down. Phalguna disrespected all the other wielders of the bow.
Those who desire their own prosperity must always act as they have spoken.” Having said this, the king proceeded.
Bhima fell down. Having fallen down, Bhima addressed Dharmaraja Yudhishthira. “O king! Look towards me. I
am loved by you and I have fallen down. What is the reason I have fallen down? If you know, tell me.” Yudhishthira replied, “You ate too much and you boasted about your vigour. O Partha! You disrespected others. That is the
reason you have fallen down on the ground.” Having said this, without looking back, the mighty-armed one proceeded. The single dog followed him and I have spoken about it to you many times.’15

Chapter 1990(3)
said, ‘Shakra arrived before Partha on a chariot, making all of heaven and earth echo with the
V aishampayana
roar, and asked him to ascend. On seeing that his brothers had fallen down, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was overcome by grief and spoke these words to the one with the one thousand eyes. “My brothers have fallen down here.
Let them come with me. O lord of the gods! Without my brothers, I do not desire to go to heaven. O Purandara!
The princess was delicate and deserved happiness. Let her come with us. You should grant us this permission.”
‘Indra replied, “You will see your brothers and sons, together with Krishna and all the others. They have gone to
heaven, ahead of you. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Do not grieve. O bull among the Bharata lineage! They
have cast aside their human bodies and have gone there. However, there is no doubt that you will go to heaven in
this body.”
‘Yudhishthira said, “O lord of the past and the present! This dog has always been devoted to me. He should go
with me. Because of compassion, that is my view.”
‘Indra replied, “O king! You will now obtain immortality, prosperity like mine, all kinds of great fame and the
happiness of heaven. Abandon the dog. There is no lack of compassion in this.”
‘Yudhishthira said, “O one with one thousand eyes! How can a person who is noble perform an ignoble act? O
noble one! That is exceedingly difﬁcult to do. I do not want a prosperity that comes about by abandoning those
who are devoted to me.”
‘Indra replied, “For those with dogs, there is no place in the world of heaven. Krodhavasha takes away their
beneﬁcial and good deeds.16 O Dharmaraja! You should think about this. Abandon this dog. There is no lack of
compassion in this.”
‘Yudhishthira said, “It is said that there is great sin in abandoning one who is devoted. In this world, this is equal
to the killing of a brahmana. O great Indra! Ever since I have been born, I have patiently done that. Therefore, for
the sake of my own happiness, how can I act in a contrary way now?”
‘Indra replied, “If gifts laid out for a sacriﬁce, or oblations poured into it, are seen by a dog, Krodhavasha takes
the beneﬁts away. Therefore, you should abandon this dog. If you abandon this dog, you will obtain the world of
the gods. O brave one! Having abandoned your brothers and your beloved Krishna, you will obtain that world
through your deeds. When you have given all of them up, why are you not ready to abandon the dog? Why are you
confused?”
‘Yudhishthira said, “In the world of mortals, there is no friendship or enmity with those who are dead. I am incapable of reviving them. That is the reason I abandoned those who are no longer alive. O Shakra! It is my view that
surrendering someone who was sought sanctuary, killing a woman, stealing the possessions of a brahmana and enmity towards a friend—these four are equal to the sin of abandoning someone who is devoted.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Hearing Dharmaraja’s words, the illustrious one, who was in the form of Dharma, was
pleased.17 He gently spoke these words, which were full of praise, to Yudhishthira, Indra among men. “O Indra
among kings! You have been born in a noble lineage. You follow your father’s conduct and possess intelligence. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! You possess compassion towards all beings. O son! On an earlier occasion, I
had tested you in Dvaitavana.18 Desiring to fetch some water, your valiant brothers were slain. Forgetting about
your brothers Bhima and Arjuna and showing equality between your mothers,19 you desired that Nakula should be
brought back to life. Now, instead of giving up the devoted dog, you have decided to forsake the chariot of the
gods. O lord of men! Therefore, there is no one in heaven who is your equal. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Therefore, in your own body, you will obtain the eternal worlds. O best among the Bharata lineage! You will obtain a divine and supreme objective.” Dharma, Shakra, the Maruts, the Ashvins, the gods and the devarshis made
Pandava ascend the chariot. The siddhas, who could roam around at will, left on their own celestial vehicles. They
were sacred and radiant, auspicious in words, intelligence and deeds. The king, the extender of the Kuru lineage,
climbed onto the chariot, which ascended swiftly, covering heaven and earth with its energy.
‘Narada was great in austerities and knew about all the worlds. He was great with words. From amidst those
gods, he spoke these words. “There are rajarshis who have assembled here. However, the king of the Kurus has
surpassed all their deeds with his own. He has enveloped the worlds with his fame, energy, conduct and prosperity

and has gone there in his own body. We have not heard of anyone other than Pandava who has accomplished that.”
Hearing Narada’s words, the king, with dharma in his soul, spoke these words, after honouring the gods and the
kings who were alongside. “My brothers have obtained a good state or a bad one. Those are the worlds that I also
wish to go to.” Hearing these words, Purandara, king of the gods, was ﬁlled with compassion and replied to Yudhishthira. “O Indra among kings! Dwell in this place. You have conquered it through your auspicious deeds. Why
are you attached to human affection still? You have obtained supreme success and no other man has obtained it. O
descendant of the Kuru lineage! Your brothers are incapable of obtaining that region. O lord of men! You are still
touched by human sentiments. Behold heaven and the abodes of the gods, frequented by devarshis and siddhas.”
Yet again, Yudhishthira spoke these words to the lord who was the Indra of the gods. “O slayer of daityas! Without
them, I am not interested in anything. I wish to go to the place where my brothers have gone. I wish to go where
Droupadi, best among women and my beloved, is. She possessed the qualities of spirit and intelligence. She was
buxom and dark.”’
This ends Maha-Prasthanika Parva.

