Section One
Anukramanika Parva
This parva has 210 shlokas and only one chapter. It was clearly a later addition and sets out the background for the recital of the story and
summarizes the main incidents, not once, but twice.
1

‘Jaya’1 must be recited after having bowed in obeisance before Narayana and also Nara,2 the supreme human being, and also the goddess Sarasvati.
The great sages, performers of difﬁcult austerities, were present at the twelve-year sacriﬁce of Kulapati3
Shounaka and were comfortably seated in Naimisharanya.4 Ugrashrava, the son of Lomaharshana and the son of a
suta,5 learned in the Puranas,6 and also known as Souti, once approached them, bowing in humility.
When he reached the hermitage of Naimisharanya, the hermits who were the inhabitants, surrounded him, wishing to hear his wonderful stories.
Having been respectfully welcomed by those sages, he folded his palms before all those sages and asked them
how their ascetic pursuits were progressing.
When all the sages had taken their seats again, Lomaharshana’s son respectfully took the seat earmarked for
him.
On seeing that he was comfortably seated and noticing that he was rested from his fatigue, one of the sages began the conversation and said: ‘O lotus-eyed! O Souti! I am asking you. Tell me the details of where you have
come from. Also, where have you spent the time?’
Souti said: ‘The great-souled royal sage and lord of earth, Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit,7 organized a snakesacriﬁce. There, in his presence, Vaishampayana recited properly the wonderful and sacred stories composed by
Krishna Dvaipayana.8 After listening to those diverse stories of the Mahabharata, I wandered among several
places of pilgrimage and sacred waters. I ﬁnally came to the sacred place known as Samantapanchaka, venerated
by the twice-born. This is the land where, a long time ago, a war was fought between the Kurus and the Pandavas,
and also all the kings of the earth. After that, anxious to see you, I have come before you. O revered sages! You
shine like the ﬁre of the sun in this sacred place of sacriﬁce. In my view, you are like Brahma to me, you who are
pure through having performed sacred rites and meditation and you who maintain the ﬁre of sacriﬁce. O you who
are twice-born! 9 You are beyond all cares. What shall I say? Shall I state the sacred stories of the Puranas, the
source of dharma and artha? Shall I speak of the history of kings among men and sages and great souls?’
The sages replied: ‘Tell us that ancient story that was told by the supreme sage Dvaipayana, that which was worshipped by the gods and the brahmarshis10 when they heard it—and that which is full of wonderful words and divisions and is the supreme of narratives, with subtle meanings and logic, adorned with the essence of the Vedas.11
That sacred history of the Bharatas is beautiful in language and meaning, and includes all other works. All the
shastras12 add to it and that sacred composition of great Vyasa has been added to the four Vedas. We wish to hear
that holy collection, that drives away fear of sin, just as it was recited at King Janamejaya’s sacriﬁce by
Vaishampayana.’

Souti said: ‘I bow to the original being Ishana,13 adored by all and to whom all offerings are made. He is truth
and without decay, the manifested and un-manifested brahman, eternal. He is both existing and non-existing. He is
the existing universe, but is distinct from the existing and the non-existing. I bow before Hari, the lord of all that
moves and does not move, the lord of the senses. I bow before the pure and sinless Vishnu, worthy of worship, and
he who is good and goodness.
‘I will describe to you the holy thoughts of that great sage who is venerated in the entire world, Vyasa, the performer of wonderful deeds. Some poets have already sung this story before. Other poets are teaching this history
now. In the future, still others will certainly do this on earth. Throughout the three worlds, this is a great storehouse
of knowledge. Those who are twice-born, possess it in its details and compound forms. It is embellished with elegant words and usage human and divine. It is adorned with myriad metres and loved by the learned.
‘When this universe was without brightness and without light and everything was enveloped in darkness on all
sides, the great egg came into being. This was the inexhaustible seed of all creatures and was created at the beginning of all the eras. It is said that in this divine cause existed the eternal brahman,14 true and resplendent—wonderful and beyond imagination and perfectly balanced everywhere. This was the subtle un-manifested cause. It was
that which exists and that which does not. From this was born the one and only Lord Prajapati, known as Brahma,
the preceptor of the gods. He is also known as Sthanu, Manu, Ka and Parameshthin. From him was born Daksha,
the son of Prachetas, and Daksha’s seven sons, and the twenty-one prajapatis. Him whom all the sages know as the
being who cannot be fathomed was also born, as were the vishvadevas, the adityas, the vasus and the ashvins. Yakshas, saddhyas,15 pishachas, guhyakas and the pitris were born and after that were born the learned, holy and superior brahmarshis. Then were born many rajarshis,16 endowed with every noble quality. The water, heaven,
earth, wind, sky and the directions, the years, seasons, months, fortnight, day and night, followed in succession.
The world witnessed everything else that came forth. When the world is immersed in the decay of the era, everything that can be seen, movable and immovable, is again brought together. As the season changes, signs of the season can be seen. Like that, at the beginning of another era, everything is produced again. Without beginning and
without end, the wheel of existence rolls on eternally in this world, causing creation and destruction, without beginning and without end.
‘To give a brief example of creation, there are 33,333 gods. The sons of the divine Vivasvat were Brihadbhanu,
Chakshus, Atma, Vibhavasu, Savita, Richika, Arka, Bhanu, Ashavaha and Ravi. Of these sons, Mahya was the
youngest and his son was Devabhrata, also known as Subhraja. Subhraja had three famous sons, named Dashajyoti, Shatajyoti and Sahasrajyoti, and each of them gave birth to many offspring. The great Dashajyoti had ten thousand sons. The self-possessed Shatajyoti had ten times that number and Sahasrajyoti had ten times the number of
offspring Shatajyoti had. From them were descended the line of the Kurus, the Yadus and the Bharatas, the lines of
Yayati, Ikshvaku and all the rajarshis. Many other lineages and diverse living beings were created and their various
places of residence.
‘The three mysteries of knowledge—the Vedas, yoga17 and vijnana18—were created, as were dharma, artha
and kama. The sage saw the various shastras, interspersed with dharma, artha and kama, and the rules of conduct
for the world. He saw the ancient histories and all their commentaries and the shruti19 texts too. This book has the
signs of all those, everything is here. Having distilled this great knowledge, the sage made a summary of all that, in
both abridged and detailed forms, as a storehouse of knowledge for the retention of the wise of this world. Some
read Bharata from the story of Manu, others from the story of Astika, still others from the story of Uparichara.
Some Brahmanas read the entire text. Learned men display their knowledge of the samhitas20 by commenting on
this collection. Some are skilled in explaining it, others in remembering it.
‘After penance and austerities, after having classiﬁed the eternal Vedas, Satyavati’s son composed this holy history. This learned brahmarshi, the son of Parashara, followed pure vows. Requested by his mother and at the request of the wise son of Ganga,21 Krishna Dvaipayana lawfully became the father of three sons in Vichitravirya’s
ﬁeld.22 These three Kouravas were like three ﬁres. After thus giving birth to Dhritarashtra, Pandu and Vidura, he
returned to his hermitage to pursue the wise path of austerities. Until these sons were born, grew up and passed on

to the supreme journey,23 the great sage did not reveal Bharata to the world of men. When he was requested by
Janamejaya and thousands of Brahmanas, he taught it to his disciple Vaishampayana, seated in his presence. Seated
with his compatriots, it was he (Vaishampayana) who recited Bharata at intervals during the sacriﬁce, being repeatedly asked to continue when he stopped. Vyasa has described in detail the great lineage of the Kurus, the virtues of
Gandhari, the wisdom of Vidura and the constancy of Kunti. The blessed sage has also described the greatness of
Vasudeva,24 the truthfulness of the Pandavas and the evil conduct of the sons of Dhritarashtra. Without minor narratives, Vyasa originally composed Bharata in 24,000 twenty verses. The learned know this as the real Bharata.
Later, he composed a summary in 150 verses, with an index of the chapters, contents and events. Dvaipayana ﬁrst
taught this index to his son Shuka and then to other disciples who had the same qualities. Narada recited it to the
gods, Asita-Devala25 to the ancestors and Shuka to the gandharvas,26 yakshas and rakshasas.
‘Duryodhana is a great tree created out of passion, Karna is its trunk, Shakuni is its branches, Duhshashana is
the plentiful fruit and ﬂowers and the mindless Dhritarashtra is its root. Yudhishthira is a great tree created out of
righteousness, Arjuna is its trunk, Bhima is its branches, the two sons of Madri27 are its plentiful fruit and ﬂowers,
and Krishna, Brahma and the Brahmanas are the root.
‘After having conquered many countries with war and valour, Pandu retired to the forest with the sages, because
he was fond of hunting. When out hunting, he brought great misfortune on himself by killing a stag when it was
with its mate. Since their birth, Pritha’s28 sons spent their lives there, according to the prescribed norms. In accordance with what is laid down in law, their two mothers29 conceived sons from Dharma, Vayu, Shakra30 and the
two gods, the Ashvins. They grew up under the care of their two mothers and in the society of holy sages, in sacred
groves and forests. Then, on their own, the sages took them to the presence of Dhritarashtra and his sons. They
were dressed as brahmacharis31 and students, with sacred tufts in their hair. The sages said, “These students of
ours are the sons of Pandu, your sons, brothers and friends.” Saying this, the sages left. On seeing the sons of Pandu who had thus been left with them, the Kouravas, the learned among the castes and the townspeople exclaimed
loudly with joy. However, some said they were not the sons of Pandu. Others said they were. Others wondered
how they could be the sons of Pandu when Pandu had died long ago. However, voices were heard from all directions saying that they were welcome nonetheless. Through great fortune, Pandu’s offspring could now be seen.
They must be welcomed. Such voices were heard everywhere. When the tumult of the people had died down, an
enormous outcry was heard from invisible beings and all the directions echoed with the sound. As Partha32 and
the others entered, there was a shower of fragrant ﬂowers and the sound of conch shells and kettledrums. It was a
great wonder. Delighted because of their love for them, the townspeople’s loud cries rose up to heaven and increased the Pandavas’ fame.
‘Without threats from anywhere, the Pandavas lived there, studying the Vedas and various other shastras. They
were respected by all the people. The townspeople were delighted with the purity of Yudhishthira, the strength of
Bhima, the valour of Arjuna, the humility of the twins and the submissiveness of Kunti to her elders. The entire
world was content with their quality of valour.
‘After a few years, in an assembly of kings where the maiden Krishna33 was to choose her own bridegroom, Arjuna performed a difﬁcult task and won her hand. From that day, he was respected by everyone in the world as a
great archer. He became like a sun in the battleﬁeld, difﬁcult to behold. He defeated all the kings and all the main
tribes. Thus, the king34 could now perform the rajasuya35 sacriﬁce. Through the wise counsel of Krishna and the
prowess of Bhima and Arjuna, Yudhishthira killed Jarasandha and the swollen-head king of Chedi36 and thus obtained the right to perform the rajasuya, rich in provisions and sacriﬁcial offerings and full of merit. Duryodhana
came to this sacriﬁce and saw on all sides the great wealth of the Pandavas—the offerings, precious stones, gold,
jewels, cattle, horses, elephants and treasure. On seeing this, his envy made him angry. He fumed when he saw the
hall of assembly, like a celestial chariot, built by Maya. Before Vasudeva, he was mocked by Bhima, who said he
was of common birth, when he got confused at the architectural deceptions.
‘It was reported to Dhritarashtra that while he was enjoying himself with various objects and valuable things, his
son had turned pale, yellow and thin. Out of affection for his son, the blind king gave him permission to play the

game of dice. When Vasudeva heard this, he became very angry. Though he wasn’t pleased, he did nothing to stop
the dispute and overlooked the fatal game and other unjust acts, as they increased in importance. In spite of Vidura,
Bhishma, Drona and Kripa, the son of Sharadvata, he made the Kshatriyas kill each other in the great war that
followed.
‘On hearing the news of the Pandava victory and knowing the vows taken by Duryodhana, Karna and Shakuni,
Dhritarashtra thought for a while and then told Sanjaya: “O Sanjaya! Listen to all that I am about to say. You will
then ﬁnd that I am not worthy of contempt. You are learned in the sacred texts, intelligent, wise and respected for
being wise. My inclinations were not for war, nor do I ﬁnd pleasure in the destruction of my lineage. I have no special afﬁnity towards my sons compared to the sons of Pandu. My own sons, following the wrong path, were upset
with me because I was old and blind. I bore all that, because of my weak state and because of my love for my sons.
I was deluded and silly and Duryodhana’s folly thrived on that. He saw the wealth and power of the sons of Pandu
at the rajasuya sacriﬁce and was mocked at his awkwardness when he ascended the hall. He couldn’t bear this, but
was incapable of defeating the Pandavas in the ﬁeld of battle. Unlike a Kshatriya and incapable of energetically
pursuing wealth, with the help of the king of Gandhara, he planned an unjust game of dice. O Souti! Listen to my
words and learn all that happened later and all that I came to know. When you hear what I say and learn, you will
know that my wise eyes have the gift of foresight.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that, in the presence of all the kings, Krishna37 was taken,
when the wonderful bow was drawn and pierced, the target fell to the ground.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Subhadra of the Madhu lineage was forcibly carried
away by Arjuna and married in Dvaraka and when the two heroes38 of the Vrishni lineage set out for Indraprastha.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Arjuna had satisﬁed Agni by giving him the Khandava
forest and when he used his divine arrows to check the downpour brought down by the king of the gods.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Yudhishthira had been defeated in the game of dice by
Soubala39 and deprived of his kingdom, though his powerful brothers were still in attendance.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Droupadi, with protectors but as if no protectors existed, was dragged to court at the time of her period, with a single garment on and with tears in her throat.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the grieving and righteous Pandava brothers left for the
forest, suffering out of love for the eldest.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that thousands of snatakas40 and great Brahmanas who
lived on alms followed Dharmaraja41 to the forest.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Arjuna had paciﬁed in combat the god of the gods, Shiva, who appeared before him in the disguise of a hunter, and obtained from him the great weapon Pashupata.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Arjuna, bound by his promise, had gone to heaven and
learnt properly from Indra the use of celestial weapons.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Bhima and the other sons of Kunti, accompanied by
Vaishravana,42 had gone to the land that is inaccessible to humans.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that my sons, spurred by Karna’s advice, had gone on a cattle-related expedition and been captured by the gandharvas, and then freed by Arjuna.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Dharma had appeared before Dharmaraja43 in the disguise of a yaksha and posed him questions that were correctly answered.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that when the great-spirited Arjuna lived in the kingdom of
Virata, my best had been destroyed by Arjuna on a single chariot.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the king of Matsya44 had with great honour bestowed
his daughter Uttara on Arjuna and he had accepted her for his son.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Yudhishthira, defeated, wealth-less, exiled, separated
from friends and relatives, had been able to raise seven akshouhinis.45

‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard Narada declare that Krishna and Arjuna were Nara and
Narayana and that he had truly seen them thus in the world of Brahma.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Krishna of the Madhu lineage, who had covered the
world with one foot,46 had been engaged on the side of the Pandavas.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Karna and Duryodhana had plotted to revile
Keshava,47 but he had shown himself in many forms.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Pritha48 had been consoled by Keshava, when she had
stood in front of his chariot, weeping in sorrow at his departure.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Vasudeva had become their advisor and Shantanu’s son
Bhishma and Bharadvaja49 had pronounced blessings on them.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Karna had told Bhishma that he wouldn’t ﬁght if Bhishma fought, and saying this, had gone away.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Vasudeva, Arjuna and the immeasurable Gandiva bow
had come together, a threesome of fearful energy.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Arjuna, overcome by lassitude, had sunk down on his
chariot, and Krishna had shown him all the worlds within his own body.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Bhishma, the great destroyer of enemies, was killing
tens of thousands50 of charioteers every day, but had not killed a single warrior of note.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Arjuna, having placed Shikhandi in front of him, had
vanquished the inﬁnitely courageous Bhishma, unconquered in many battles.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the old warrior Bhishma, after killing the somaka51
warriors until only a few remained, was lying on a bed of arrows, wounded by an arrow with a multicoloured
feathered tip.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Shantanu’s son Bhishma was lying there and was thirsty
and Arjuna pierced the ground to slake his thirst.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Shukra52 and Surya53 united to bring victory to the
sons of Kunti and ﬁerce beasts of prey were always around us.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Drona displayed the paths of many weapons in the
course of battle, but failed to kill a single one of the chief Pandavas.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the great warriors,54 the sanshaptakas,55 who had been
placed so as to kill Arjuna, were all killed by him.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Subhadra’s brave son56 had single-handedly penetrated
our secret battle formation, impenetrable to others and guarded by the well-armed son of Bharadvaja57 himself.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that all our great warriors, unable to defeat Arjuna, combined to surround and kill the boy Abhimanyu and then rejoiced.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the mindless warriors of Dhritarashtra cheered with delight at killing Abhimanyu and the furious Arjuna took his vow about the king of Sindhu.58
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Arjuna had taken a vow to kill the king of Sindhu and
kept his vow in the midst of all his enemies.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that on ﬁnding the horses of Dhananjaya59 exhausted, Vasudeva unyoked them in the ﬁeld of battle, gave them water to drink and then re-yoking them, drove on.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Arjuna, on his chariot, fended off all warriors with his
Gandiva bow, when the horses that drew his chariot were indisposed.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Yuyudhana60 of the Vrishni race threw Drona’s army
into disorder with the strength of his unassailable elephant and returned to where Krishna and Partha61 were.

‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Karna, with Bhima in his power, spared his life with
some abusive words and dragged the warrior with the tip of his bow.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Drona, Kritavarma, Kripacharya, Karna, Drona’s son62
and the brave king of Madra63 allowed the king of Sindhu64 to be killed in their presence.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the celestial spear, given by the king of the gods,65 was
diverted by Madhava,66 to the demon Ghatotkacha, of terrible form.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that in the ﬁght between Karna and Ghatotkacha, the spear
that would have killed Savyasachi67 in battle, was unleashed by the son of the charioteer.68
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Dhrishtadyumna, violating all norms of what was right,
killed Drona, while he was alone on his chariot, insensate and bent on dying.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Nakula, the son of Madri, engaged the son of Drona69
in a chariot duel before all the people and proved himself to be equal in war.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that after Drona’s death, Drona’s son misused the celestial
weapon narayana, but failed to kill the Pandavas.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the exceedingly brave Karna, unconquerable in war,
was killed by Arjuna in a fraternal war that was beyond comprehension even to the gods.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the son of Drona,70 the brave warrior Duhshasana and
the fearsome Kritavarma failed to defeat Dharmaraja Yudhishthira.
‘“O Sanjaya! O Bard! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Yudhishthira killed the king of Madra,71 who
always taunted Krishna in battle.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that evil Soubala,72 the cause of the game of dice and the
quarrel, though armed by magic, was killed in battle by the Pandava Sahadeva.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Duryodhana, weakened in strength, without a chariot,
fatigued, and with his pride broken, went to a pond and lay down in its waters.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the Pandavas, accompanied by Vasudeva, stood at that
pond of the Ganga and addressed my quarrelsome son with contempt.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that, in the battle of the clubs, despite displaying various
marvellous circuits,73 he was unjustly killed through the advice of Vasudeva.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the son of Drona74 and others committed a horrible and
infamous act by killing the Panchalas75 and the sons of Droupadi while they slept.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that, pursued by Bhimasena and angered, Ashvatthama discharged the greatest of weapons named aishika, which killed the unborn in the womb.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the weapon brahmashira, was discharged by Ashvatthama and repelled with another weapon by Arjuna, which he then paciﬁed, but Ashvatthama had to surrender
the jewel on his head.
‘“O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the son of Drona76 killed the unborn in the womb of
the daughter of Virata77 through a great weapon, and that the son of Drona was cursed jointly by Dvaipayana and
Keshava.
‘“Alas! Woe to Gandhari who has lost her sons, grandsons, friends, fathers, brothers and relatives. The Pandavas
have accomplished a difﬁcult feat. They have again gained a kingdom without a rival.
‘“Alas! I have heard that only ten people have survived this difﬁcult war, three on our side and seven on the side
of the Pandavas. In that fearful war of Kshatriyas, eighteen armies78 have been slain. I see extended and extreme
darkness all around me. Delusion overcomes me. O Suta! Consciousness is leaving me, my mind is delirious.”’
Souti said, ‘Having uttered these words in greatest sorrow and lamented his fate, Dhritarashtra became unconscious. On recovering, he addressed Sanjaya in these words.

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! Since this has happened, I wish to give up my life immediately. I see not consolation nor proﬁt in being alive any longer.”’
Souti said, ‘Then the wise son of Gavalgana79 addressed these words full of meaning to that wretched and
lamenting king of the earth.
‘Sanjaya said, “From wise Narada and Dvaipayana you have heard of many kings, those who had great enterprise and great strength. They were born in great royal dynasties and possessed great virtues. They knew the use of
celestial weapons and were equal to Shakra80 in energy. Having conquered the earth with righteous conduct and
performed sacriﬁces with appropriate offerings, they obtained fame in this world and then succumbed to the forces
of time. Such men were the great warrior Vainya, the brave Srinjaya who won through blessings, Suhotra, Rantideva, Kakshivanta, Oushija, Balhika, Damana, Shaivya, Sharyati, Ajita, Jita, Vishvamitra, the slayer of enemies and
Ambarisha, of great strength, Marutta, Manu, Ikshvaku, Gaya, Bharata, Rama, the son of Dasharatha,
Shashabindu, Bhagiratha and Yayati of good deeds, to whom the gods themselves sacriﬁced and who has left the
habitable and inhabitable regions of the earth adorned with sacriﬁcial sheds and stakes. In ancient times, when
Shaivya was afﬂicted with the loss of his son, these were the twenty-four kings whose acts were cited by the royal
sage Narada. But there were other kings who came and went before, with more power, great warriors, great souls
and blessed with all the good qualities. They were Puru, Kuru, Yadu, Shura, Vishvagashva of great endurance,
Anena, Yuvanashva, Kakutstha, the brave Raghu, the invincible Vitihotra, Bhava, Shveta, Brihadguru, Ushinara,
Shataratha, Kanka, Duliduha, Druma, Dambhodbhava, Para, Vena, Sagara, Sankriti, Nimi, Ajeya, Parashu, Pundra,
Shambhu, the pure Devavridha, Devahavya, Supratima, Supratika, Brihadratha, Mahotsaha, Vinitatma, Nala of the
nishadas,81 Satyavrata, Shantabhaya, Sumitra, the lord Subala, Janujangha, Anaranya, Arka, Priyabhritya, Shubhavrata, Balabandu, Niramarda, Ketushringa, Brihadbala, Dhrishtaketu, Brihatketu, Diptaketu, Niramaya, Avikshita, Prabala, Dhurta, Kritabandhu, Dridheshudhi, Mahapurana, Sambhavya, Pratyanga, Parahan and Shruti. These
kings and hundreds of others, as many as lotuses, have been heard of. Giving up immense wealth and pleasure,
these great, powerful and wise kings attained death, as did your sons. Even those, performers of celestial deeds,
great souls who had valour, generosity, truth, purity, pity, magnanimity, faith and simplicity and whose abundance
of good qualities and riches have been described for the world in the Puranas by superior poets of great learning,
they too went to their death. Your sons were wicked, envious, greedy, driven by passion and evil. Do not mourn for
them. O Dhritarashtra! You are knowledgeable in the shastras and characterized by intelligence and wisdom. Those
whose understanding follows the norms of the shastras do not succumb to delusion. O king of men! You know the
good fortune and misfortune of fate. You know the extreme sentiments you succumbed to in protecting your sons.
You should not sorrow for that which was bound to happen. Those who are wise do not feel sorry over fate. Even
with the greatest wisdom, that which is ordained will happen. No one can transgress the path that has been laid
down. Time brings existence and non-existence, pleasure and pain. Time creates all elements and time destroys all
beings. Time burns all subjects and it is time that extinguishes the ﬁre. Time alone is awake when everything is
asleep. Time cannot be conquered. Time walks in all elements, pervasive and impartial. Knowing that everything,
past, present and future, is created by time, it is not appropriate that you should be consumed by grief.”’
Souti said, ‘Krishna Dvaipayana has composed a holy Upanishad. The study of Bharata is such a holy act that
even if one reads only one line of a shloka, all the reader’s sins are destroyed. Here are lauded the performers of
pure deeds, the gods, the devarshis, the immaculate brahmarshis, the yakshas and the great nagas. The eternal Lord
Vasudeva has been lauded here. It is he who is truth, immortality, purity and holy. In it is described the eternal
supreme brahman, who is the constant everlasting light and whose divine action is described by the learned. He is
the source of the existing and the non-existing, the principle of extension and withdrawal. In it has been described
the supreme spirit who assumes the attributes of the ﬁve elements82 and three qualities83 and to whom words like
un-manifest cannot be applied. And also those who are free, through the powers of meditation and yoga, perceive
established in themselves like reﬂections in a mirror. He who is always faithful and always follows the path of
righteousness, such a man is freed from all sin on reading this chapter. The believer who always hears this introductory chapter of Bharata from the beginning never suffers from difﬁculties. He who repeatedly utters any part of
the introductory chapter in the morning or evening is freed from all sins accumulated during the day or night. In

the body of Bharata, this chapter is like truth and ambrosia—like butter among curds and Brahmanas among
bipeds, like the ocean is the best of the lakes and the cow is the best of the quadrupeds. Just as these are the best,
so it is said is Bharata. He who makes a Brahmana listen to one verse of a shloka at a funeral ceremony, his offerings of food and drink to his ancestors become inexhaustible. The Vedas should be supported with itihasa84 and
the Puranas. But the Vedas are afraid of those with little learning,85 lest that knowledge be hurt. However, if a
learned man recites this Veda of Krishna’s,86 he will gain. Without a doubt, the sin of killing an embryo is also destroyed. I think that a pure man who has read this chapter reverently at every change of the moon has read the entire Bharata. The man who reverently listens every day to these sacred verses, it is said he attains a long life, fame
and goes to heaven. In ancient times, the gods and the sages came together and on one side of a scale, they placed
the four Vedas, with Bharata on the other side. In greatness and in weight, Bharata was heavier. Because of its superiority in substance and content, it came to be known as Mahabharata and he who knows this true meaning is
freed from all sins. Asceticism is not a sin, studying is not a sin, the natural rules of the Vedas are not sins and exertion to acquire wealth is not a sin. These become sins when they are abused.’

Section Two
Parvasamgraha Parva
This parva has 243 shlokas and one chapter. It too was clearly a later addition. It gives two listings of the Mahabharata in the eighteen-parva
and the 100-parva classiﬁcations. There is also a very brief summary of the highlights of the story.
2

The sages said, ‘O son of a suta! We wish to hear from you all about the place Samantapanchaka,1 described as it
really is.’
Souti said, ‘O Brahmanas! As per your wishes, listen to the blessed words about Samantapanchaka as I tell
them. For listening to these accounts, you are the best of men. At the juncture of treta and dvapara,2 angered at
sins committed, the greatest of those who ever bore arms, Rama,3 repeatedly decimated the world of all Kshatriyas. Having destroyed all Kshatriyas through his own prowess, lustrous like ﬁre, he created ﬁve lakes of blood in
Samantapanchaka. We have heard that, beyond his senses with anger, he stood in the bloody waters of those lakes
and rendered bloody offerings to his ancestors. Then Richika4 and his other ancestors appeared before this bull
among Brahmanas and said, “Calm down, refrain, be paciﬁed.” From that day, the region in the neighbourhood of
those ﬁve bloody lakes has become famous as the holy land of Samantapanchaka. The wise men have said that
every place should have a name that signiﬁes something that made the place famous. At the end of dvapara and the
beginning of kali, a great battle was fought between the armies of the Kurus and the Pandavas at this holy Samantapanchaka. In that holy land, free from any bad qualities of the earth, eighteen akshouhinis of soldiers eagerly assembled for battle. O Brahmanas! Thus it was that the name of the region came about. I have described to you that
beautiful and holy place. O best of Brahmanas! I have told you everything about this place, a region famous in the
three worlds.’
The sages said, ‘O son of a suta! We wish to hear everything about the akshouhini that you mentioned to us. You
know everything. Tell us exactly the size of an akshouhini, with foot soldiers, horses, chariots and elephants.’
Souti said, ‘One chariot, one elephant, ﬁve foot soldiers and three horses make up a patti. Three pattis are
known as a senamukha and three senamukhas make up a gulma. Three gulmas are named a gana and three ganas a
vahini. The wise know that three vahinis collectively form a pritana. Three pritanas make a chamu, three chamus
an anikini and the wise say that ten times an anikini is known as an akshouhini. O best of Brahmanas! Those who
know arithmetic have calculated that there are 21,870 chariots in an akshouhini and the number of elephants is the
same. Know that the number of foot soldiers is 109,350 and the number of horses is 65,610. O best of Brahmanas!
I have described to you in detail that which those who are familiar with numbers call an akshouhini. O best of
Brahmanas! The eighteen akshouhinis of the Kurus and the Pandavas were made up according to these numbers
and the cause destroyed them all. Time brought them together in this region and making the Kouravas the cause,
destroyed them all. Bhishma, skilled in the best weapons, fought for ten days. Drona defended the Kuru army for
ﬁve days. Karna, the decimator of enemy soldiers, fought for two days, Shalya for half a day and the duel of the
clubs for also that duration. At the end of that day, the son of Drona,5 Hardikya6 and Goutama7 killed Yudhishthira’s soldiers when they were sleeping unsuspectingly. I will tell you in detail the story that was narrated at the sacriﬁce of Shounaka, the Bharata story, beginning with the story of Poulama, which contains wonderful meanings,

verses and accounts and is adorned in many ways. It is accepted by the wise the way men who desire ﬁnal release
accept renunciation, as the atman8 is among objects to be known and life among things that are dear. It is the chief
among all histories and the best among all sacred texts. This supreme of histories incorporates the supreme of intelligence and vowels, consonants and words, vulgate and learned. Hear the outline of different parvas of Bharata
history, with subtle meanings and wondrous lines.
‘The ﬁrst is called Anukramanika (1);9 the second Parvasangraha (2); then come Poushya (3), Poulama (4),
Astika (5) and the descent of the ﬁrst generation (6); then come the parvas composed by the gods—Sambhava (7),
Jatugriha Daha (8),10 Hidimba (9); then Baka Vadha11 (10) and then Chaitraratha (11); then the parva known as
svayamvara of the divine Panchali (12);12 then, after defeating rivals in accordance with the dharma of Kshatriyas
(13), Vaivahika (14),13 Viduragamana14 and Rajya-labha (15);15 then Arjuna Vanavasa (16),16 Subhadra Harana
(17)17 and Harana Harika (18); then Khandava Daha (19),18 where Maya is met; after that, it is known as Sabha
Parva (20)19 and after that, Mantra Parva (21);20 then Jarasandha Vadha (22)21 and Digvijaya (23)22 and after
that comes the parva known as Rajasuya (24);23 then Arghabhirana (25),24 Shishupala Vadha (26)25 and then
Dyuta (27);26 and then known as the Anudyuta (28);27 then the parva known as Aranyaka (29)28 and Kirmira
Vadha (30);29 then the parva known as Kairata (31), which features the bout between Ishvara30 and Arjuna; then
the parva known as Indraloka Abhigamana (32);31 then the wise king of Kuru’s pilgrimage in Tirthayatra (33);
then Jatasura Vadha (34)32 and Yaksha Yuddha (35);33 and the one after that is known as Ajagara (36);34 then the
parva known as Markandeya Samasya (37);35 and then the parva that has the dialogue between Droupadi and
Satyabhama (38); then the parvas known as Ghoshayatra (39),36 Mrigasvapna (40)37and after that the story
known as the measurement of rice (41); then Droupadi Harana (42)38 by Saindhava39 from the forest; then comes
the parva known as Kundala Harana (43),40 then Araneya (44)41 and after that the parva known as Virata (45);42
then the parva known as Kichaka Vadha (46);43 then the parva known as Gograhana (47);44 then the parva that
tells of the wedding between Abhimanyu and the daughter of the king of Virata (48); the next parva is known as
Udyoga (49)45 and after that the parva is known as Sanjaya Yana (50);46 the next parva, concerning the worries of
Dhritarashtra, is known as Prajagara (51);47 then Sanatsujata Parva (52) with secret spiritual philosophy; then
Yanasandhi (53)48 and the arrival of Bhagavana (54);49 then it is known comes the quarrel of the great Karna (55)
and Niryanan Parva (56),50 where the Kuru and Pandava armies march to battle; then comes the parva that describes the numbers of warriors and chariots (57), and the arrival of the intolerance-inspiring messenger Uluka
(58); then the parva that tells the story of Amba (59); then the wonder-inspiring parva that tells of the anointment
of Bhishma (60); then comes the parva that describes the creation of Jambu (61)51and Bhumi Parva (62), which
gives an account of the expanse of the continents; then Bhagavad-gita Parva (63); then the parva describing the
killing of Bhishma (64); then the anointment of Drona (65) and then the parva with the death of the sanshaptakas
(66); then Abhimanyu Vadha (67)52 Parva; then Pratijna Parva (68);53 then Jayadratha Vadha Parva (69);54 then
Ghatotkacha Vadha Parva (70);55 then the account of the slaying of Drona (71) that makes one’s hair stand up; after that the parva that is named after the release of the narayana weapon (72); then it is known as Karna Parva
(73);56 after that it is known as Shalya Parva (74);57 then the parva that has the entering of the lake (75) and after
that Gada Yuddha Parva (76);58 then the parva that describes the river Sarasvati and places of pilgrimage and dynasties (77) and then Souptika (78);59 then the dreadful Aishika Parva (79) 60 and then Jalapradana (80);61 then
Stri Parva (81);62 then it is known as Shraddha Parva (82) 63 with funeral rites for the dead Kuru warriors; then
the coronation of the wise Dharmaraja (83); then the subjugation of Charvaka (84) who was a demon who appeared in the garb of a Brahmana; then the parva that describes the dividing up of the houses (85); then Shanti Parva (86)64 where the duties of kings are described; then the parva where duties during contingencies are described
(87); then that which describes the way to salvation (88); then Anushasana Parva (89) that describes disciplines

and the parva that describes the wise Bhishma’s ascent to heaven (90); next is Ashvamedha Parva (91) that destroys all sins and Anugita Parva (92) that concerns spiritual attainment; next come dwelling in the hermitage (93),
meeting the sons (94) and the arrival of Narada (95); then the terrible Moushala Parva (96),65 then Mahaprasthanika Parva (97),66 and then Svargarohanika Parva (98);67 then follows the Purana known as Harivamsha (99)68 that
is an appendix; and ﬁnally comes the great Bhavishya Parva (100), 69 which is also an appendix.
‘These one hundred parvas were recited in full by the great Vyasa. Later, in the Naimisha forest, Lomaharshana,
the son of a suta, recited them exactly again, having classiﬁed them into eighteen parvas. The gist of Bharata is
given there as a summary of this collection of parvas.
‘In Pousha Parva, the greatness of Utanka is described. In Poulama Parva, the extent of the lineage of Bhrigu is
described; in Astika, the birth of all the snakes and Garuda, the churning of the ocean and the birth of
Uchchaihshrava.70 Then is recounted the story of the great-souled Bharatas, as described at the snake-sacriﬁce of
King Parikshit.71 In Sambhava Parva is described the birth of various kings, Brahmanas and the sage Dvaipayana,
the partial incarnations of the gods are recounted, the births of the daityas, danavas72 and powerful yakshas, and
of nagas,73 snakes, gandharvas and birds and all the other diverse living creatures; the births of the great Vasus
from the Bhagirathi and in the house of Shantanu and their subsequent ascent to heaven and the birth of Bhishma
from their energy is described, his renunciation of the kingdom, his adoption of brahmacharya, his adherence to the
vow, his protection of Chitrangada and after Chitrangada’s death, his protection of his younger brother,74 and his
subsequent placing of Vichitravirya on the throne. The birth of Dharma among men, as a result of Animandavya’s
curse, and the births of Dhritarashtra and Pandu, thanks to Krishna Dvaipayana’s boon, and also that of the Pandavas, is described. The conspiracy of Duryodhana on the journey to Varanavata, the digging of a tunnel on Vidura’s advice and the meeting between the Pandavas and the terrible-looking Hidimba in the forest and the birth of
Ghatotkacha are next described. Then follow the disguised existence of the Pandavas in the house of the Brahmana, the killing of Vaka and the amazement of the townspeople. Then, after defeating Angaraparna on the banks
of the Ganga, Arjuna, together with his brothers, went to Panchala. Then follow the supreme accounts of Tapati,
Vasishtha and Ourva, the wondrous story of the ﬁve Indras, Drupada’s sorrow that his daughter should have ﬁve
husbands and the account of Droupadi’s divinely arranged marriage. Vidura’s arrival and meeting with Keshava,
the life in Khandavaprastha and the rule over half the kingdom and Narada’s command to Droupadi to follow separate hours, where the story of Sunda and Upasunda is told and Partha’s75 departure to the forest and his meeting
with Ulupi on the way are then described. Next there is the description of the birth of Babhruvahana, the visit to
many sacred places of pilgrimage, Arjuna’s abduction of Subhadra with Vasudeva’s permission in the chariot that
goes everywhere at the will of the rider and on the arrival of Krishna, the son of Devaki, the burning of Khandava
forest and their receiving of the chakra and the bow. The birth in Subhadra’s womb of the supreme Abhimanyu,
the saving of Maya’s life from the ﬁre and the saving of the life of the serpent and the sage Mandapala’s giving
birth to a son in the womb of a sharanga bird76—all this and other matters are found in the long Adi Parva, which
is the ﬁrst. Vyasa, of great energy, divided this into 218 chapters.77 The great one had 7984 shlokas in the text.
‘The second is known as Sabha Parva,78 with extensive accounts. It describes the building of the assembly hall
by the Pandavas and their meeting with their servants, the description of the assembly halls of the guardians of the
world by Narada who knows the celestial worlds, the beginning of the royal sacriﬁce, the killing of Jarasandha, the
freeing by Krishna of the kings kept imprisoned in Girivraja,79 the killing of Shishupala at the royal sacriﬁce when
there was a dispute about offerings, Duryodhana’s misery and jealousy at the magniﬁcence of the sacriﬁce, Bhima’s taunting of Duryodhana in the assembly hall, as a consequence of which he plotted a game of dice in which
the crafty Shakuni defeated the son of Dharma,80 Droupadi’s immersion and deliverance like a boat in the ocean
of gambling, after which, witnessing the deliverance, King Duryodhana challenged the Pandavas to another game
of dice. The sage named all this Sabha Parva, with seventy-two chapters and 2511 shlokas.
‘The great Aranyaka Parva,81 the third parva, follows. The wise son of Dharma is followed by the townspeople.
All the Vrishnis and Panchalas arrive, the slaying of Soubha and Kirmira is described and Arjuna’s, whose energy

was boundless, wanderings in search of weapons, his duel with Mahadeva who was in the form of a hunter, his ascent to heaven and his sighting of the guardians of the world. Also described is the grieving Yudhishthira, who was
tormented over his vices, meeting with the great sage Brihadashva who had knowledge of the atman, the righteous
but pitiful tale of Nala is there, the equanimity of Damayanti and Nala’s succumbing to vice, the bringing of the
news of Arjuna being in heaven by Lomasha to the great-souled Pandavas who were then forest-dwellers. Then
follows the pilgrimages of the great-souled Pandavas, the slaying of Jatasura, Bhimasena’s journey to Gandhamadana at Droupadi’s request, where he transgressed a lotus pond in search of a mandara ﬂower82 and had a
great ﬁght with the rakshasas and yakshas led by Manimana. There is the story of Agastya and his swallowing of
Vatapi and his sleeping with Lopamudra to beget a son, then the account of the hawk and the pigeon, where Indra,
Agni and Dharma test King Shibi, the description of Rishyashringa who was celibate from boyhood and the description of Rama, son of Jamadagni, of unbounded energy, where the slaying of Kartyavirya and the Haihayas is
told.83 There is the story of Sukanya, where sage Chyavana of the Bhargava clan allowed the Ashvins to drink
soma84 at Sharyati’s sacriﬁce and obtained everlasting youth as a result. There is the account of Jantu, where King
Somaka sacriﬁced his son to obtain more sons and obtained one hundred sons, the story of Ashtavakra, where the
sage defeated Bandin in a debate and won back his father who had been immersed in the ocean. Having obtained
divine weapons for his elder brother, Savyasachi85 battled the Nivatakavachas of Hiranyapura. Partha86 then returned to his brothers in Gandhamadana. In the cattle expedition, Kiriti87 fought a battle with the gandharvas. The
Pandavas then returned to the lake named Dvaityavana, Droupadi was abducted from the hermitage by Jayadratha
and Bhima, whose speed equalled that of the wind, pursued him. Then there is the meeting with Markandeya and
several stories, Krishna’s meeting and conversation with Satya, the story of the measure of rice and that of Indradyumna and the accounts of Savitri, Ouddalaka and Vainya, the story of the Ramayana recounted at great
length, the theft of Karna’s earrings by Purandara,88 the account of the wood kindlings where Dharma teaches his
son and where the Pandavas, after obtaining a boon, leave for the west. This is known as Aranyaka Parva, the third
parva, where the great sage had 269 chapters89 and 11,664 shlokas.
‘Then occurs the extensive Virata Parva. It describes how the Pandavas arrived at the city of Virata, saw a large
shami tree90 in a cremation ground and hid their weapons in it. Then is described their entry into the city and their
living there in disguise and the slaying of the evil Kichaka by Vrikodara.91 The Kouravas were defeated by Arjuna
when the cattle were stolen and Virata’s bovine wealth was freed by the Pandavas. Virata gave his daughter Uttara
to Kiriti92 for Abhimanyu, the son of Subhadra and the slayer of enemies. I have described the contents of the
fourth large Virata Parva. The great sage composed this parva in sixty-seven chapters and 2050 shlokas.
‘After that, listen to the contents of the ﬁfth Udyoga Parva. When the Pandavas were dwelling in Upaplavya,
both Duryodhana and Arjuna, desirous of battle, went to Vasudeva and sought his help. Then the extremely wise
Krishna said, “O bulls among men! On one side, there is an akshouhini of my soldiers and, on the other, I as a noncombatant counsellor. Which shall I give you?” Not realizing his interests, the foolish Duryodhana asked for the
soldiers and Arjuna asked for Krishna as a non-combatant counsellor. Then the mighty king Dhritarashtra sent
Sanjaya as a messenger to the Pandavas to ask for peace. Hearing that the Pandavas had Vasudeva in front of them,
Dhritarashtra suffered from insomnia and worry and Vidura’s many and diverse words of advice to the wise king
Dhritarashtra are described and the supreme spiritual doctrine of Sanatsujata told to the sorrowing and anguished
king. Next morning, in front of the king, in court, Sanjaya spoke of the union between Vasudeva and Arjuna. It was
then that the great Krishna, moved by pity and desirous of bringing peace, himself went to Hastinapura to ﬁnd
peace and Krishna’s proposal for peace was rebuffed by King Duryodhana, though this was in the interest of both
parties. Then, hearing the evil counsel of Karna, Duryodhana and others, Krishna displayed to the kings his powers
of yoga. Then, Krishna took Karna on his chariot and gave him good advice about options, but intoxicated with
arrogance, Karna refused. Then follows the marching out of Hastinapura of chariots, horses, infantry and elephants
and the recounting of their numbers. On the day before the great battle, the prince93 sent the cruel-tongued Uluka
as a messenger to the Pandavas. Then is related the numbers of charioteers and great charioteers and the story of

Amba. These are the many accounts in the ﬁfth parva of Bharata, titled Udyoga Parva and with incidents of war
and peace. The great sage Vyasa, of vast wisdom, composed this in 186 chapters94 and 6696 shlokas.
‘Then is told the wonderful Bhishma Parva, where Sanjaya recounted the creation of the region known as Jambu. Thereafter is narrated the ﬁerce and terrible battle that raged for ten days and the depression of Yudhishthira’s
army. The supremely wise Vasudeva dispelled there95 Partha’s96 lassitude born out of delusion, by invoking the
teachings of salvation. Also is narrated how the great archer Partha placed Shikhandi in front of him in the war and
wounded Bhishma with his sharp arrows and felled him from the chariot. This sixth great parva of the Bharata is
Bhishma Parva and was composed by Vyasa, learned in the Vedas, in 117 chapters and 5884 shlokas.
‘Then follows the wonderful Drona Parva with many accounts, where Partha had to retreat before the sanshaptakas in battle and Kiriti97 vanquished King Bhagadatta, equal to Shakra in war, and his elephant Supratika. There
is described the slaying, by many great warriors led by Jayadratha, of the brave Abhimanyu, still a boy and not yet
a major. Angered at Abhimanyu’s death, Partha killed King Jayadratha and seven akshouhinis of soldiers in battle
and killed in war the remaining sanshaptakas. In Drona Parva is recounted the deaths of brave Alambusha, Shrutayus, Jalasandha, Soumadatti,98 Virata, the great warrior Drupada and Ghatotkacha and others. When Drona was
downed in battle, unforgiving, Ashvatthama unleashed the awful narayana weapon. This is the detailed seventh
parva of Bharata, Drona Parva, where many rulers of the world met their death, warriors and bulls among men
mentioned earlier. The sage, the son of Parashara99 and master of great knowledge, composed this in 170
chapters100 and 8909 shlokas.
‘Thereafter follows the most wonderful Karna Parva, where the appointment of the wise king of Madra101 as
charioteer is described. The old story of the destruction of Tripura is recounted. Then is narrated, at the time of
marching out, the strong words exchanged between Karna and Shalya and the account of the swan and the crow,
with an insulting moral. There is described the anger of Yudhishthira and Kiriti towards each other and Partha’s
slaying of the great warrior Karna in a duel of chariots. Those who know the Bharata call this parva the eighth parva. Karna Parva has sixty-nine chapters and 4900 shlokas.
‘The next parva is the wonderful Shalya Parva. After the deaths of the chief warriors, the king of Madra became
the commander of the army. In different parts of Shalya Parva is described the deaths of the chief warriors of the
Kuru army in circular chariot duels, Shalya’s death at the hands of the great-souled Dharmaraja, the furious battle
of the clubs is described here and the holy pilgrimage of the Sarasvati River. This wonderful parva with diverse
meanings is known by those good at numbers as one with ﬁfty-nine chapters102 and 3220 shlokas, composed by
the great sage who wished to spread the fame of the Kuru lineage.
‘I shall now describe to you the terrible Souptika Parva. Once the sons of Pritha103 had withdrawn, the warriors
Kritavarma, Kripa and the son of Drona104 came to the ﬁeld of battle in the evening and saw the intolerant King
Duryodhana lying on the ground, his thighs broken and his body covered with blood. Firm in his anger, the great
warrior, the son of Drona, vowed that he would not take off his armour without killing all the Panchalas led by
Dhrishtadyumna and the Pandavas and their allies. Protected by Krishna’s strength, the ﬁve sons of Pritha and
Satyaki,105 the great wielder of the bow, escaped. Everyone else died. Those bulls among men, led by the son of
Drona, killed the Panchalas and their families as they slept peacefully in the night. Grief-stricken because of her
sons, and mourning the deaths of her father and brother, Droupadi sat before her husbands, resolving to die of fasting. Moved by Droupadi’s words, Bhima, the performer of great deeds, was angered and ran after the son of his
preceptor, the son of Bharadvaja.106 Driven by destiny and out of fear of Bhimasena, the son of Drona unleashed
the celestial weapon, urging it to destroy the Pandavas. Krishna neutralized the words and said that would not be,
and Phalguna107 neutralized the weapon with one of his own. Dvaipayana cursed the son of Drona, and he too
cursed Dvaipayana. After the funerals of all the kings were performed with offerings of water, there follows the
acknowledgement by Pritha108 of the secret story of how Karna was born from her. The raconteurs know this as
the tenth parva, Souptika Parva, composed by the great soul, the sage of unlimited intelligence in eighteen chapters
and 870 shlokas.

‘After that is told the pitiful Stri Parva. There is recounted the pitiful lamentations of the wives of the heroes and
Gandhari and Dhritarashtra’s wrath and fainting. They saw the Kshatriya warriors lying on the ﬁeld of battle, unable to escape destiny—dead sons, brothers and fathers. There the extremely wise king, chief among those who
show righteous conduct, burnt the dead bodies of the kings according to prescribed rites. This is known as the great
and pitiful eleventh parva. There are twenty-seven chapters in it and seventy-ﬁve shlokas are counted. The greatsouled author composed the story of Bharata so as to move the hearts and bring tears to the eyes of good people.
‘After that follows the twelfth Shanti Parva, which increases the understanding. There is related Dharmaraja
Yudhishthira’s despondency at having killed his fathers, brothers, sons, maternal uncles and relations by marriage.
On the bed of arrows109 is related duties and laws that kings who desire to have knowledge should study. Also recounted are norms during emergencies and rules of time and cause. The wonderful path to salvation is described in
great detail and a person who understands these attains supreme knowledge. This is known as the twelfth parva,
loved by the wise and this parva has 339 chapters110 and 14,525 shlokas, ﬁlled with the fruit of meditation.
‘Then follows the excellent Anushasana Parva. There, Yudhishthira, king of the Kurus, was composed after
learning about righteous conduct from Bhishma, son of Bhagirathi. It describes the rules of dharma and artha in
great detail, the different rules of donation and their fruits, the different merits of charity depending on persons to
whom charity is given, the rules of living, the rites of individual conduct and the unmatched supremacy of truth.
All these diverse and supreme accounts are recounted in Anushasana Parva and it also describes Bhishma’s ascent
to heaven. This is the thirteenth parva, describing the certainty of righteous conduct. It has 146 chapters111 and
6700 shlokas.
‘After that is the fourteenth, Ashvamedhika Parva. There is related the excellent story of Samvarta and Marutta,
the discovery of the golden treasures,112 then the birth of Parikshit, who was burnt almost dead by the weapon and
revived by Krishna again, the Pandava’s113 journey with the sacriﬁcial horse that had been set loose, his combats
with angry princes, Dhananjaya’s encounter with Chitrangada’s son,114 his great danger in the battle with Babhruvahana and the story of the mongoose in the great horse-sacriﬁce. This extremely wonderful parva is known as
Ashvamedhika Parva and he who knew the truth composed it in 133 chapters115 and 3320 shlokas.
‘Then follows the ﬁfteenth Ashramavasika Parva. In this, abdicating the kingdom, King Dhritarashtra, accompanied by Gandhari and Vidura, retire to the forest. On seeing this, the virtuous Pritha,116 who always served her superiors, left the kingdom of her sons and followed the old couple. As a result of the blessings of the sage
Krishna,117 the king saw an incomparable sight. He saw his dead sons, grandsons and other kings, who had gone
to the other world, return. On seeing this, the old king discarded his sorrow and obtained with his wife the greatest
fruits of his righteous deeds. Having resorted to righteous conduct all his life, Vidura also attained the supreme
state. So did the learned and wise adviser Sanjaya, son of Gavalgana. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira met Narada and
learnt from Narada about the destruction of the Vrishni lineage. This is the wonderful Ashramavasika Parva. He
who knew the truth composed it in forty-two chapters118 and 1506 shlokas.
‘Then is told the terrible Mousala Parva.119 This tells the story of how those tigers among men,120 scars of
weapons on their bodies, on account of the Brahmana’s staff, were drunk and deprived of their senses. On the
shores of the salty ocean, with eraka grass121 that became like thunder in their hands, they killed one another, driven by destiny. There is told that Rama122 and Keshava,123 after destroying their race, themselves succumbed to
the great all-consuming time. Then is described how Arjuna, bull among men, journeyed to Dvaravati, and seeing
it bereft of the Vrishnis, succumbs to great sorrow and afﬂiction. Having performed the funeral rites for his brave
maternal uncle Vasudeva,124 he saw the warriors of the Yadu race lying dead where they had been drinking. He
then performed the funeral ceremonies over the bodies of the great Vasudeva125 and Rama126 and the chief
among those of the Vrishni lineage. Then is described the journey from Dvaravati with the aged and the children
and the sufferings, with the defeat of the gandiva bow. He witnessed the inefﬁcacy of his celestial weapons and the
failure to prevent the destruction of the Yadava women. He was despondent on seeing this, and on Vyasa’s advice,

went to Dharmaraja and asked for permission to become an ascetic. All this is described in the sixteenth Mousala
Parva in eight chapters and 300 shlokas.
‘Then follows the seventeenth Mahaprasthanika Parva. There, the Pandavas, bulls among men, accompanied by
the divine Droupadi, gave up their kingdom and left for their great journey. He who knew the truth composed it in
three chapters and 120 shlokas.
‘That which comes next is called Svargarohana Parva, full of celestial matters. Replete with the fruits of meditation, it has ﬁve chapters and 200 shlokas.
‘These are the contents of the eighteen parvas. The appendices are known as Hari Vamsha127 and
Bhavishya.128 Thus the entire contents of Bharata are described in the chapter known as Parva Sangraha. Eighteen
akshouhinis of soldiers came together to ﬁght and the battle raged for eighteen days.
‘A twice-born who is learned in the Vedas, the angas129 and the Upanishads, but does not know this account,
cannot be said to have any learning at all. Having heard this account, so worthy of being heard, no other account
will seem pleasing, like the harsh cawing of crows sounds to one who has heard the cuckoo sing. Like the three
worlds have evolved from the ﬁve elements,130 the inspirations of all poets ﬂow from this supreme history. O
Brahmanas! Just as the four kinds of beings131 are derived from the sky, all the Puranas132 draw upon this account. Like the senses are dependent on all the varied workings of the mind, all action and all qualities are dependent on this account. There is no tale on earth that is not based on this account, just as it is impossible for the body
to be alive without food. Like servants who wish to advance always live off high-born masters, all great poets
make a living off this account. The Bharata ﬂowed from the lips of Dvaipayana133 and is immeasurable, sacred,
purifying, salvation and the dispeller of sin. He who hears it as it is being recited has no need to bathe in the waters
of Pushkara.134 Just as the wide ocean can easily be crossed by men who possess boats, this section known as Parvasamgraha, helps understand the supreme and great account that is full of deep meaning.’

Section Three
Poushya Parva
This parva has 195 shlokas and one chapter. It is the story of Poushya. After the ﬁrst two sections, which are really summaries and no more,
Section 3 is where the main story of the Mahabharata should begin. But not only is this section mostly in prose, unlike the rest of the Mahabharata, it has little to do with the main story, since it has all kinds of incidents that don’t quite belong. All this section does is set up the snakesacriﬁce.
3

Suta said, ‘Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit, attended a long sacriﬁce in Kurukshetra with his brothers. His three
brothers were Shrutasena, Ugrasena and Bhimasena. As they sat at the sacriﬁce, a dog1 came there. Being beaten
by Janamejaya’s brothers, the weeping dog went to his mother. On seeing him cry, the mother asked, “Why are you
yelping? Who has beaten you?” On hearing this, he told his mother, “I have been beaten by Janamejaya’s
brothers.” Then the mother said, “You must have committed some wrong that you were beaten.” He replied, “I did
not commit any wrong. I did not lick the sacriﬁcial ghee. I did not even look at it.” On hearing this, his mother
Sarama felt sorry for the misery of her son and went to the place where Janamejaya and his brothers were attending the long sacriﬁce.
‘She angrily addressed Janamejaya. “My son committed no wrong. He did not lick your sacriﬁcial ghee. He did
not even look at it. Why did you then beat him? Since you beat my son who committed no wrong, evil will befall
you when you least expect it.” On hearing these words of Sarama, dog of the gods, Janamejaya was saddened and
miserable.
‘Once the sacriﬁce was over, he returned to Hastinapura and took great effort to ﬁnd a priest who could counteract the effect of the curse and pacify the effects of his sin. One day, Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit, went out on a
hunt and saw a hermitage in a lonely part of his kingdom. A rishi named Shrutashrava lived there and he had a
beloved son named Somashrava. Desiring to make the son his priest, Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit, saluted the
rishi and said, “O Bhagavan!2 Please allow your son to be my priest.” Thus addressed by Janamejaya, the sage
replied, “O Janamejaya! My son is a great ascetic and is endowed with learning. But he was born to me in the
womb of a snake that had swallowed my semen. He can absolve you from all sins except those committed against
Mahadeva. However, he has a secret vow. If a Brahmana asks for anything from him, he always gives it away. If
you can accept that, take him with you.” Thus addressed, Janamejaya replied, “O Bhagavan! It shall be as you
say.” He then accepted him3 as his priest and returned.
‘Janamejaya then told his brothers, “I have accepted this person as my teacher. Without questioning, you must
always do what he asks you.” The brothers did what they were asked. Giving these instructions to his brothers, he
marched against the kingdom of Takshashila and brought it under his control.
‘At that time, there was a rishi named Ayoda-Dhoumya. He had three disciples named Upamanyu, Aruni and
Veda. One day, the sage asked the disciple Aruni, from the land of Panchala, to go and stop a breach in the dike.
On his preceptor’s instruction, Aruni of Panchala went there, but could not stop the breach. He was sorry at this,
but then found a way and said, “This is what I will do.” He entered the breach and lay himself down there and the
ﬂow of water stopped. After some time, the preceptor Ayoda-Dhoumya asked his other disciples where Aruni of
Panchala was. They replied, “O Bhagavan! He has been sent by you to stop the breach in the dike.” Thus told, he

said to his disciples, “Let us all go to where he is.” Having gone there, he cried out in these words, “O Aruni of
Panchala! Where are you? Come here, my son.” Hearing his preceptor’s voice, Aruni rose from the breach in the
dike, stood before his preceptor and said, “I was in the breach in the dike to stop the ﬂow of water that could not be
stopped in any other way. It is only when I heard your revered words that I suddenly came to you and allowed the
breach again. O Bhagavan! I salute you. Please tell me what your instructions are now.” Thus addressed, the preceptor replied, “Since you have opened the ﬂow of waters by standing up from the breach in the dike, you will
henceforth be known as Uddalaka.” The preceptor also blessed him. “Since you have obeyed my instructions, you
will obtain good fortune. All the Vedas will shine in you and also all the dharmashastras.” Hearing these words of
his preceptor, Aruni went to the land where he wished to go.
‘Ayoda-Dhoumya had another disciple named Upamanyu. To him the preceptor said, “Go my son and look after
my cows.” As instructed by his preceptor, he went and looked after the cows. After looking after the cows during
the day, he returned to his preceptor’s house in the evening, stood before him and respectfully saluted him. On seeing him in the best of health, his preceptor asked, “Upamanyu, my son! How do you support yourself? You are
very fat.” He replied to his preceptor, “I support myself by begging.” The preceptor replied, “You should not use
alms you receive from begging without ﬁrst offering them to me.” As instructed, he looked after the cows again.
After looking after them, he returned before his preceptor and saluted him again. The preceptor, on seeing him as
fat as before, said, “Upamanyu, my child! I take all your alms away from you. How do you support yourself now?”
Being thus asked, he told his preceptor, “O Bhagavan! After giving you all my alms, I go out and beg again to support myself.” The preceptor replied, “That is not the way to obey your preceptor. When you behave thus, you deprive others of their sustenance. You have shown that you are covetous.” Having agreed to his preceptor’s words,
he went away to look after the cows. Having done that, he returned to his preceptor’s house, stood before him and
respectfully saluted him. On seeing that he was still fat, the preceptor said again, “I take all your alms and you do
not go out to beg for a second time. How do you support yourself now?” He replied to his preceptor, “I live on the
milk of these cows.” The preceptor replied, “It is not right for you to drink the milk without ﬁrst asking for my permission.” He agreed to his preceptor’s words and went to look after the cows. Having done that, he returned to his
preceptor’s house, stood before him and respectfully saluted him. On seeing that he was still fat, the preceptor said,
“You do not support yourself through alms. You do not go begging for a second time. You do not drink milk. But
you are still fat. How do you support yourself now?” Thus questioned, he replied to his preceptor, “I drink the
froth the calves throw out when they drink at their mother’s udders.” The preceptor replied, “The good calves
throw out generous quantities of froth out of kindness towards you. But if you act like this, you deprive the calves
of their sustenance. It is not proper for you to drink the froth.” Upamanyu agreed to his preceptor’s words and
went to look after the cattle, without food.
‘Having been prevented, he did not seek alms. He did not go begging a second time. He did not drink the milk.
He did not drink the froth. One day in the forest, suffering from hunger, he ate the leaves of the arka tree.4 His
eyes were affected by the acrid, pungent, bitter and unripe arka leaves and he went blind. Wandering blindly
around, he fell into a well. When he did not return, the preceptor told his students, “I have forbidden Upamanyu
everything and perhaps he is angry. That is the reason he has not returned and has stayed out so long.” Having said
this, he went to the forest and cried out in a loud voice to Upamanyu. “O Upamanyu! Where are you? Come here
my son.” On hearing his preceptor’s voice, he replied, “O preceptor! I am here. I have fallen into a well.” The preceptor asked, “How did you fall into this well?” He said, “I ate the leaves of the arka tree and went blind. That is
how I fell into the well.” The preceptor replied, “Sing praises of the two Ashvins.5 Those divine physicians will
restore your eyesight.” On hearing this, he6 began to worship the Ashvins with verses from the Rig Veda. “O ﬁery
ﬁrst-born beings, born before creation. I worship you two, inﬁnite and radiant. You are birds with beautiful feathers, beyond measure, but all-pervading in the world and the universe; you vest in all beings. You are golden eagles
into which everything disappears. You are free from falsehood and you do not decay. You are always triumphant.
Having created the sun, you weave night and day with black and white threads. For our good fortune, you freed the
bird of life that was seized by time. Those who suffer from the delusion of the senses think that you, who are beyond matter, have forms. Three hundred and sixty milking cows7 give birth to a single calf,8 the creator and de-

stroyer of time. The calves are in different sheds, but they suckle the same truth. The Ashvins milk them of true
knowledge. There are 720 spokes on the nave.9 To the rims of the wheel are stuck another twenty.10 Without a
rim, this wheel revolves, without decay and with delusion. O Ashvins! Set this wheel in motion. One wheel of time
revolves with twelve rims.11 Six spokes12 and one axle bear the immortal nectar to which the gods of the universe
are addicted. O Ashvins! Free me from this wheel of time. After killing Vritra, Indra once won back the nectar.
Like that, the Ashvins have won it back. The Ashvins cleft the mountain in all forms and freed the pleasures obtained from the senses. At the beginning of creation, you created the ten directions of the universe.13 You placed
the sun and the moon above. The rishis perform yajnas according to their courses and so do gods and men who inhabit the earth. Mixing many colours, you have created objects of sight and the world and the universe were created from these. Gods and men who inhabit the earth follow these. O Ashvins! I worship only you and I worship the
sky you have created. You are free and without decay, and create order from which even the gods are not free. You
are the seed of everything. As male and female, you swallow food that becomes vital ﬂuid and blood. The newborn
baby sucks the mother’s breast and you are the baby. O Ashvins! Restore my sight and grant me life.” Thus
praised, the Ashvins appeared and said, “We are pleased. Here is a cake. Take it and eat it.” Thus addressed, he
replied, “O Ashvins! Your words can never be false. But I cannot eat this cake without offering it to my preceptor.”
Then the Ashvins replied, “Many years ago, your preceptor once worshipped us. We were pleased and gave him a
cake. He ate it without offering it to his preceptor. You should do what he had then done.” Thus addressed, he
replied, “O Ashvins! I crave your pardon. I cannot eat this cake without offering it to my preceptor.” The Ashvins
said, “We are pleased with your devotion to your preceptor. Your preceptor has teeth made of black iron. Yours
will be golden. Your sight will be restored and you will have good fortune.” Thus addressed by the Ashvins, he14
regained his sight. He returned to his preceptor, saluted him and told him everything. He15 was very pleased with
him and told him he would obtain good fortune as the Ashvins had promised. All the Vedas would be manifest to
him. This was his trial.16
‘The other disciple of Ayoda-Dhoumya’s was named Veda. One day, his preceptor told him, “Veda, my son!
Stay here in my house and serve your preceptor. Fortune will be yours.” He gave his promise and remained for a
long time in his preceptor’s house, always obeying his preceptor. Like a bull always yoked to pull a heavy load, he
endured the difﬁculties of heat and cold, hunger and thirst, and never complained. After a long time had passed, his
preceptor was satisﬁed with him. Because of his preceptor’s satisfaction, he obtained complete knowledge and
good fortune. This was his trial. Having received his preceptor’s permission, he returned home from his preceptor’s house and embarked on the householder stage of life. Three disciples came to live with him. But he never
asked them to undertake any work or serve him in any way. Since he had himself suffered from the miseries of living in his preceptor’s house, he did not wish to be severe on his disciples. After some time had passed, two Kshatriyas, Janamejaya and Poushya, came to the Brahmana Veda and chose him as their preceptor.
‘One day, he had to leave to ofﬁciate at a sacriﬁce. He told one of his disciples named Utanka to look after his
house. “Utanka,” he said, “whatever needs to be done in my house, perform it without negligence.” Leaving these
instructions, Veda went away on his journey. Utanka lived in his preceptor’s house, always following his preceptor’s instructions. While he lived there, the women of his preceptor’s household assembled near him and told him,
“Your preceptor’s wife is at the right period for conception and your preceptor is away from home. You must stand
in his place and ensure that her period does not go barren.” Thus addressed by the women, he replied, “It is not
proper for me to do this at the request of women. My preceptor has not asked me to do anything that is not proper.”
After some time, his preceptor returned home from his journey. He heard everything that had happened and was
very pleased. He told him, “Utanka, my son, what favour can I bestow on you? You have faithfully served me in
accordance with what is proper. Consequently, the fondness we have for each other has increased. I grant you permission to leave. Go, and all your desires will be fulﬁlled.” Thus addressed, he replied, “Let me do what you wish.
For it is said, he who asks without rightfully giving in return and he who gives without rightfully receiving in return, one of those will die and enmity created between them.17 Now that you have given me permission to leave, I
wish to give my preceptor what he desires.” On hearing this, the preceptor replied, “Utanka, my son, wait for some
time.” After some time, Utanka again told his preceptor, “Command me as to what I should give my preceptor.”

His preceptor then replied, “Utanka, my son, you have asked me many times about what to give to your preceptor.
Go to my wife and ask her what you should bring as a gift. Bring what she wants.” Thus instructed by his preceptor, Utanka went to his preceptor’s wife and said, “O madam! My preceptor has given me permission to go home.
But I wish to bring a gift that brings pleasure and then go home, free from my debt. Command me as to what I
should bring as a preceptor’s gift.” Thus addressed, his preceptor’s wife replied, “Go to King Poushya and get
from him the earrings that his queen wears. Bring those here. Four days from now, the day is holy. On that day, I
wish to appear radiant before the Brahmanas and serve them wearing those earrings. If you can do this, good fortune will be yours.” Thus instructed by his preceptor’s wife, Utanka took his leave.
‘When he was passing along the route, he met an extraordinarily large bull and an extraordinarily large man riding on it. The man addressed Utanka. “O Utanka! Eat the dung of this bull.” Though thus addressed, Utanka refused. The man said again, “Utanka, eat it. Do not hesitate. Your preceptor has himself eaten it before.” Thus addressed, Utanka agreed and ate the bull’s dung and drank the bull’s urine and then left for where the Kshatriya
Poushya was. As he came near, Utanka found him seated. Utanka saluted him and said, “I have come to you as
someone who asks.” The other answered, “O Bhagavan! I am Poushya. What can I do?” Utanka told him, “I have
come to ask for a pair of earrings your wife wears, to give them as a gift to my preceptor. Please give me those earrings.” He told him, “Go to the inner apartments of the palace and ask the queen.” He did as he had been asked,
went to the inner apartments, but could not see the queen. He again told Poushya, “You should not treat me with a
lie. Your queen is truly not in the inner apartment. I could not see her.” Thus addressed, Poushya thought for a
while and said, “You must be deﬁled with leftover food. Try and remember. The queen cannot be seen by anyone
who is deﬁled with leftover food. Since she is faithful to her husband, she doesn’t appear before anyone thus deﬁled.” Thus addressed, Utanka thought for a while. Remembering, he said, “Yes, that is true. Since I was in a hurry, I performed my ablutions while I was walking.” Poushya retorted, “This is a breaking of the rules. Ablutions
cannot be performed while standing or walking.” Utanka agreed and sat down facing the east. He ﬁrst washed his
hands, face and feet properly. Then, silently, he thrice sipped just enough water, free from scum and froth, to reach
his heart. He then washed twice and cleaned his oriﬁces with water. Having done this, he entered the inner apartment and saw the queen.
‘On seeing him, the queen stood up, saluted him with respect and said, “O Bhagavan! Welcome. Command me
as to what I should do for you.” He told her, “You should give me your earrings. I ask for them because I wish to
give them as a gift to my preceptor.” She was pleased at his direct words and thought that such a worthy recipient
could not be refused. Therefore, she took off her earrings and gave them to him. And told him, “Takshaka, king of
the nagas, wants these earrings. Please be careful when carrying them.” Thus addressed, he told the queen,
“Madam! Be reassured. Takshaka, king of the nagas, cannot overpower me.” Having said this, he took leave of the
queen and went to Poushya.
‘He told him, “O, Poushya! I am very pleased.” Poushya replied, “O Bhagavan! You are a guest of many qualities. After a long time, we have found a worthy recipient in you. Therefore, I wish to perform a shraddha.18 Stay
for some time.” Then Utanka said, “Yes, I will wait. But I wish to leave quickly. Please bring whatever food is
ready.” As asked, he19 offered food that was readily available. Utanka saw that the food that was brought to him
was cold and had a hair in it. He considered the food unclean and told Poushya, “Because you have offered me unclean food, you will go blind.” In turn, Poushya replied, “Since you have rendered unclean what was clean food,20
you will be without offspring.” Then Poushya inspected the cleanliness of the food closely. Because the food had
been prepared by a woman who had not braided her hair, Poushya found that the food was cold and had a hair in it
and was unclean. He paciﬁed Utanka, “O Bhagavan! The food placed before you was cold, had a hair in it and was
unclean. This was an error and I seek your pardon. Please don’t make me go blind.” Utanka replied, “What I say
must happen. You will go blind, but you will recover your eyesight soon. Grant me that your curse on me should
also not have effect.” Poushya said, “I cannot take back my curse even if I want to. Even now, my anger has not
been paciﬁed. Don’t you know that a Brahmana’s heart is soft as butter, even though his words are like sharp razors? The Kshatriya is not like that. His words are soft like butter, but his heart is like a sharp instrument. Since
that is the case, I cannot take back my curse, because my heart is still sharp. Please go.” Then Utanka said, “I
showed you the unclean food that was placed before me and allowed you to pacify me. Before that, you said I

would be without offspring because I had rendered clean food unclean. But the food was unclean. Therefore, your
curse will have no effect. Enough.” Saying this, Utanka left, taking the earrings with him.
‘On his way, Utanka saw a naked mendicant21 come towards him. He was sometimes visible and sometimes invisible. Placing the earrings on the ground, Utanka then went for some water. The mendicant quickly came to the
place, picked up the earrings and ran away. Then Utanka dashed after him and seized him. Then Takshaka suddenly gave up his disguise, assumed his real form and disappeared into a large hole in the ground. Entering the world
of the nagas, he went to his own home. Utanka followed him through the same hole and on entering the place,
praised the nagas with the following words. “O snakes!22 Subjects of King Airavata,23 you adorn battles, you
shower like clouds, driven by wind and charged with lightning. O offspring of Airavata! Handsome and manyformed, bedecked with earrings of many colours, you shine like the sun in the sky. Many are the habitations of the
nagas on the northern banks of the Ganga. Who wishes to march in an army against the blazing sun without Airavata? When Dhritarashtra24 goes out, 20,000 nagas march as companions. I salute all of you who have Airavata as
their elder brother, whether they live near him or far away. For the sake of the earrings, I salute Takshaka, son of
Kadru, who has always lived in Kurukshetra and the Khandava region. Takshaka and Ashvasena25 were constant
companions when they lived on the banks of the river Ikshumati in Kurukshetra. I must also salute Takshaka’s
youngest brother, the great-souled Shrutasena,26 who lived in Mahadyumna in a desire to become a chief of the
nagas.” When he saw that in spite of the salutations, he did not get back the earrings, he saw two women weaving
a cloth on a loom. There were black and white threads in the loom. He also saw a wheel being turned by six boys
and a man who was handsome.
‘He praised them with the following mantras. “Six boys keep turning this wheel with 360 spokes, perpetually
moving in a cycle of twenty-four divisions. Two young women, representing the universe, are continually weaving
with black and white threads, creating worlds and beings of the past and the present. O master of the
thunderbolt!27 O protector of the worlds, the killer of Vritra28 and the destroyer of Namuchi!29 O great-souled
one who is dressed in black, who brings out truth and untruth in the worlds! O he who in ancient times obtained as
his mount the horse,30 which was another form of the ﬁre-god, from the depths of the water. I always salute you,
the lord of the universe. O lord of the three worlds! O Purandara!31” Then that man said to him, “I am pleased
with your salutations. What can I do to please you?” He32 then told him, “Let the serpents be in my power.” Then
that man again said, “Blow into this horse’s anus.” He then blew into the horse’s anus and from all the horse’s oriﬁces that were blown into there billowed out ﬂames and smoke. This burnt down the world of the nagas. Then the
alarmed Takshaka, scared of being burnt by the ﬁre, took the earrings, ﬂed from his palace and told Utanka,
“Please take back these earrings.” Utanka took the earrings back.
‘But having taken them back, he began to think. “Today is the sacred day mentioned by my preceptor’s wife. I
have come very far away. How can I then give these to her?” As he was thus thinking, the man said, “Utanka, get
on this horse. It will instantly take you to your preceptor’s house.” He agreed, mounted the horse and reached his
preceptor’s house. After bathing, the preceptor’s wife was dressing her hair, thinking that if Utanka did not come,
she would curse him. At that time, Utanka entered, saluted her and gave her the earrings. She said, “Utanka, you
have come at the right time and the right place. Welcome, my son. You have been fortunate that I have not cursed
you. May good fortune be with you.” Then Utanka saluted his preceptor and his preceptor said, “Welcome, Utanka, my son. What took you so long?” Utanka replied, “Takshaka, king of the nagas, cast impediments in my path
and I had to go the world of the nagas. There I saw two women weaving a cloth with black and white threads on a
loom. What did that mean? I saw a wheel with twelve spokes being turned by six boys. What did that mean? I also
saw a man. Who was he? I saw an extraordinarily large horse. What was that? And as I was on my way along the
road, I saw a man mounted on a bull. He respectfully addressed me as Utanka, and asked me to eat the bull’s dung,
as my preceptor had done. On being requested by the man, I ate the bull’s dung. Who was this man? Please instruct
me, what did all this mean?” Thus addressed, the preceptor told him, “The two women you saw are Dhata and Vidhata. The black and white threads represent night and day. The wheel with twelve spokes is the year with twelve
months and the six boys turning it are the six seasons. The man is Parjanya.33 The horse is Agni.34 And the bull

you saw on the way is Airavata, the king of elephants. The man who rode it is Indra. The bull’s dung that you ate is
the nectar of immortality. It is certainly because you ate this that you were not killed in the world of the nagas. Indra is my friend and it is because of his kindness that you have returned with the earrings. Now, amiable Utanka, I
give you permission to go. You will obtain good fortune.” Having received his preceptor’s permission, Utanka
went towards Hastinapura, angry with Takshaka, and wishing to seek revenge.
‘In a short while, the good Brahmana Utanka reached Hastinapura and went to seek King Janamejaya, who had
only recently returned victorious from Takshashila. He saw him seated, surrounded by his advisers. He uttered
blessings of victory as was proper and then addressed him in words that had the right tone and metre. “O best of
kings! You are spending your time in juvenile pursuits, when an important duty urgently demands your attention.”
Thus addressed by the Brahmana, King Janamejaya saluted him, as was proper, and said in a gracious tone, “I perform the duties of my Kshatriya birth by looking after my subjects. Tell me, O king of Brahmanas, what should I
do? I am obediently waiting for your words.” Having been thus addressed by that best of kings, the best of Brahmanas, superior because of his good deeds, replied thus, “O king of kings! It was Takshaka who performed violence on your father.35 Therefore, you should take vengeance on that evil-souled serpent. I think the time has
come for you to take revenge, as destiny has ordained. Go, O king! And take revenge for the death of your greatsouled father, who caused no offence, but succumbed to the ﬁve elements, like a tree struck by thunder, having
been bitten by this evil-souled serpent. Drunk with power, Takshaka, worst of the serpent race, committed a crime
when he bit your godlike father, the protector of the lineage of royal sages among kings. The evil one even repulsed Kashyapa.36 It is right for you, O king, to burn the evil one in the blazing ﬁre of a snake-sacriﬁce. Do what
is necessary and you will avenge your father. Thus, O king, you will also do me a great favour. O king of the
world! O king who are pure! It was that evil one who obstructed me when I went on my preceptor’s work.” On
hearing these words, the king was angry with Takshaka. As ghee stokes the sacriﬁcial ﬁre, the offerings of Utanka’s words inﬂamed him. In Utanka’s presence, the sorrowful king asked his advisers the details about his father’s
ascent to heaven. When he heard from Utanka the circumstances of his father’s death, the king of kings was overcome with sorrow and grief.’

Section Four
Pouloma Parva
This parva has 153 shlokas and nine chapters.
Chapter 4: 11 shlokas
Chapter 5: 26 shlokas
Chapter 6: 16 shlokas
Chapter 7: 26 shlokas
Chapter 8: 22 shlokas
Chapter 9: 22 shlokas
Chapter 10: 8 shlokas
Chapter 11: 17 shlokas
Chapter 12: 5 shlokas
The meat of the Mahabharata doesn’t start in this parva, since one is still on the snake-sacriﬁce. Indeed, this parva is mostly about the Bhargava lineage, descended from the great sage Bhrigu. Bhrigu’s son was the famous Shukra or Shukracharya and so was the sage Chyavana.
Bhrigu married Puloma and anyone descended from Puloma is called Pouloma. That is how this parva obtains its name. The chapters in this
parva take us down Bhrigu’s lineage, through Chyavana, Pramati, Ruru and Shunaka.
41

Lomaharshana’s son, the suta Ugrashrava, learned in ancient tales, was present at the twelve-year sacriﬁce of Kulapati Shounaka, held in Naimisharanya. Having spent a great deal of labour in learning the Puranas, he knew them
well. He stood before the sages at the sacriﬁce, and with folded hands, addressed them, ‘What do you wish to
hear? What shall I tell?’
The sages replied, ‘O son of Lomaharshana! We wish to hear, and you will tell us, those who are eager to listen,
some excellent tales. But at the moment, the revered Kulapati Shounaka is busy in the room with the holy ﬁre. He
knows the divine tales about the gods and the demons. He also knows the stories of the men, the nagas and the
gandharvas. O Souti! At this sacriﬁce, that learned Brahmana is the chief priest, capable, faithful to his vows and
learned in all the sacred texts and the aranyakas. He is always truthful, a hermit strict in his austerities and vows,
and calm. He is respected by all of us and we must wait for him. When he has taken the honoured seat meant for
the preceptor, you will reply to what the best of the Brahmanas asks you.’
Souti replied, ‘So it shall be. When that great-souled preceptor has sat down, I shall narrate, as asked by him, all
the sacred stories on a wide variety of subjects.’
After that, when that bull among Brahmanas had ﬁnished all actions in accordance with the proper rites and had
prayed to the gods and offered water to the ancestors, he came to the place of sacriﬁce where Souti was seated, in
front of that assembly of brahmarshis, inﬂexible and successful in their austerities. Then, when Shounaka was seated among the ofﬁciating priests and assistants, who were seated, Shounaka said the following.
5

Shounaka said, ‘My son, in days long past, your father learnt all the Puranas. O son of Lomaharshana! Is it the case
that you have learnt them too? In the Puranas are described divine stories and accounts of the wise of the original
lineage. In the past, long ago, we have heard these from your father. From those tales, I wish to hear that of the
Bhrigu lineage. Tell us that story. We are all eager to hear.’

Souti said, ‘That which was correctly learnt in ancient times by great-souled Brahmanas who were the best, that
which was learnt and recited by the Brahmana Vaishampayana, that which was correctly studied by my father and
from him learnt by me, O descendant of the Bhrigu race,2 hear that story of the Bhrigu lineage, revered by the
gods, Indra, Agni and the Maruts.3 O chief and great sage, I shall recite to you the history of this lineage, and related stories, as it is recounted in the Puranas. Bhrigu gave birth to a beloved son, named Chyavana Bhargava. Chyavana had a righteous son named Pramati and Pramati, in turn, had a son named Ruru, from Ghritachi. From his
wife Pramadvara, Ruru had a son named Shunaka. He was righteous and learned in the Vedas, he was your greatgrandfather. He was devoted to asceticism, famous, learned in the shrutis, truthful, righteous, wise in knowledge of
the brahman and always had control over his senses.’
Shounaka said, ‘O son of Suta, why was the great-souled son of Bhrigu known as Chyavana? I am asking you,
tell me.’
Souti replied, ‘Bhrigu had a beloved wife, widely known as Puloma. She conceived from Bhrigu’s semen and a
child formed in her womb. In time, when the equable and chaste wife Puloma was in that condition, one day, the
famous and righteous Bhrigu went out for his ablutions. It was then that a rakshasa named Puloman came to his
hermitage. Having entered the hermitage, he saw Bhrigu’s unblemished wife, and seeing her, he was ﬁlled with
lust and lost his senses. On seeing that a guest had come, the beautiful Puloma served him with roots and fruits
from the forest. O Brahmana, having seen her, the rakshasa burned with lust and wished to carry away the unblemished woman. He went to the room where the holy ﬁre was blazing brightly and the rakshasa then asked the ﬂaming ﬁre, “O Agni! Tell me truthfully, under oath, whose wife is she? O Pavaka!4Tell me the truth, I am asking you.
This beautiful lady was earlier engaged to be my wife. But later, her father gave her to Bhrigu, who thus committed a falsehood. Tell me truly if this beautiful lady can be called Bhrigu’s wife. Since I have found her in the hermitage, I wish to carry her away. My hurt burns with rage that Bhrigu should have obtained this slim-waisted
woman who was my wife ﬁrst.” Thus did the rakshasa repeatedly ask the ﬂaming ﬁre this uncertain question of
whether the lady was Bhrigu’s wife. “O Agni! You are always there in every being as witness of their righteous
deeds and evil ones. O wise one! Answer my question truthfully. The wrong-doer Bhrigu abducted her, though she
was my wife ﬁrst. I wish to hear the truth from you. When I hear the truth from you about whether she is Bhrigu’s
wife or not, I shall carry her away from the hermitage in your presence. Therefore, O ﬁre, tell me the truth.” Having heard these words, the seven-tongued ﬁre was extremely distressed. He was afraid to lie because of the fear of
a curse. At the same time, he was scared of Bhrigu’s curse.’
6

Souti said, ‘O Brahmana, having heard Agni’s words, the rakshasa assumed the form of a boar and carried her
away with the speed of the mind and of thought. Bhrigu’s child, who was in her womb, was angry at this violence
and fell down from his mother’s womb. For this reason, he got the name Chyavana.5 On seeing the child fall from
his mother’s womb, blazing like the sun, that rakshasa let go of her, but fell down, burnt to ashes. O Brahmana, O
descendant of Bhrigu! Puloma, the lady with the beautiful hips, almost fainted with grief, but picked up Chyavana
and walked away. Brahma himself, the grandfather of all the worlds, saw Bhrigu’s unblemished wife weeping,
eyes ﬁlled with tears. The venerable Brahma, grandfather of all beings, consoled his daughter-in-law and a great
river was formed from the tears that fell from her eyes. The river followed the footsteps of the famous Bhrigu’s
wife. On seeing it follow the path of his son’s wife, the venerable grandfather of the world named it himself. He
called it Vadhusara and it passed near Chyavana’s hermitage. Thus was Chyavana born, the mighty son of Bhrigu.
‘On seeing Chyavana and also the beautiful young lady there, the angry Bhrigu asked his wife Puloma, “Who
told the rakshasa who was here about you, so that he wanted to carry you away? O lady of beautiful smiles! That
rakshasa could not have himself known that you were my wife. Tell me who told him, because I wish to curse him
in my anger. Who does not fear my curse? Who dared to transgress?” Puloma replied, “O Bhagavan! I was made
known to the rakshasa by Agni. Then that rakshasa carried me away, crying like a female osprey. I was freed only
through the extraordinary energy of your son. That rakshasa let go of me, fell down on the ground and was burnt to

ashes.” Having heard this from Puloma, Bhrigu became very angry. Out of his anger, he cursed Agni that he would
be an omnivore.’6
7

Souti said, ‘Being thus cursed by Bhrigu, the angry Agni said, “O Brahmana! What do you mean by displaying
this rashness today? I always try to stick to the righteous path and tell the truth impartially. On being asked, I told
the truth. Where is my transgression? A witness who is asked and knows the facts, but testiﬁes to that which is
false, dooms both his ancestors and his descendants for seven generations. And he who knows the truth about an
action, but knowingly does not speak, is certainly tainted by the same sin. I am also capable of cursing you, but I
hold Brahmanas in esteem. O Brahmana! Although these are known to you, I shall nevertheless recount them to
you. Listen. Having multiplied myself through my powers of yoga, I am present in many forms, in
agnihotras,7sattras8 and other sacriﬁces and rituals. When ghee is offered to me in accordance with the rituals
prescribed in the Vedas, the gods and also the ancestors appear in it and are satisﬁed. The gods are the waters and
the ancestors are also the waters. The gods and the ancestors have equal rights to perform darshas9 and pournamasas.10 Therefore, the gods are the ancestors and the ancestors are the gods. Depending on the stage of the
moon, they are worshipped as one and also separately. The gods and the ancestors eat what is poured on me. I am
therefore known as the mouth of the thirty-three gods11 and the ancestors. On the day of the new moon the ancestors, and on the day of the full moon the gods, are fed through my mouth the ghee that is offered to me. If I am
their mouth, how can I become an omnivore?” After contemplating this problem for some time, Agni withdrew
himself from everywhere, from the agnihotras of the Brahmanas, from sattras and other sacriﬁces. Being deprived
of omkaras, vashatkaras,12svadhas13 and svahas,14 all the creatures became miserable.
‘Then, in great anxiety, the sages went to the gods and said the following words. “O faultless beings! Because of
the loss of ﬁre, the three worlds are confounded at having lost their sacriﬁces. Without losing any more time,
please decree what is to be done.” The gods and the sages then went before Brahma. They told him about the curse
on Agni and his withdrawal from all sacriﬁces. They said, “O illustrious one! Agni has been cursed by Bhrigu for
some unknown reason. How can he who is the mouth of the gods and receives the ﬁrst part of all sacriﬁcial offerings and is also the acceptor of all offerings in all the worlds ever become an omnivore?” Having heard all this, the
creator of the world summoned Agni to his presence. He addressed Agni, who is the creator of all the worlds, like
him, and is also eternal, in gentle words. “You are the creator of all the worlds and you are their destroyer. You preserve the three worlds and ensure that all sacriﬁces and ceremonies are preserved. Therefore, O lord of the worlds!
Act in a way that the rites thrive. O eater of the sacriﬁcial ghee! How have you become thus deluded? You are always pure in this universe. You are the refuge of all living creatures. With your entire body, you cannot become an
omnivore. O Fire, with a crest of ﬂames! Only ﬂames that are meant for accepting oblations will devour everything. Just as everything touched by the sun’s rays are rendered pure, anything that has been burnt in your ﬂames
will become pure. O Agni! You are the supreme energy. You have issued forth from your own energy. Through
your own lustrous power, make the sage’s curse come true. Accept the gods’ share, and your own, when they are
offered into your mouth.” Agni replied to the grandfather, “Let it be that way.” He went away to obey the instructions of the god Parameshthin.15 In great delight, the gods and the sages returned the way they had come. And the
sages continued to perform all their sacriﬁces and ceremonies, as they had done before. The gods rejoiced in heaven, as did the many living beings on earth. Freed from the taint of the curse, Agni was also extremely happy. Such
is the ancient history of the curse that was imposed on Agni, with the destruction of Puloman and the birth of
Chyavana.’
8

Souti said, ‘O Brahmana! Chyavana, the son of Bhrigu, then had a son from his wife, named Sukanya. Sukanya’s
son was the great-souled Pramati, of resplendent energy. In turn, Pramati had a son named Ruru, from Ghritachi.
Ruru had a son named Shunaka from his wife Pramadvara. O Brahmana! I will tell you all the accounts of Ruru,

whose energy was resplendent. Listen to it in detail. In days long gone by, there was a sage named Sthulakesha. He
possessed the power of austerities and learning and was known for devoting himself to the welfare of all creatures.
O Brahmana! O sage! At this time, Menaka16 conceived a child through the king of the gandharvas, named Vishvavasu. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! When the time came, the apsara Menaka delivered her child near
Sthulakesha’s hermitage. After leaving her child on the banks of the river, she went away. The great sage and great
Brahmana, Sthulakesha, found the daughter abandoned on the banks of the river. He saw her to be blazing in beauty, like the child of an immortal. On ﬁnding her, the best of the sages was driven by compassion and adopted her.
The beautiful and radiant girl grew up in that hermitage. Since she was superior to all the others in beauty and in
every quality, the great sage gave her the name of Pramadvara.17
‘When Ruru saw Pramadvara in that hermitage of his,18 the righteous man, in control over himself, fell in love
with her. Through his friends, he made his father Pramati, descended from Bhrigu, acquainted with his love.
Thereupon, Pramati asked the famous Sthulakesha. Then the sage engaged Pramadvara with Ruru, ﬁxing the date
for marriage as one when the nakshatra19 Bhagadaiva20 would be in the ascendant. A few days before the date
ﬁxed for the wedding, when the beautiful girl was playing with her friends, her time having come and driven by
destiny, she didn’t see a coiled snake and stepped on it with her foot. Driven by the requirements of destiny, the
snake sunk its venomous fangs into the body of the careless girl. As soon as she was bitten by the snake, she suddenly fell down senseless on the ground. She, who was so beautiful when alive, became painful to look at when
dead. Thanks to the snake’s venom, the slender-waisted girl looked more beautiful than when alive, as if asleep on
the ground. Her father and other hermits who were there, saw her lying motionless on the ground, as beautiful as a
lotus. Overcome with compassion, all the best of Brahmanas assembled there—Svastyatreya, Mahajanu, Kushika,
Shankhamekhala, Bharadvaja, Kounakutsa, Arshtisena and Goutama, and also Pramati and his son and other inhabitants of the forest. They were overcome with compassion when they saw the maiden dead with the snake’s
venom and wept. But in great pain, Ruru left.’
9

Souti said, ‘When the Brahmanas were seated there in a circle, Ruru went into the deep forest and wept loudly.
Overcome with grief, his lamentations were piteous. Thinking and remembering his beloved Pramadvara, he
mourned. “She is lying on the ground, that slender-bodied beauty, increasing my grief and that of her relatives.
What can be more painful than this? If I have ever given alms, performed austerities, if I have shown respect to my
superiors, let those merits instil life into my beloved. If I have controlled myself from the day I was born, if I have
stuck to the prescribed rites, let the beautiful Pramadvara rise up right now.” The messenger of the gods said, “O
Ruru! The words that you utter in your grief can have no effect. O righteous one! Someone whose mortal time on
this earth has run out, cannot come back to life again. The miserly life has run out for this daughter of the gandharva and the apsara. Therefore, do not yield even a little to grief. However, in advance, the great gods have devised
an antidote. If you wish to implement this, you will get back your Pramadvara.” Ruru replied, “O traveller in the
sky! Tell me the details of the means the gods have provided for in advance. I will implement what I hear. Your honour, grant me deliverance.” The messenger of the gods said, “O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! Give up half of
your life to the girl. O Ruru! Your wife Pramadvara will rise up again.” Ruru replied, “O best of the travellers in
the sky! I give up half of my life to the girl. Let my beloved arise, in the form and adornment of love.” Then the
supreme king of the gandharvas and the supreme messenger of the gods together went to Dharmaraja.21
‘They addressed him in these words. “O Dharmaraja! If you so think, let Ruru’s beautiful bride Pramadvara,
who is now dead, arise with half of Ruru’s life.” Dharmaraja replied, “O messenger of the gods! If you so wish, let
Ruru’s wife Pramadvara arise with half of Ruru’s life.” When he thus spoke, the beautiful lady Pramadvara, engaged to Ruru, arose as if from a slumber, endowed with half of Ruru’s life. It was later seen in the future that the
illustrious Ruru gave up half of his long life for the sake of his wife and this shortened his own. Thereafter, on the
designated day, their respective fathers gladly married them in accordance with the rites and the couple passed
their days, devoted to each other. Having obtained a wife who was so difﬁcult to get, beautiful and radiant as the

ﬁlaments of a lotus, the sage of ﬁrm austerities took a vow to destroy the snakes. Whenever he saw a snake, he was
possessed with terrible anger. If it was near, he always killed it with a weapon.
‘O Brahmana! One day, Ruru entered a very large forest. He saw an old dundubha22 lying there. With the intention of killing it, he then raised staff, like the staff of death and struck it. The dundubha then addressed the Brahmana. “O ascetic! I have not done you an iota of harm today. For what reason and in what violent rage do you wish
to do violence to me?”’
10

‘Ruru said, “My wife, whom I love as much as I love my own life, was bitten by a snake. O snake! At that time, I
took a terrible vow that thereafter I would kill every snake that I saw. It is for that reason that I do violence to you
and I shall deprive you of your life.” The dundubha replied, “O Brahmana! There are other snakes that bite
mankind. The dundubhas are snakes only by smell; you should not kill them. We may share the same misfortune,
but we do not share the same good fortune. We may share the same sorrows, but we do not share the same joys.
Since you cannot differentiate between right and wrong, you should not kill the dundubhas.” On hearing the words
of the snake, Ruru did not kill the dundubha, because he was scared and thought it might be a rishi.
‘The revered Ruru now sought to pacify the snake. “O snake!” he said. “If you desire, tell me how you came to
be so metamorphosed.” The dundubha replied, “O Ruru! I was earlier a rishi named Sahasrapata. I became a snake
through a Brahmana’s curse.” Ruru asked, “O best of the snakes! Why were you cursed by an angry Brahmana and
how long will you have to continue in this present form?”’
11

‘The dundubha said, “In times long past, I had a Brahmana friend named Khagama. He was truthful in his words
and possessed powers through his austerities. When he was engaged in the agnihotra sacriﬁce, out of juvenile playfulness, I made a snake out of blades of grass and tried to frighten him. He fainted. When he regained consciousness, that truthful ascetic, rigid in his vows, told me in great anger, ‘Since you created a powerless mock snake to
frighten me, you will yourself turn into a powerless23 snake through my curse.’ O ascetic! I knew the power of his
austerities. Therefore, very agitated in my heart, I told him, ‘I stand here, bowing before you and saluting you with
folded hands. Since I am your friend, I did this only to make you laugh. O Brahmana! You should forgive me and
take back your curse.’ Seeing that my mind was thus agitated, the ascetic was moved and breathing hot and hard,
he said, ‘What I have said must come to pass. But, O ascetic! Since you are always rigid in your austerities and unwavering from your rites, hear what I have to say and hold it close to your heart. When Pramati’s son, the pure
Ruru appears, you will be immediately freed from the curse on seeing him.’ You are that Ruru, the son of Pramati.
Regaining my form, I will tell you something for your beneﬁt.
‘“O best of beings! The righteous path is non-violence and that of not destroying life. Therefore, a Brahmana
should never take the life of any living creature. The sacred texts say that a Brahmana should always be peaceful,
learned in the Vedas and the Vedangas, should make all creatures fearless and should be non-violent, truthful and
forgiving. The supreme duty of Brahmanas is to retain the knowledge of the Vedas. The duty of the Kshatriyas is
not meant for you. O Ruru! Listen to me. To hold up the rod of punishment, to rule over and protect subjects, these
are the natural duties of Kshatriyas. In days gone by, the snakes were destroyed in Janamejaya’s sacriﬁce. But the
frightened snakes were saved by a Brahmana at the snake-sacriﬁce. O supreme among the Brahmanas! This was
Astika, chief among the Brahmanas, powerful in his austerities, brave, strong and learned in the Vedas.”’
12

‘Ruru said, “O supreme among the Brahmanas! Why did King Janamejaya cause violence to the snakes and how
did he destroy them? O best of the Brahmanas! Why were the snakes saved by the wise Astika? I wish to hear all
this.”
‘The sage said, “O Ruru! You will hear the great history of Astika from a Brahmana who will recount it.” Saying this, he vanished.’

Souti said, ‘Ruru rushed to look for the rishi, but could not ﬁnd him anywhere in the forest. Not ﬁnding him, he
was tired and fell down on the ground. Regaining his senses, he returned home and asked his father. On his asking,
his father told him the entire story.’

Section Five
Astika Parva
This parva has 1025 shlokas and forty-one chapters.
Chapter 13: 45 shlokas
Chapter 14: 23 shlokas
Chapter 15: 13 shlokas
Chapter 16: 40 shlokas
Chapter 17: 30 shlokas
Chapter 18: 11 shlokas
Chapter 19: 17 shlokas
Chapter 20: 15 shlokas
Chapter 21: 17 shlokas
Chapter 22: 5 shlokas
Chapter 23: 12 shlokas
Chapter 24: 14 shlokas
Chapter 25: 33 shlokas
Chapter 26: 47 shlokas
Chapter 27: 35 shlokas
Chapter 28: 25 shlokas
Chapter 29: 23 shlokas
Chapter 30: 22 shlokas
Chapter 31: 18 shlokas
Chapter 32: 25 shlokas
Chapter 33: 31 shlokas
Chapter 34: 18 shlokas
Chapter 35: 13 shlokas
Chapter 36: 26 shlokas
Chapter 37: 27 shlokas
Chapter 38: 39 shlokas
Chapter 39: 33 shlokas
Chapter 40: 11 shlokas
Chapter 41: 30 shlokas
Chapter 42: 20 shlokas
Chapter 43: 39 shlokas
Chapter 44: 22 shlokas
Chapter 45: 28 shlokas
Chapter 46: 41 shlokas
Chapter 47: 25 shlokas
Chapter 48: 26 shlokas
Chapter 49: 28 shlokas
Chapter 50: 17 shlokas
Chapter 51: 23 shlokas
Chapter 52: 22 shlokas
Chapter 53: 36 shlokas
It is one of the longer parvas and is about the snake-sacriﬁce, which provides the setting where the Mahabharata story was told. The parva is
named after a sage named Astika, who saved the snakes (the major ones) from the snake-sacriﬁce.
13

Shounaka asked, ‘Why did that tiger among kings, King Janamejaya, decide to have a snake-sacriﬁce until all the
snakes were destroyed? Why did Astika, supreme among the Brahmanas, save the snakes from the blazing ﬁre?
Whose son was the king who performed the snake-sacriﬁce? Whose son was that best of the Brahmanas? Tell us.’
Souti said, ‘O best of the Brahmanas! O best of the speakers! I shall recount in all its details the great story of
Astika, as it was told. Listen.’
Shounaka said, ‘I wish to hear in detail the beautiful story of the ancient and famous Brahmana sage Astika.’
Souti said, ‘The wise know this ancient story as history. It was recounted by Krishna Dvaipayana to the inhabitants of the Naimisharanya. At the request of the Brahmanas, my learned father Lomaharshana, Vyasa’s disciple
and a suta, once narrated it. O Shounaka! I was present at the time. Since you have asked me, I shall recount the
story of Astika exactly as I heard it.
‘Astika’s father was as powerful and mighty as Prajapati.1 He was celibate and was always engaged in great
austerities. He was controlled in his food and never spilt his semen. He was known by the name of Jaratkaru. He
was the chief among mendicants,2 righteous and rigid in his vows. Once, when he was travelling, he saw his ancestors hanging upside down in a great cave, their feet pointing upwards and their heads down. On seeing them
Jaratkaru asked, “Who are you, hanging upside down in this cave, tethered with a rope made of grass that has been
eaten away by rats who secretly live in this cave?” The ancestors replied, “We are rishis rigid in our vows, known
as the yayavaras. O Brahmana! We are descending into the earth because we have no descendants. We only have
one descendant known as Jaratkaru. But unfortunate as we are, that unfortunate one has adopted the path of austerities. Therefore, that fool does not think of having a wife so as to get a son. It is for that reason that we are hanging
upside down in this cave, because we are decaying. Like sinners, despite having a protector, we are unprotected. O
excellent one! Who are you that you are sorrowing for us like a relative? O Brahmana! We wish to know who you
are that you are standing before us mourning, though we deserve to be mourned?” Jaratkaru replied, “I am
Jaratkaru himself and you are my fathers and grandfathers who have come before me. Tell me what I should do.”
‘The ancestors said, “For your sake and for us, endeavour your best to have a son so that our lineage can continue. O exalted one! Such is the law. From the fruits of virtuous action and from the stored-up merits of austerities
one does not obtain the gains accrued by having a son. Therefore, as we are instructing you, try your best to marry
a wife and have a son. O son! You are our recourse and this will bring us the greatest good.”
‘Jaratkaru replied, “I have always resolved never to have a wife. But I will take a wife for the sake of your welfare. O ancestors! If I get a girl under my conditions, I will marry her according to the prescribed rites. Her name
has to be the same as mine and her relatives have to willingly bestow her on me as a gift. But who will give a wife
to a poor man like me? However, I will accept a girl who is given to me as alms. O ancestors! I shall go as far as to
marry a wife under these conditions. I shall not act otherwise. O my ancestors! For the sake of relieving you, I
shall have offspring from her so that you may attain the eternal state and be happy there.”’
Souti said, ‘The Brahmana who was rigid in his vows thereafter roamed the earth in search of a wife. But he did
not get a wife. One day, the Brahmana went into a forest and, remembering the words of his ancestors, thrice
begged for a woman in a faint voice. Thereupon, Vasuki3 appeared and offered his sister to the Brahmana for acceptance. But he did not accept her, because he thought she did not have the same name as his. The great-souled
Jaratkaru had intently thought to himself that he would not accept for a wife someone who did not bear the same
name as his. Then Jaratkaru, of great austerities and of great wisdom, asked, “O snake! Tell me truthfully, what is
your sister’s name?” Vasuki replied, “O Jaratkaru! My younger sister’s name is also Jaratkaru. Given by me, accept this slender-waisted one as your wife. O best of the Brahmanas! Till now, I have protected her for you. Therefore, take her.” O foremost among those who have knowledge of the brahman! In times gone by, the snakes were
cursed by their mother4 that they would be destroyed in Janamejaya’s sacriﬁce by the one whose charioteer was
the wind.5 It was to pacify this curse that the best of the snakes6 married his sister to the great-souled rishi of good
vows.
‘Accepting her in accordance with the prescribed rites, he7 had from her a great-souled son named Astika, greatsouled and an ascetic and learned in the Vedas and the Vedangas. He looked on all the worlds impartially and removed the fear from his father and mother. Then, after a long time, we have heard that a ruler of men8 from the

Pandava lineage conducted a great sacriﬁce known as the snake-sacriﬁce. When the sacriﬁce for the destruction of
the snakes went on, Astika, of great fame, delivered them from the curse. Saving his maternal uncles, relatives and
other snakes, he then delivered his ancestors by having a son through his ascetic practices. O Brahmana! He freed
himself from their debt through his diverse vows and study of the Vedas. He pleased the gods through sacriﬁces in
which many offerings were made. He pleased the sages through his celibacy and his ancestors through his progeny.
Jaratkaru and his grandfathers went to heaven.
‘After a long time, the noble Jaratkaru, best of the sages, had a son named Astika and after following the righteous path, went to heaven. I have narrated the account of Astika as I heard it. O tiger of the Bhrigu lineage! Now
tell me, what else should I narrate?’
14

Shounaka said, ‘O Souti! Tell us once again, in detail, the account of the holy and wise Astika. You listen most
obediently to what we say. O son! You speak in gentle tones, with the right words and metres. We are very pleased.
You speak like your father. Your father was always ready to please us. Therefore, tell us this account, as your father narrated it.’
Souti said, ‘O long-lived ones! I shall tell you the story of Astika exactly as I heard it from my father. O Brahmana without sin! Many years ago, in the era of the gods, Prajapati9 had two fair daughters and these sisters had
great beauty. Their names were Kadru and Vinata and they were the wives of Kashyapa. Their husband was like
Prajapati and obtaining great happiness from his wives, gave each of them a boon. Hearing that their husband
Kashyapa was willing to grant boons, these two beautiful women were transformed from happiness to great joy.
Kadru wished to have one thousand nagas as her sons, equal to one another in splendour. Vinata asked for two
sons, greater than Kadru’s sons in strength, form, energy and valour. Then, her husband granted her the boon of
sons she wanted and Kashyapa told Vinata that it would be as she wished. Having got the boon she desired of two
greatly powerful sons, Vinata was satisﬁed and happy. So was Kadru at having obtained the boon of one thousand
sons, equal in splendour. “Nurture the embryos with care.” Saying this, the great ascetic Kashyapa went away to
the forest, leaving his two wives satisﬁed with their boons.’
Souti said, ‘O lord of the Brahmanas! After a long time, Kadru gave birth to one thousand eggs. Vinata gave
birth to two eggs. Their happy maidservants kept these separately in steaming vessels and 500 years passed. After
500 years, Kadru’s sons emerged from the eggs. But nothing was seen to emerge from Vinata’s two eggs. Thereupon, that ascetic lady Vinata, impatient to have a son but ashamed and sorry, broke open one of the eggs and saw
her son, with the upper part of the body formed, but the lower part yet unformed. It was then heard that the enraged
son cursed his mother. “O mother! Since out of avarice, you broke open this egg and didn’t allow my body to be
completely developed, you will be enslaved for 500 years by the woman you sought to equal. O mother! Your other illustrious son will set you free from slavery, if you wait patiently and do not break open the egg prematurely
and deform his body like you have done mine. If you wish to have a son of unrivalled strength, you must patiently
wait for his time of birth, for 500 years.” Thus cursing his mother Vinata, the son arose into the sky. O Brahmana!
Aruna10 can be seen in the morning. At the right time, Garuda, the enemy of the nagas, was born. As soon as he
was born, he deserted his mother. O tiger of the Bhrigu lineage! Being hungry, the king of the birds rose into the
sky to search for the food earmarked for him by the creator.’
15

Souti said, ‘O great ascetic! At around this time, the two sisters once saw Ucchaihshrava approach towards them.
This gem, the best of horses, was worshipped by all the gods when he arose when the ocean was churned for nectar. This horse was supreme, of unsurpassed strength, divine, forever young, wonderful and decorated with all the
auspicious marks.’
Shounaka asked, ‘Where and how did the gods churn the ocean for nectar, from which you say this powerful
and resplendent king of horses arose? Tell me this.’
Souti said, ‘There is a supreme mountain named Meru that is blazing with energy. The sun’s rays are scattered
when they fall on its golden and glowing peaks. Adorned with ornaments of gold and frequented by gods and

gandharvas, this is unfathomable and unattainable to those who have committed many sins. Fearful beasts of prey
roam its heights and divine herbs illuminate it. That great mountain arises high to cover the vaults of heaven. It
cannot be approached through the imagination. It is bedecked with many trees and rivers and it echoes with the
beautiful melodies of many birds. It has stood aloft for many eras. It was on this peak’s bejewelled and beautiful
summit that all the revered gods ascended. Those who had practised austerities and observed vows gathered and
held consultations about how they might obtain the ambrosia. When all the gods thought and consulted each other,
the god Narayana11 spoke to Brahma. “The pot of curdled milk12 must be churned by the gods and the demons
together. When that is done, ambrosia and all the herbs and all the jewels will emerge. O gods! Therefore, churn
the ocean and you will get the ambrosia.”’
16

Souti said, ‘There is a mountain named Mandara, with soaring peaks that tower like clouds. Adorned with nets of
innumerable creepers, echoing with the melodies of many birds and with many ﬁerce-toothed beasts of prey roaming on it, it is frequented by kinnaras,13 apsaras and gods. It rises up 11,000 yojanas14 above and its base extends
11,000 yojanas downwards. Having failed to uproot it, all the gods came to Vishnu and Brahma, who were seated
together, and told them, “For the sake of our welfare and intelligence, endeavour to ﬁnd a means to uproot Mandara.” O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! Both Vishnu and Brahma said, “Let it be that way”, and summoned by
Brahma and directed by Narayana to perform the task, the powerful Ananta15 uprooted the king of mountains with
all his might, with all the forests and all the beings that lived in the forests. With the mountain,16 the gods then
went to the shores of the ocean and told him, “O ocean! We have come to churn your waters for the sake of the
ambrosia.” The lord of the rivers replied, “Let it be that way, but give me my share. I shall then be able to bear the
great crushing when my waters are churned by Mandara.” The gods and the demons then went to Akupara, the
king of the tortoises and said, “You will have to bear the mountain on your back.” Thus addressed, the tortoise offered his back, and using instruments, Indra ﬁxed the mountain on his back.
‘O Brahmana! In days long past, having made Mandara the churning rod and Vasuki the rope, the gods and the
demons began to churn the ocean, the treasure house of waters. For the sake of the ambrosia, the asuras and the
danavas17 grasped one end of the king of the snakes and the great gods grasped the tail. And Ananta stayed with
the revered Narayana and repeatedly raised and lowered the head of the naga. As the naga Vasuki was raised up
and down by the gods, black smoke and ﬂaming winds issued from his mouth. From this smoke was created clouds
with lightning in them and showers rained down on all the gods, refreshing them when they were tired and fatigued. From the sides of the mountain, ﬂowers showered down and refreshed all the gods and the demons. Tugged
by the gods and the demons as they churned the ocean, there arose from Mandara a terrible roar, like deep thunder
in the clouds. All kinds of marine creatures were crushed by the great mountain and in hundreds gave up their lives
in the salty ocean. Many living beings who dwelt in the underground depths, in the land of Varuna, met their destruction. From the whirling Mandara, great trees crashed against each other, were torn from their roots, and tumbled down, with all the nestling birds. Great ﬁres frequently blazed forth from the friction of trees brushing against
each other. The mountain Mandara looked like dark clouds ﬁlled with streaks of lightning. It drove out and burnt
lions, elephants and many other creatures and killed them all. Then Indra, foremost among the gods, began to pacify the blazing ﬁres that were everywhere by pouring down rain from the clouds. The juices of many herbs and the
resins of many large trees ﬂowed into the waters of the ocean and the gods became immortal through the juices of
the milk, mixed with extracts of liquid gold, which had the powers of ambrosia. Through those juices and resins,
the waters of the ocean now turned into milk and the milk turned into clariﬁed butter, mixed with the best of
essences.
‘Then the gods came to where Brahma, the granter of boons, was seated and said, “O Brahma! We are tired out,
but the ambrosia has not yet emerged. Unless Narayana helps, devas, daityas and nagas have no strength to churn
the ocean any more, which has been going on for a long time.” Then Brahma spoke to the god Narayana thus: “O
Vishnu! You are the last recourse. Give them divine strength.” Vishnu said, “I grant strength to all those who have

devoted themselves to the task. All of you insert Mandara into the pot and turn it around.” Their strength increased
on hearing Narayana’s words and together they once more mightily churned the ocean’s milk.
‘Then from the ocean arose the calm, cool and radiant moon, whose light rivalled 100,000 of the sun’s rays.
Then from the ghee arose Lakshmi, dressed in pale white; then arose the goddess of wine and the white horse.18
Then from the ghee arose the celestial jewel koustubha, which adorns Narayana’s breast. Directed by Aditya,19
swift as the mind, Lakshmi, wine, the moon and the horse followed a path to where the gods were. Then arose the
beautiful god Dhanvantari20 with a white pot in his hand, in which the ambrosia was. Seeing this wonderful sight,
the danavas raised a great uproar for the ambrosia, saying, “It is ours.” At that, Narayana used illusion to assume
the form of a beautiful woman and mixed with the danavas. Then, having lost their senses, their hearts bewitched
by the woman, the danavas and the daityas gave the ambrosia to her.’
17

Souti said, ‘Then the daityas and the danavas assembled, grasped their best shields and many weapons and rushed
at the gods. But the powerful god Lord Vishnu, accompanied by Nara, seized the ambrosia from the chief danavas.
Thereupon, in the tumultuous confusion, all the gods received the ambrosia from Vishnu and drank it. When the
gods were drinking the much desired ambrosia, a danava named Rahu assumed the form of the god Budha21 and
began to drink it also. For the welfare of the gods, the sun and the moon informed the gods of what had happened
when the ambrosia had only reached the danava’s throat. Then the great god22 sliced off his23 well-adorned head
with his weapon, chakra,24 as he was drinking the ambrosia. Then, sliced off by the chakra, the gigantic head of
the danava fell down on the ground with thunderous roars. Ever since that day, a great enmity was created between
Rahu’s head and the sun and the moon and even today, he swallows them both.25
‘Then the great lord Hari26 abandoned his unparalleled feminine form and made them tremble by hurling many
weapons at them. On the shores of the salty ocean thus began the greatest of terrible battles between the gods and
the demons. Thousands of large and sharp spears, sharp-tipped javelins and many other weapons were hurled.
Then, wounded by fearful swords, lances and clubs, sliced by discuses, the demons vomited a lot of blood and fell
down on the ground. Cut off by sharp-tipped spears, in that terrible battle the heads fell down continuously, like
nets of molten gold.27 Covered with blood on their bodies, the great demons lay dead everywhere, like mountain
peaks red with metals. When the sun was tinged with red, thousands of wails rose from everywhere, from those
killed by weapons. The roars of those killed in battle, with iron-tipped clubs when at a distance and with blows of
ﬁsts when close, rose up as if to touch the sky. “Slice down”, “pierce them”, “chase them”, “throw them down”,
“advance”: these terrible words were heard in all directions.
‘When this fearful battle was raging, the gods Nara and Narayana entered the battleﬁeld. On seeing the divine
bow in the hands of Nara, the great Lord Vishnu thought of his danava-destroying chakra.28 As soon as it was
thought of, sudarshana chakra,29 the scorcher of enemies, as radiant as the sun, terrible to look at and unwavering
in its path, descended from the sky. When it arrived, Achyuta,30 as bright as the blazing ﬁre and with fearful arms
like an elephant’s trunk, unleashed with great force that weapon of blazing energy, capable of destroying enemy
towns. Then, when the supreme man31 unleashed with his hand that weapon in battle, like the blazing ﬁre at the
time of the destruction of the universe, it swiftly and repeatedly descended everywhere, destroying Diti and Danu’s
progeny in their thousands. Sometimes it burnt, blazing like ﬁre. Sometimes it struck down demons like the god of
death. Sometimes it was in the sky and sometimes it was on the ground, drinking blood in that battle like a malevolent spirit. Then, undeterred in spirit, the mighty demons rose into the sky like dishevelled clouds and troubled the
gods by showering mountains on them. Those terror-inspiring mountains, with many trees and ﬂat peaks on them,
descended from the sky like masses of clouds, crashing against each other and producing tremendous roars. When
warriors shouted and the battle raged everywhere and mountains, with forests on them, began to fall, the earth and
all her forests began to tremble.

‘Then the great Nara appeared in the terrible battle of the asura masses and using his gold-tipped arrows with
feathered shafts darkened the sky and reduced to dust the mountain peaks. Then the mighty demons, harried by the
gods and witnessing the fearful sudarshana raging like a ﬂaming ﬁre, entered the earth, while others plunged into
the salty waters of the ocean. Having become victorious, the gods respectfully returned Mandara to its place. The
clouds, making heaven resound everywhere, returned whence they had come. The gods rejoiced a great deal and
returned, keeping the ambrosia in safe custody. For safe-keeping, the killer of Bala32 and the other gods handed
over the vessel containing the ambrosia to Kiriti.’33
18

Souti said, ‘I have told you the story of how the ambrosia was churned out from the ocean. From that, the handsome horse34 emerged, unparalleled in strength. When Kadru saw this horse, she asked Vinata, “My dear, what is
the colour of Ucchaihshrava? Tell me right away.” Vinata replied, “Blessed one, the king of horses is white. What
colour do you think it is? Tell me what you think and we will have a wager.” Kadru said, “O lady of the sweet
smiles! I think the horse has a black tail. O beautiful one! Let us have a wager that she whose words are false will
become the other one’s slave.” Thus, having laid a wager that one would be the slave of the other, they returned to
their home, resolving to examine the horse the next day.
‘Wishing to deceive, Kadru asked her 1000 sons to become like hair as black as collyrium and speedily cover
the horse’s tail, so that she did not become a slave. When they refused to do what they had been asked, she cursed
the snakes and said, “In the snake-sacriﬁce of the royal and wise sage Janamejaya, of the Pandava lineage,35 the
ﬁre will consume all of you.” The grandfather36 himself heard this extremely cruel curse uttered by Kadru, and
driven by destiny, bearing in mind the welfare of all creatures, since the snakes had greatly multiplied, he37 and
the other gods approved the curse. The snakes had virulent poison, excessive strength and were mighty in prowess.
They had a tendency to bite. For the welfare of all creatures, to counter their virulent poison, he bestowed on the
great-souled Kashyapa the knowledge of neutralizing poison.’
19

Souti said, ‘O you who are rich in austerities! When the night was gone, it was morning and the sun arose. The sisters Kadru and Vinata, having laid a wager on slavery, were impatient and driven by jealousy. They started out to
see the horse Ucchaihshrava, who was nearby. On their way, they saw the deep and great ocean, the treasury of the
waters, full of ﬁsh that swallow whales,38 crowded with sharks39 and populated by thousands of other creatures of
many forms. No other creatures could approach it, because of the perennial and terrible presence of crocodiles and
turtles. It was the source of all jewels. It was the abode of Varuna. It was the beautiful and supreme home of the
nagas. It was the lord of all the rivers. It was the home of the subterranean ﬁre, friend to the demons and a terror to
all creatures. It was the great reservoir of the waters and never decayed. It was blessed and brought welfare to the
gods. It was the source of the ambrosia. It was beyond measure, beyond imagination, sacred and supreme. It was
also fearful, with the terrible roars of aquatic creatures making a thunderous noise and full of deep whirlpools. It
was a source of fear to all creatures. Buffeted by the winds, with the shoreline changing, heaving up with the agitation and the turbulence, it seemed to dance everywhere, its waves like raised hands. Its waves heaved with changes
in the moon. It was the source of the panchajanya.40 It was the source of the best of jewels.
‘In days gone by, it was agitated by Lord Govinda41 of inﬁnite energy, when he assumed the form of a boar and
found the earth at the bottom of the waters. Though he tried for 100 years, the brahmarshi Atri could not ﬁnd its
bottom, lower than the nether regions. At the beginning of every yuga, when Vishnu of inﬁnite energy falls asleep
in spiritual meditation, it is the bed of the lotus-navelled.42 Its waters were the sacriﬁcial offerings in the subterranean ﬁre’s blazing ﬂames. It was holy, without limits, vast, beyond measure and the lord of the rivers. They saw
the great ocean, with thousands of great rivers rushing towards it with pride, like rivals towards lovers’ rendezvous. They saw that it was deep, populated by whales and sharks, thundering with the sounds of other aquatic
creatures. They saw it was vast, as extended as the sky, unfathomable and the inﬁnite and great treasury of the wa-

ters. When they thus saw the deep ocean, populated with whales, sharks and waves, serene and extended like the
sky, shining with the ﬂames of the subterranean ﬁre, they swiftly passed over it.’
20

Souti said, ‘Having crossed the ocean, Kadru of swift speed, accompanied by Vinata, quickly arrived before the
horse. Seeing many black hairs stuck to the tail, Kadru made the dejected Vinata her slave. Then, having lost the
wager, Vinata became a slave who was stricken by grief.
‘Meanwhile, when the time came, Garuda of great energy broke open the egg without his mother’s help and
emerged. He looked like a mass of blazing ﬁre and was fearful in appearance. As soon as he was born, the bird increased to a gigantic size and rose into the sky. On seeing him, all the beings43 sought the refuge of Vibhavasu.44
They bowed down before the god who has a universal form and who was seated on his seat, and addressed him
thus. “O Agni! Do not extend your body. Have you decided to burn us? Look, the huge mass of ﬂames is spreading.” Agni replied, “O persecutors of the demons! It is not what you think. It is the mighty Garuda, equal to me in
energy.” Thus addressed, the gods and all the sages approached Garuda and from a distance praised him in these
words. “O lord of the birds! You are a rishi. You obtain the greatest share in a sacriﬁce. You are a god. You are our
supreme protector. You are the ocean of strength, you are purity. You are beyond qualities and darkness. You are
the possessor of all anger. You cannot be conquered. We have heard that you are the performer of all great acts.
You are all that has not been and all that has been. You are the supreme knowledge. Surpassing the rays of the sun,
you produce all that is permanent and all that is transient. Darkening the splendour of the sun, you are the destroyer of everything. You are all that perishes and all that does not perish. O god! With the splendour of ﬁre, you consume everything, just as the sun burns all beings in his anger. You are like the terrible ﬁre which destroys everything at the end of a yuga, when all is consumed in the cycle of destruction. O king of the birds! Having come to
you, we seek refuge in you. You move in the sky, you have unbounded energy, you are as powerful as the ﬁre. You
are the mighty bird Garuda, you reach the clouds. We have approached you. You are the granter of boons and unparalleled in strength.” Having been thus praised by the gods and all the sages, Suparna45 then decreased his energy and his splendour.’
21

Souti said, ‘Then that bird, capable of travelling everywhere at will and capable of summoning energy at will, went
to his mother’s house, on the other side of the ocean. Vinata lived there, tormented by grief, having lost the wager
and having become a slave. Some days later, when her son was present, Vinata was summoned by Kadru and when
Vinata bowed before her, Kadru said, “Dear Vinata, take me to the beautiful and lovely abode of the nagas situated
in the heart of the ocean.” Then Suparna’s mother took up the mother of the snakes. On his mother’s request, Garuda took the snakes on his back. Vinata’s son, the bird, began to rise up towards the sun and scorched by the rays of
the sun, the snakes became unconscious.
‘Seeing the state of her sons, Kadru began to praise Shakra46 in these words. “O lord of the gods! I bow before
you. O slayer of Bala! I bow before you. O slayer of Namuchi! I bow before you. O thousand-eyed husband of
Shachi!47 The snakes are being burnt by the rays of the sun. Save them with your showers. You are our supreme
protector. O best of the gods! O Purandara!48 You can pour forth water in torrents. You are Vayu,49 you are the
clouds. You are Agni. You are the lightning in the sky. You drive the masses of clouds and therefore you are known
as the dense cloud. You are the unparalleled thunder, you are the roaring clouds. You are the creator and the destroyer of all the worlds. You are invincible. You are the light of all beings. You are the sun and the ﬁre. You are
supreme knowledge, you are wonderful. You are the king. You are the best of the gods. You are Vishnu, you have
one thousand eyes. You are the God and the last refuge. You are the soma50 that is the most worshipped. You are
the instants.51 You are the tithis.52 You are lava and you are again kshana.53 You are shuklapaksha,54 you are
krishnapaksha,55 you are kala,56 you are kashtha57 and you are also truti.58 You are the year, the seasons, the
months, the nights and the days. You are the beautiful earth with its mountains and forests. You are the bright sky

with the sun. You are the great ocean and its waves, with whales,59 creatures that swallow whales,60 crocodiles61
and diverse other ﬁsh. You are immensely famous. You are always worshipped by the wise, whose intelligence has
been awakened, and the maharshis. You are the drinker of the soma juice that is offered at sacriﬁces with sacred
incantations and other offerings. You are always worshipped in sacriﬁces by Brahmanas who desire the fruits. Your
incomparable strength is praised in the Vedas. It is for this reason that the best of the Brahmanas, who are engaged
in sacriﬁces, study the Vedangas with great diligence.”’
22

Souti said, ‘Having been thus addressed by Kadru, the illustrious god who rides tawny horses,62 covered the entire
sky with layers of blue clouds. Those clouds, sparkling with lightning, poured down copious quantities of water.
As the clouds continued to thunder in the sky, as if at each other, and continuously poured down torrents of water
that were welcome, they roared. The sky seemed to madly dance with the wind’s violence, the clap of thunder and
the waves of showers. As Vasava63 poured down this rain, the nagas were overwhelmed with delight. The entire
earth was covered everywhere with water.’
23

Souti said, ‘Carried by Suparna, they soon came to an island. It was surrounded by the waters of the ocean and
echoed with the songs of birds. There were myriad fruits and ﬂowers in the woods that were there. There were
beautiful houses and lakes with lotuses. It was adorned with charming lakes that were full of clear water. It was refreshed with pure winds that carried with them divine fragrances. It was radiant with trees that grow on the Malaya
mountains.64 They rose high up in the sky and stirred by the breeze, showered down ﬂowers. It was as if the trees
bathed the nagas who lived there with rain in the form of ﬂowers. It was a charming, pleasant and divine place,
dear to the gandharvas and the apsaras. Echoing with the sweet melodies of many birds, it delighted Kadru’s sons.
‘Having arrived in those woods, the pannagas65 enjoyed themselves there. Then they told the immensely valorous Suparna, supreme among birds, “Take us to another beautiful island that has large quantities of water. O bird!
You must have seen many enchanting countries when travelling through the sky.” Having thought about this, the
bird asked his mother Vinata, “O mother! Why must I do what the serpents ask me to?” Vinata replied, “O
supreme among birds! I have become the slave of my ignoble sister. The serpents deceived me and made me lose a
wager.” When his mother told him the reason, the one who travels in the sky66 grieved.
‘He told the serpents, “O serpents! What can I get you? What can I ﬁnd out for you? What feat of power can I
perform? Tell me truly how one can be freed from this state of slavery.” Having heard the bird, the serpents asked
him to use his energy to bring the amrita.67 That was the way to be freed from slavery.’
24

Souti said, ‘When he had heard the words of the snakes, Garuda told his mother, “I am going to get the amrita. But
I wish to eat something. Tell me what.” Vinata replied, “The nishadas68 have their excellent home in a remote part
of the ocean. Eat thousands of nishadas and bring back the amrita. But never set your mind on killing a Brahmana.
Among all living beings, a Brahmana is like ﬁre and is never to be killed. When he is angered, a Brahmana is like
ﬁre, the sun, poison or a sharp weapon. Among all beings, he is the one who obtains the ﬁrst share at a sacriﬁce, is
supreme among the varnas and is a father and preceptor.”
‘Garuda said, “O mother! I am asking you. What are the auspicious signs through which I will recognize a Brahmana? You should tell me.” Vinata replied, “O son! If a man goes down your throat torturing you like a swallowed
ﬁsh hook or burning it like hot coal, know him to be a bull among Brahmanas.” Out of the great love she bore for
her son, Vinata again repeated the words. Vinata knew her son’s valour to be unparalleled. But she nevertheless
pronounced a blessing on him. “Let the Maruts protect your wings. O son! Let the moon protect your back. Let the
ﬁre protect your head. Let the sun protect all your body. O son! I shall always be engaged in ceremonies that bring

you peace and welfare. O son! Go in safety and accomplish your objective.” Having heard his mother’s words, the
bird then stretched his wings and ﬂew up into the sky.
‘The powerful one soon descended hungrily on the nishadas, like Yama himself. Determined to destroy the
nishadas, he raised a great storm of dust that covered up the sky. This dried up the water in the ocean and shook the
mountains that grew around. The king of birds opened his gigantic mouth and stopped the route of the nishadas. In
great alarm, the nishadas also entered the mouth of the eater of snakes. Like frightened birds in a forest that rise in
thousands into the sky when there is a great storm, the nishadas were blinded by the dust and in thousands entered
the wide open mouth of the giant eater of snakes. Then the hungry bird, with great strength and swift speed, the
scorcher of his enemies, closed his mouth. The traveller in the sky killed many nishadas, who depend on diverse
ﬁsh for a living.’
25

Souti said, ‘A Brahmana and his wife had entered his throat and began to burn the bird’s throat like a piece of coal.
The giant bird said, “O best among the twice-born! Come out of my open mouth quickly. A Brahmana will never
be killed by me, even if he is always associated with those who commit sin.” When Garuda said this, the Brahmana replied, “My wife is a nishada. Let her come out with me.” Garuda said, “Take the nishada with you and
come out immediately. Save yourself, before you are digested by the energy in my stomach.” Thereupon, the Brahmana emerged with the nishada woman. Praising Garuda, he went to the country where he wished to go. When the
Brahmana and his wife emerged, the king of birds, swift as the mind, stretched his wings and rose up into the sky.
‘He then saw his father,69 who asked him about his welfare and he replied, “I have been sent by the snakes to
steal the supreme soma. I shall bring it today, to free my mother from her slavery. My mother instructed me to eat
the nishadas. But even after eating them in their thousands, my hunger is not yet satisﬁed. O illustrious one! O
lord! Show me some other food that I can eat, so that I am strong enough to steal the amrita.”
‘Kashyapa said, “In ancient times, there was a maharshi named Vibhavasu. He became angry very easily. He
had a younger brother named Supratika,70 who was a great ascetic. That great sage was unwilling to maintain their
wealth jointly with his brother and Supratika always spoke of dividing it. After some time, Vibhavasu told his
brother Supratika, ‘It is from delusion that many wish to divide common property. Once it has been divided, they
are deluded from love of wealth. Ignorant from selﬁshness, enmity is created, though there is a disguise of friendship. Others, knowing them estranged in property matters, increase the enmity on other matters and divided relatives meet their downfall. Absolute ruin soon comes to those who are separated. That is the reason why learned
ones never approve partition among brothers. When divided, they do not have any respect for the sacred texts or
preceptors. O Supratika! You are beyond my control. Disregarding my advice and out of love for riches, you wish
for a partition. I curse you that you will become an elephant.’ Thus cursed, Supratika told Vibhavasu, ‘You will
become a tortoise that lives in the water.’ Cursed by each other and their minds deluded by desire, they became an
elephant and a tortoise, animals of low birth. Boastful of their strengths and sizes, as earlier, they have continued in
their vice of enmity towards each other, living in this huge lake. Look at one of them, the large and handsome elephant, come towards this lake now. Hearing his trumpeting, the giant tortoise that lives under water rises out of the
lake, agitating its waters. On seeing him, the valorous elephant curls his trunk and rushes into the water, violently
moving his tusks, trunk, tail and feet. The water that is full of ﬁshes is agitated. The valorous tortoise also raises its
head and comes up to ﬁght. The elephant is six yojanas71 in height and double that in length. The tortoise is three
yojanas in height and ten yojanas in circumference. These two are maddened at the prospect of ﬁghting each other
and wish to kill each other. Eat them up and swiftly accomplish the task you wish to perform.” Hearing his father’s
words, the bird swooped down from the sky and swiftly grasped the elephant and the tortoise, one in each claw.
‘The bird then ﬂew high up into the sky. It went to the tirtha72 named Alamba and saw many celestial trees
there. Struck by the wind raised by his wings, the trees trembled in fear. Those celestial trees had golden branches
and were scared that these would be broken. Seeing that the trees bore fruit and shoots capable of granting all desires and that they were quivering in fright, the bird went to other trees, incomparable in colour and shape. Those
giant trees had fruit of gold and silver, with branches of lapis lazuli. They were washed by the waters of the ocean.

‘A giant sandalwood73 tree stood there and spoke to the best of the birds, as he was swiftly swooping down
with the speed of the mind. “Descend on my giant branch, which extends for one hundred yojanas, and eat the elephant and the tortoise.” Then the supreme among the birds, as giant as a mountain, descended swiftly on the tree,
shaking the branches that housed a thousand birds, and broke the branch that was full of leaves.’
26

Souti said, ‘As soon as the tree’s branch was touched by the immensely powerful Garuda with his feet, it snapped.
He74 held onto it as it was about to fall. As he wonderingly gazed at that large branch that had been broken, he
saw the valakhilyas75 hanging from it, their heads facing downwards. The lord of birds was scared of killing them
and carefully held the branch in his beak and ascended again. Shaking the mountains, the bird slowly circled the
sky and while doing this, passed many countries, with the elephant and the tortoise. In his compassion for the
valakhilyas, he could ﬁnd no place to alight on. At last he went to the best of mountains, the indestructible
Gandhamadana.
‘There he saw his father Kashyapa engaged in austerities. His father also saw the bird of divine form, with energy, valour and strength, swift as the wind and the mind, large as a mountain, like the raised staff of a Brahmana,
inconceivable, incapable of description, terrible to all beings, the possessor of the valour of delusion,76 as radiant
as Agni himself, incapable of being vanquished by devas, danavas and rakshasas, capable of splintering mountain
peaks, drying up the water of rivers and whirling the worlds, as terrible as Yama himself.
‘On seeing him approach and knowing his wishes, the illustrious Kashyapa told him, “O son! Do not commit a
rash act, because that can bring sudden pain. The valakhilyas sustain themselves on the sun’s rays. If angry, they
can scorch you.” Therefore, for his son’s sake, Kashyapa propitiated the valakhilyas, accomplished performers of
austerities. He explained the reason and said, “O performers of austerities! Garuda’s endeavour is for the welfare
of all creatures. He is trying to perform a great act. Therefore, please give him permission.” Having been thus addressed by the illustrious Kashyapa, the valakhilyas gave up the branch and went off to the sacred Himalayas, in
search of more austerities.
‘When they went away, Vinata’s son,77 the branch still extending his beak, asked his father Kashyapa, “O lord!
Where will I discard this branch of the tree? O lord! Tell me of a land where there are no Brahmanas.” Kashyapa
told him of a mountain that was uninhabited by men, inaccessible and incapable of being penetrated by others even
in their thoughts, covered with snow and full of caves. The great bird, Tarkshya,78 carried the branch, the elephant
and the tortoise and swiftly, with the power of his mind, entered the mountain’s wide base. A thin leather strap cut
out of a hundred skins wouldn’t have been long enough to encircle that giant branch the giant bird carried in his
ﬂight. Garuda, the lord of all the birds, ﬂew over 100,000 yojanas in the briefest possible time. As if in a moment,
he reached the mountain his father had described and released the branch, which fell down with a great roar. On
being struck by the wind unleashed by the bird’s wings, the king of mountains trembled. As the trees collapsed,
they showered down ﬂowers. The peaks of that great mountain, adorned with gold and gems, were shattered on all
sides. The falling branch struck many trees with golden ﬂowers and they looked like clouds charged with lightning. Bright as gold, those falling trees mixed with the mountain’s minerals and glowed, as if reﬂecting the red
rays of the sun. The best of birds sat down on the peak of the mountain and ate both the elephant and the tortoise.
‘With the speed of the mind, he79 then arose from the mountain peak. Ominous and fearful portents appeared
before the gods. Indra’s vajra blazed forth in great pain. Meteors that trailed ﬂames and smoke were loosened from
the sky and descended. The weapons of vasus, rudras, adityas, saddhyas, maruts and other classes of gods began to
ﬁght among themselves. Such things had never occurred earlier, not even during the war between devas and asuras. Meteors showered down in all directions, tumultuous winds thundered and the cloudless sky made a tremendous roar. Even the God of the gods rained showers of blood. Garlands on the necks of the gods faded and the
sky’s energy withered. Fearful masses of clouds rained down thick showers of blood. The swirling dust darkened
the splendour of crowns worn by the gods. Then Shatakratu,80 with the other gods, was greatly alarmed and frightened. Bewildered at these terrible portents, he asked Brihaspati,81 “O illustrious one! Why have these terrible por-

tents suddenly arisen? I do not see any enemy who can withstand us in battle.” Brihaspati replied, “O Shatakratu!
O king of the gods! It is because of your own fault and negligence. Through the power of their austerities, the
valakhilyas have created a wonderful being—the bird who is the son of the sage Kashyapa and Vinata. He is powerful and capable of assuming any form at will and is coming to take away the soma. The bird is supreme among
the strong and is capable of taking away the soma. He is capable of achieving the impossible.” Hearing this,
Shakra82 spoke to the guardians of the amrita, “An immensely valorous and strong bird has decided to take the
soma away. I am warning you in advance, so that he doesn’t succeed in taking it away by force. Brihaspati has told
me that his strength is unparalleled.” When they heard these words, the gods were amazed.
‘Carefully, they took up positions around the amrita. Shatakratu Indra also stood there, vajra in hand. They wisely clad themselves in wonderful golden armour, expensively adorned with lapis lazuli. They brandished diverse
terrible weapons in their thousands, emitting ﬂames, sparks and smoke, the edges and points sharpened—chakras,
iron clubs, tridents, battle axes, many sharp spears, spotless swords, maces of terrible forms, weapons most appropriate for their respective bodies. Armed with these radiant weapons and decorated with divine ornaments, the
army of gods stood there, their fears paciﬁed. With unparalleled strength, energy and radiance, capable of razing
the cities of the asuras and displaying themselves in forms as radiant as the blazing ﬁre, the gods stood there, their
minds set upon protecting the amrita. Thus, that supreme battleﬁeld, with the gods and with hundreds and thousands of clubs, looked like another ﬁrmament, lit up by the radiant rays of the sun.’
27

Shounaka asked, ‘O suta! What was Indra’s fault and how was he negligent? How was Garuda born through the
austerities of the valakhilyas? How did Kashyapa, a Brahmana, have the king of the birds as a son? How did he83
become invincible and indestructible to all creatures? How did the bird have the power to travel anywhere at will
and summon up every power at will? If they are recounted in the ancient tales, I would like to know the answers to
these questions.’
Souti said, ‘O Brahmana! What you wish to know is indeed narrated in the ancient tales. Listen to me, as I
brieﬂy recount it to you. Prajapati Kashyapa undertook a sacriﬁce in order to have a son and it is said that he was
helped by the rishis, the gods and the gandharvas. Kashyapa appointed Shakra,84 the other gods and the valakhilya
sages to bring ﬁrewood for the sacriﬁce. Because of his great strength, the lord Shakra picked up ﬁrewood that was
as large as a mountain and carried it, without any effort at all. On the way, he saw some rishis who were no larger
than the joint of a thumb. Together, they carried a single leaf of a palasha tree.85 The ascetics were extremely
weak from lack of food and their bodies were lean. A cow’s hoof had left a print86 and this had ﬁlled up with water, causing them grief. Vain about his valour, Purandara87 was amazed at this sight and contemptuously laughing
at them swiftly passed over them, stepping over their heads. At this they were angered and began a great act88 that
would bring danger to Shakra. According to the rites, these great sages, rigid in their austerities, poured libations
into the sacriﬁcial ﬁre and chanted mantras saying, “The gods will have another Indra, capable of going anywhere
at will and capable of summoning up any power at will. He will bring great fear to the present king of the gods.
Through the fruits of our austerities, there will be born one, swift as the mind, who will be a hundred times better
than Indra in strength and valour.” On learning of this, Shatakratu,89 the king of the gods, was greatly alarmed and
sought refuge with Kashyapa, rigid in his vows.
‘Hearing everything from the king of the gods, Prajapati Kashyapa went to the valakhilyas and asked them if
their act had been successful. The truthful ones replied that it had been. Then Prajapati Kashyapa paciﬁed them
and said, “O ones blessed with the power of austerities! The present Indra has been appointed by Brahma as the
lord of the three worlds. You are trying to create another Indra. O supreme ones! You should not make Brahma’s
words false. Nor should I make your intentions false. Let there be another Indra for winged beings, endowed with
great strength and valour. Show mercy to the king of the gods who is a supplicant before you.” Having been thus
addressed by Kashyapa, the valakhilya ascetics saluted Kashyapa, supreme among sages, and said, “O Prajapati!
Our act was for the purpose of creating an Indra. It is also something that you wish, because it was meant to bring

you a son. Please accept this act and its fruits. Do whatever seems to you to be the best course of action.” At that
time, the beautiful and illustrious goddess Dakshayani90 Vinata desired to have a son.
‘Having performed austerities and rites for the birth of a son and bathed, the pure one served her husband.
Kashyapa told her, “O goddess! This act of yours will bear fruit and you will obtain what you desire. You will give
birth to two valorous sons, lords of the three worlds. Owing to the austerities of the valakhilyas and through my
own desire, these sons will be extremely fortunate and will be worshipped in the worlds.” Marichi’s illustrious
son91 again told her, “Take good care when you bear these auspicious seeds in your womb. One of these will be a
valorous bird, the Indra of all winged beings, capable of summoning every power at will and esteemed by the
worlds.” Pleased, Prajapati92 then spoke to Shatakratu,93 “O Purandara! You will have two powerful birds as
brothers. They will cause no injury to you. O Shakra! Stop worrying. You will continue to be Indra. But in your
arrogance, never insult those who have knowledge of the brahman. Their words are like poison, their anger is fearsome.” At these words, Indra’s fears were dispelled and he went to his world. Vinata was delighted, because her
wishes had been fulﬁlled. She gave birth to two sons, Aruna and Garuda. Aruna, with the malformed body, became
the one who comes before the sun.94 Garuda was instated as the Indra of the birds. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! Now listen to his great deeds.’
28

Souti said, ‘O best of the twice born! When this turmoil was going on, Garuda, the king of the birds, swiftly came
to where the gods were. Having seen his great strength, the gods began to tremble in fear. They even began to attack each other with their weapons. Among those guarding the soma, was Bhouvana,95 as radiant as the lightning
and ﬁre and unparalleled in his great valour. But after an instant’s great ﬁght, he lay dead, ripped apart by the
beaks, talons and wings of the Indra among birds. Darkening the worlds with a great storm of dust created by his
wings, the giant bird overwhelmed the gods, and overcome with that dust, the gods were deluded. Those who were
guarding the amrita could not see it because of that dust. Thus, Garuda brought complete turmoil to the world of
the gods. He ripped the gods apart with his wings and beak. Then, the god with the thousand eyes96 commanded
Vayu,97 “O Marut! It is your duty to drive the dust away.” Then the mighty Vayu drove the dust away.
‘When the darkness had disappeared, the gods attacked the bird. He roared in the sky, like a giant cloud, terrifying all beings. Attacked by the army of the gods, the immensely valorous king of the birds, the destroyer of enemies, rose into the sky, above the heads of the gods. Led by Indra and armoured, they attacked him with many
weapons like lances, iron clubs, spears, maces, many sharp swords and chakras as radiant as the sun. Attacked
from every side, the king of birds didn’t even tremble. Vinata’s powerful son fought a tremendous battle, showing
no signs of tiring out. Like the roar of thunder in the sky, Vinata’s powerful son attacked the gods from all sides
with his wings and breast and scattered them in all directions. Oppressed and mangled by Garuda’s beak and
talons, a lot of blood ﬂowed from the bodies of the gods and they ﬂed. The saddhyas and gandharvas ﬂed to the
east, the vasus and rudras to the south, the adityas to the west and the Nasatyas98 to the north. They retreated
while ﬁghting and looked back repeatedly at the immensely energetic enemy. He fought with the brave Ashvakranda, the bird Renuka, the brave Krathana, the bird Tapana, Uluka, Shvasana, the bird Nimesha, Praruja and Pulina.
Vinata’s son tore them into pieces with his wings, talons and sharp beak, like the wrathful and enemy-destroying
Pinaki99 at the end of a yuga. Those immensely powerful and energetic warriors, draining showers of blood from
their many wounds, looked like dark clouds.
‘Thus rendering the gods almost dead, the best of the birds went to where the amrita was and found it surrounded from all sides by ﬁre. The ﬂames of that great raging ﬁre covered up by the entire sky and moved by violent
winds seemed to burn up the hot and sharp rays of the sun. The great-souled Garuda thereupon assumed ninety
times ninety mouths and drank up with these mouths water from rivers. Returning with great speed and using his
wings as a chariot, he quenched the blazing ﬁres with the rivers. Putting out the ﬁres, he adopted a very small
form, wishing to enter.’100

29

Souti said, ‘Assuming the form of a golden body as bright as the rays of the sun, Garuda entered with great force,
like a river entering the ocean. He saw a wheel near the amrita, with keen edges and sharp blades, revolving continuously and murderously around it, blazing like the ﬁre and the sun, a fearful instrument skilfully created by the
gods to slice down those who wished to steal the soma. The bird saw an entry through this. He made his body very
small and in an instant passed through the spokes in the wheel.
‘Behind the wheel, he saw two large snakes, standing guard over the amrita. They blazed like ﬂaming ﬁre and
their tongues were like lightning. Their power was immense and their faces and their eyes were ﬁery. They were
terrible, angry and always mobile and their eyes had venom in them. Their eyes did not blink and displayed rage.
Anyone who was even seen by those two was instantly burnt to ashes. The one with the beautiful feathers101 instantly ﬂung dust into their eyes and thus making them sightless he attacked them from all directions. Vinata’s son,
the traveller in the skies, attacked their bodies and at will tore them into shreds. Without any delay, he then went to
where the soma was.
‘Vinata’s powerful son picked up the amrita from where it was. The valorous one ﬂew up into the sky, in the
process shattering the instrument into pieces. The bird soon emerged, grasping the amrita, but without drinking it.
He proceeded on his way, not tired at all, making the sun’s radiance seem dark.
‘Then Vinata’s son encountered Vishnu in the sky. Narayana was pleased with him at his act of self-denial and
told the bird, “I am the god who grants boons that don’t decay.” The bird said, “I always wish to remain above
you.” He again told Narayana, “I wish to be immortal, free from the decay of age, without the amrita.” Having received these boons, Vinata’s son told Vishnu, “O illustrious one! I wish to grant you a boon too.” Krishna102
asked for the boon that the powerful one should always be his vehicle.103 The illustrious god Narayana placed the
bird on his ﬂagstaff and said, “Thus you will always be above me.” The bird agreed.
‘As the bird, the enemy of the gods, ﬂew on with the amrita, Indra powerfully struck him with his vajra. Struck
by the vajra, Garuda, supreme among those who ﬂy, tauntingly told Indra in a pleasant voice, “I shall respect the
rishi from whose bones the vajra has been constructed. O Shatakratu! I shall respect the vajra and you too. I will
cast off one of my feathers and you will never be able to ﬁnd its ends. I have not felt the slightest pain at being
struck by your vajra.” On seeing that beautiful feather, all the beings were amazed and exclaimed, “Let this bird be
called Suparna.”104 On seeing this marvellous act, the thousand-eyed Purandara was surprised and concluded that
the bird must be a great being. He said, “O supreme among birds! I wish to know the extreme limits of your incomparable strength. I wish to be your eternal friend.”’
30

‘Garuda said, “O Purandara! As you wish, let there be friendship between us. But know that my strength is great
and hard to bear. O Shatakratu! There is no doubt that the learned do not approve of speaking highly of one’s own
strength or of praising one’s own qualities. O friend! Since we are now friends and since you ask me, I will tell
you, though there should never be self-praise without reason. O Shakra! On a single one of my feathers, without
any fatigue, I can bear the wide world with its mountains, forests, oceans and even you suspended there, even all
the worlds together, with all their mobile and immobile objects. Know this to be my great strength.”
‘O Shounaka! When the hero said this, the illustrious and prosperous lord, the crowned king of the gods, the
bringer of welfare to all beings, said, “Now accept my eternal and supreme friendship. If you do not require the
soma, please return the soma to me. Those to whom you give it will always overcome us.” Garuda replied, “There
is a reason why I am taking the soma away. I will not give the soma to anyone to drink. O god with the thousand
eyes! O ruler of the three worlds! When I have put it down, you can immediately pick it up and bring it back.”
Shakra said, “O you who are born of an egg! Your words please me. O best of the birds! Ask from me any boon
that you desire.” Being thus addressed, he remembered Kadru’s son and his mother’s slavery through deception
and said, “O Shakra! I have the power to do what I desire. Yet, I will be a supplicant before you. Let the mighty
snakes be my food.” The enemy of the danavas agreed and said, “I shall take the soma away when you have put it
down.” Thereafter, with great speed, Suparna went to his mother.

‘In great delight, he told all the snakes, “I have brought you the amrita. I will place it for you on this kusha
grass. O snakes! Drink it after bathing and purifying yourselves through rites. I have done what you asked me to
do. Therefore, as you had promised, let my mother be freed from her slavery at this very instant.” The snakes
agreed and went off to have their baths. Shakra picked up the amrita and went off to heaven. After bathing and purifying themselves through prayers and rites, the snakes joyfully returned to the place where the soma had been
kept, to drink it. But the snakes found that they had been deceived. They began to lick the darbha grass on which
the soma had been placed. Because of this act, the tongues of the snakes were split in two and became forked.
From that day, because of contact with the amrita, the darbha grass became sacred.
‘Thereafter, Suparna happily lived in that forest with his mother. He delighted Vinata by eating snakes, being
honoured by all birds and always earning fame. Without a doubt, he who hears this story or recites it in an assembly of Brahmanas, will attain heaven, obtaining his share of merit from the gloriﬁcation of the great-souled lord of
the birds.’
31

Shounaka said, ‘O, son of a suta! You have told us why the snakes were cursed by their mother. You have told us
why Vinata was cursed by her son. You have told us about the boons granted to Kadru and Vinata by their husband. You have given us the names of the two birds who were born from Vinata. O son of a suta! But you have not
told us the names of the snakes. We wish to hear their names, at least those who are chief among them.’
Souti said, ‘O one who is blessed with the power of austerities! The names of the snakes are many. I will not
mention all their names, but only the main ones. Listen. The ﬁrst one to be born was Shesha and Vasuki came after
him. Then Airavata, Takshaka, Karkotaka, Dhananjaya, Kaliya, Maninaga, the snake Apurana, Pinjaraka, Elapatra,
Vamana, Nila, Anila, Kalmasha, Shabala, Aryaka, Adika, Shalapotaka, Sumanomukha, Dadhimukha, Vimalapindaka, Apta, Kotanaka, Shankha, Valishikha, Nishthayunaka, Hemaguha, Nahusha, Pingala, Bahyakarna, Hastipada, Mudgarapindaka, Kambala, Ashvatara, Kaliyaka, Vritta, Samvartaka, the two snakes known as Padma,
Shankhanaka, Sphandaka, Kshemaka, Pindaraka, Karavira, Pushpadamshtra, Haridraka, Aparajita, Jyotika, Shrivaha, Kauravya, Dhritarashtra,105 Pushkara, Shalyaka, Virajas, Subahu, the mighty Shalipinda, Hastibhadra, Pitharaka, Kumuda, Kumudaksha, Tittiri, Halika, Karkara, Akarakara, Mukhara, Konavasana, Kunjara, Kurara, Prabhakara, Kundodara and Mahodara.
‘O best of the twice-born! I have told you the names of the chief snakes. Since there are too many names, I have
not told you the names of the others. O one blessed with austerities! I believe the progeny and the offspring of the
progeny to be innumerable. Therefore, I will not mention them. O one blessed with austerities! There are many
thousands, millions106 and hundreds of millions107 of snakes in the world. One cannot recount all their numbers.’
32

Shounaka said, ‘O son! You have told us about the many valorous and invincible serpents. Now that you have told
me about their curse, what did they do after that?’
Souti said, ‘The illustrious and greatly famous lord Shesha left Kadru and practised severe austerities. He lived
on air and observed rigid vows. He went to Mount Gandhamadana and practised his austerities in Badari, Gokarna,
Pushkararanya108 and the slopes of the Himalayas. He spent his time in these sacred tirthas, always rigid in observing his vows and controlling his senses.
‘The grandfather109 saw him engaged in terrible austerities, a lord with matted hair and dressed in bark, his
skin, ﬂesh and muscles dried up. Addressing the ascetic engaged in his austerities and truthful vows, the grandfather said, “O Shesha! What are you doing? Let the welfare of all beings also be in your thoughts. O unblemished
one! You are causing pain to all beings through your severe austerities. O Shesha! Tell me what the wish in your
heart is.” Shesha replied, “My brothers who shared the same womb are wicked of mind. I do not wish to live with
them. Please allow me this. Like great enemies, they are always jealous of each other. I am therefore engaged in
austerities. I do not wish to see them. O grandfather! They show no kindness for Vinata or her son, though Vinata’s
son is also our brother. They always show him hatred. So does he. Because of the boon granted by the great-souled

Kashyapa, our father, he is much stronger. Therefore, I shall carry on with these austerities until I have shed this
body of mine. I will not associate with my brothers, in this life or another.”
‘When Shesha uttered these words, Brahma said, “O Shesha! I know what all your brothers do. There is a great
danger that looms before them because of their mother’s offence. O snake! But earlier, I have already provided for
an exception. O Shesha! Do not grieve for any of your brothers. Choose whatever boon you wish for from me. I
am extremely pleased with you and I wish to grant you a boon. O best of the snakes! It is good that your mind is
ﬁxed on dharma. Let your mind be established even more ﬁrmly on dharma.” Shesha replied, “O divine grandfather! O lord! I ask for the boon that my mind always delight in dharma, in tranquillity and in austerities.”
‘Brahma said, “O Shesha! I am extremely pleased with your self-denial and desire for tranquillity. For the welfare of all creatures, let the words that you have expressed be fulﬁlled at my command. O Shesha! This wide earth
is very unstable with its mountains and forests, towns, habitations and oceans. Bear it up properly and well, so that
it is stable.” Shesha replied, “O divine Prajapati! O granter of boons! O lord of the earth! O lord of every being! O
lord of the universe! As you command, I will hold the earth steady. Please place it on my head.” Brahma said, “O
best of the snakes! O Shesha! Go under the earth and she herself will open up a passage for you. By holding up the
earth, you will perform an act greatly valued by me.” Shesha agreed. The ﬁrst among the snakes, the ﬁrst one to be
born, entered the passage in the earth and remained there. He carries the goddess earth, encircled by a girdle of
oceans, on his head.
‘Brahma said, “O Shesha! You are the best of the snakes. You are the god of dharma, because you singly hold up
the earth, encircling her with your endless coils. This is no less than what I myself, or the cleaver of Bala,110 can
do.” Thus does the powerful snake Ananta111 always live under the ground, holding up the earth on Lord Brahma’s command. Then the grandfather, the illustrious lord who is the foremost among the gods, provided Vinata’s
son Garuda to Ananta as a helper.’
33

Souti said, ‘Vasuki, best among snakes, heard about the curse from his mother and wondered about how it might
be aborted. He held a consultation with Airavata and all his other brothers, those who were devoted to dharma. Vasuki said, “O unblemished ones! As you know, a curse has been pronounced on all of us. We should have consultations to free ourselves from this curse. There is no curse that does not have a remedy. O snakes! But he who has
been cursed by his mother has no remedy. My heart trembles on hearing that this curse was uttered before the immutable, immeasurable and truthful one.112 Without a doubt, our annihilation is imminent. Otherwise, the immutable lord would have prevented our mother from imposing the curse. Therefore, let us consult now to see how
the health of the snakes can be preserved. Let us not waste time. Through our consultations, we may be able to ﬁnd
a means of escape, like in ancient times the gods regained the lost Agni who had hidden himself inside a cave, so
that Janamejaya’s sacriﬁce for the destruction of the snakes does not take place or is overcome.” Thus addressed,
all of Kadru’s offspring assembled. They were wise in counsels and put forward their views.
‘Some snakes present said, “Let us assume the form of bulls among Brahmanas and beg Janamejaya to call off
the sacriﬁce.” Other snakes who believed themselves to be wise said, “All of us will become his best advisers.
Without a doubt, he will then ask for our considered opinion on all the rituals and we will render him advice that
the sacriﬁce should be stopped. Thinking us to be extremely wise, the wise king will certainly ask us about the sacriﬁce and we will give reasons why it should not be held. We will point out many serious evils, in this world and
the next, that will result and show causes and reasons why the sacriﬁce should not be held. Or if a preceptor, who
is known to be devoted to the king’s welfare and is well-versed in the rites of a snake-sacriﬁce, is appointed as the
priest, one of us can bite and kill him so that he is dispatched to the land of Yama. If the sacriﬁcial priest is killed,
there will be no sacriﬁce. If other experts in snake-sacriﬁces are appointed as ofﬁciating priests, we will bite them
too and our objective will be attained.” Some other snakes who were devoted to dharma said, “This advice is not
good. It is not proper to kill Brahmanas. Confronted with any danger, ultimate paciﬁcation is only possible when
the remedy is based on dharma. As we know, adharma only destroys the entire world.” Other snakes said, “Let us
become clouds luminescent with lightning and rain down showers so as to extinguish the sacriﬁcial ﬁre.” Other su-

perior snakes said, “Let us go in the night, unobserved by anyone, and steal the ladles for the sacriﬁce. That will
bring an obstruction. Or let the snakes go in their hundreds and thousands to the sacriﬁce and bite everyone and
create a terror. Or let the snakes deﬁle the pure food with their dung and urine, so that all the food is destroyed.”
Others said, “Let us become ofﬁciating priests at the sacriﬁce and obstruct it by demanding our dakshina113 at the
beginning. Let us overpower the king, so that he does that which we ask him to.” Others said, “When the king is
sporting in the water, let us carry him home and tie him up, so that the sacriﬁce is not held.” Others, thinking themselves to be virtuous, said, “Let us go to the king and bite him at once, so that our objective is attained. Through
his death, the root of all our afﬂictions will be severed. This is the ﬁnal result of our wisdom and consultations. O
king! If you approve of this, let us proceed immediately.”
‘Having said all this, they looked at Vasuki, the lord of the snakes. After thinking for a while, Vasuki told the
snakes, “O snakes! This ﬁnal advice of yours is not ﬁt to be carried out. Not a single one of the plans given by the
snakes seems right to me. What can I suggest that will be for our welfare? That is the reason I am worried. The
credit and the blame for the act will rest on me alone.’
34

Souti said, ‘Having heard what all the snakes and Vasuki had to say, Elapatra said, “This sacriﬁce is certain. The
Pandava, King Janamejaya, from whom great terror for us results, is also certain. O king!114 One who is afﬂicted
by destiny can ﬁnd a remedy in destiny alone. There can be no other recourse. O best of the snakes! The source of
our danger is destiny. Therefore, it is only destiny that can be our refuge. Listen to my words. O best of the snakes!
When that curse was imposed, I was frightened and climbed up into my mother’s lap. O best of the snakes! O immensely radiant lord! From there, I heard the sorrowful gods speak to the grandfather.
‘“The gods said, ‘O grandfather! O god of the gods! Who but the harsh Kadru, having borne such beloved children, can curse them in this way and in front of you too? O grandfather! And you also approved of her curse. We
wish to know why she was not stopped.’
‘“Brahma said, ‘The snakes have become numerous. They are cruel, terrible in valour and full of poison. Because of the welfare of all other creatures, I did not prevent Kadru. The snakes which are destined to be destroyed
are poisonous ones that have a propensity to bite, those that bite for little reason, the mean and evil ones, not
snakes that follow dharma. Hear how those snakes can escape from that terrible danger when the time comes. In
the line of the Yayavaras, there will be born a great rishi, intelligent, austere and self-controlled, who will be
known by the name of Jaratkaru. That Jaratkaru will have a son named Astika, who will also be blessed by the
power of austerities. He will bring an end to the sacriﬁce and snakes who are virtuous will escape.’
‘“The gods asked, ‘O god! On whom will Jaratkaru, foremost among sages and gifted with great powers of asceticism, beget that great-souled and powerful son?’
‘“Brahma said, ‘O gods! The powerful one, the best of the Brahmanas, will beget a powerful son on a woman
who will have the same name as his own.”’
‘Elapatra said, “The gods agreed with the grandfather that it would happen that way. The gods went away and so
did the grandfather God. O Vasuki! I see before me your sister, who bears the name of Jaratkaru. Give her as alms
to the rishi of rigid vows when he comes looking for alms, so that this great danger to the snakes may be paciﬁed. I
have heard that this is the means of escape.”’
35

Souti said, ‘O best of the twice-born! When the snakes heard Elapatra’s words, they were delighted, and applauded. From that day, Vasuki took great care of that maiden Jaratkaru, his sister, and was relieved. Not long after this,
all the gods and the asuras churned Varuna’s abode.115 The serpent Vasuki, strongest of the strong, became the
rope used for churning. After this work was over, he appeared before the grandfather. The gods and Vasuki told the
grandfather, “O illustrious lord! Vasuki is suffering because of the fear of the curse. O God! He desires the welfare
of his relatives, but the spike from his mother’s curse pierces his heart. Please draw it out. The king of the snakes

always does that which is pleasing to us and is our benefactor. O lord of the gods! Please grant him a favour and
pacify the fever in his mind.”
‘Brahma said, “O immortal ones! I have myself mentally thought about what you have said and had earlier inspired the snake Elapatra to utter those words. The time has come. Let the king of the snakes carry out those
words. Only the wicked ones will be destroyed, not those who follow the path of dharma. The Brahmana Jaratkaru
has been born and is engaged in austerities. At the appropriate time, let him116 give away his sister Jaratkaru. O
gods! What the snake Elapatra proposed for the welfare of the snakes is true. It cannot be otherwise.”’
Souti said, ‘On hearing the grandfather’s words, the king of the snakes appointed a large number of snakes to
keep a continuous watch on Jaratkaru. He said, “When Lord Jaratkaru exhibits the desire for a wife, come immediately and inform me. Our future welfare depends on this.”’
36

Shounaka said, ‘O son of a suta! I wish to know why the great-souled rishi, whom you have referred to as
Jaratkaru, came to be famous by that name on earth. What is the origin of the name Jaratkaru?’
Souti said, ‘Jara means decay and karu means gigantic. The sage had a gigantic body, but he decayed it slowly
through severe austerities. O Brahmana! It was because of this that he was known as Jaratkaru and Vasuki’s sister
had the name for similar reasons.’
When he heard this, the virtuous Shounaka smiled and told Ugrashrava117 that the names were appropriate.
Souti said, ‘A great deal of time passed. But the sage of rigid vows, deeply engaged in devout austerities, exhibited no desire for a wife. The great-souled sage roamed the entire earth, engaged in deep studies and controlling his
senses, holding back his seed without any signs of fear. Even in his thoughts, he showed no desire for a wife.
‘O Brahmana! Once upon a time, there was a king named Parikshit. He was born in the Kuru lineage. Like Pandu, he was mighty-armed and the supreme of archers in battle. He was devoted to hunting, like his great-grandfather118 in ancient times. That lord of the earth roamed around, hunting deer, wild boar, hyenas, buffaloes and various other wild animals. One day, he pierced a deer with an arrow that had stooping tufts, and slinging his bow over
his back, entered the dense forest. Like Lord Rudra searching in heaven for the sacriﬁcial deer that had been
pierced, he searched everywhere in the forest, bow in hand. Never had a deer pierced by Pariskhit escaped in the
forest alive. However, though wounded by the lord of the earth and the king of men, this deer was soon lost,
demonstrating Parikshit’s own proximity to heaven. He went far in pursuit. Tired and thirsty, he came upon a hermit in the forest. He was seated in a cowshed and drank the froth that issued from the mouths of calves when they
sucked milk.119 Swiftly hurrying to that sage of rigid vows, the king said, his bow raised, “O Brahmana! I am
King Parikshit, the son of Abhimanyu. Have you seen where the deer pierced by me has gone?” Since the sage was
under a vow of silence then, he did not reply. At this, the king became angry. He picked up a dead snake with the
end of his bow and placed it around his120 neck. The hermit looked at him, but did not utter a word, good or bad.
On seeing him in that state, the king’s anger cooled and he was sorry. Thereupon, he returned to his city and the
rishi remained the way he was.
‘He121 had a young son who was blessed with the power of austerities and was extremely powerful. His name
was Shringi and he was great in his vows, but given to great anger and difﬁcult to appease. He sometimes worshipped, with great devotion, the supreme god Lord Brahma, engaged in ensuring the welfare of all beings. Once
commanded by Brahma, he was returning home. A friend of his jestingly told him about his father. On hearing
what had happened, the rishi’s son, easily prone to anger and like poison itself, was enraged. O best of the Brahmanas! The friend, Krisha, was also a rishi’s son and the two often spent time together. Krisha said, “O Shringi!
Do not be too proud. You are an ascetic of great powers. But your father has got a carcass around his shoulders.
Sons of rishis like us are successful, have knowledge of the brahman and are immersed in asceticism. But you
should keep quiet. Where are your powers, your proud words and your arrogance when you see your father carrying a carcass?”’
37

Souti said, ‘When the powerful Shringi, who was easily prone to anger, heard the news that his father was carrying
a corpse, he was extremely angry. He looked at Krisha and, abandoning all pleasantness of speech, asked, “Why
should my father carry a corpse?” Krisha replied, “O friend! When King Parikshit was roaming around on his hunt
today, he placed a dead snake on your father’s shoulders.” Shringi asked, “What harm had my father done to that
evil-souled king? O Krisha! Tell me this and you will witness my ascetic powers.”
‘Krisha said, “Abhimanyu’s son, King Parikshit, was out hunting and wounded a swift deer with a feathered arrow. He chased it alone and the king could not see the deer when he roamed in the wilderness of the great forest.
He saw your father and asked him about it. The king was suffering from hunger, thirst and fatigue and repeatedly
asked your father about the missing deer. But your father was under a vow of silence. He was immobile and did
not reply. Thereupon, the king picked up a dead snake with the end of his bow and placed it on his shoulders. O
Shringi! Rigid in his vows, your father is still seated there. However, the king has returned to his city, named after
the elephant.122”’
Souti said, ‘Hearing this, the rishi’s son stiffened like a celestial pillar. His eyes reddened with anger and he
looked like a blazing ﬁre. Afﬂicted with rage and powered by the strength of his anger, the powerful one touched
the water and cursed the king, “The evil-hearted and vile king, the deﬁler of Brahmanas and disgrace of the Kuru
lineage, who has placed a dead snake on my old and feeble father’s shoulders, will, triggered by my words, be taken to the abode of Yama within seven nights from today, bitten by angry Takshaka, the lord of the serpents, and
smitten with the swift virulence of his poison.” Having thus angrily cursed the king, Shringi went to his father and
found him seated in the cowshed, the dead snake on his shoulders. On seeing the dead snake on his father’s shoulders, Shringi was again possessed by anger. Shedding tears of grief, he told his father, “O father! When I heard
how the evil-hearted King Parikshit insulted you, I cursed him in anger. That worst of the Kuru lineage deserves
such a terrible curse. Within seven days from today, Takshaka, the king of the snakes, will send the evil one to
Vaivasvata’s123 abode.”
‘At that, the father Shamika told his enraged son, “O son! Your act does not bring me pleasure. This is not the
dharma for ascetics. We live in the domain of that king and we are righteously protected by him. We should not
take note of his evil acts. Ruling kings must always be pardoned by men like us. O son! There is no doubt that if
you destroy dharma, it will destroy you. If the king does not protect us, we will suffer from many afﬂictions. O
son! We will then not be able to pursue dharma according to our desires. O son! It is because we are protected by
kings, who too know dharma, that we are able to pursue dharma and obtain great merits to which such kings also
have a share. Like his great-grandfather, Parikshit protects us, the way a king should protect his subjects. Today, he
came here tired, hungry and thirsty and he did not know that I was under a vow of silence and he himself practices
austerities. Therefore, you have committed an evil act through childishness. O son! In no way does that king deserve a curse from us.”’
38

‘Shringi said, “O father! Whether my act was rash and improper, whether it brings you pleasure or displeasure, the
words that I have spoken will not be in vain. O father! It can never be otherwise. I tell that I never lie, even in jest,
and certainly not in a curse.”
‘Shamika said, “O son! I know that you are greatly powerful and always truthful. You have not uttered a lie in
your life. Therefore, this curse of yours will not be false. But even if he is grown up, a son must be advised by his
father, so that he attains all the good qualities and becomes immensely famous. You are yet a child. Therefore, you
need advice much more. You are always engaged in austerities and the anger of powerful and great-souled ones
increases with their powers. O supreme among those who follow the path of dharma! Seeing that you are my son
and witnessing your rashness, I see that I must advise you. Live on whatever food can be obtained from the forest
and lead a life of tranquillity. Give up your anger. Otherwise, you will not be able to follow the path of dharma.
Anger destroys merits that ascetics obtain after a great deal of pain. There is no hope for those who are deprived of
merits. Tranquillity alone gives success to ascetics who are forgiving. Good accrues to the forgiving, in this world
and the next. Therefore, you must always control your senses and lead a life that is forgiving. By being forgiving,
you will attain worlds that cannot even be reached by Brahma. O son! Having achieved tranquillity, I shall do

whatever is in my power. I shall send word to the king that he has been cursed by my son, who is yet immature and
whose intelligence isn’t fully developed and who did this in anger, when he couldn’t condone the disrespect shown
to me.”’
Souti said, ‘After these instructions, driven by compassion, the great ascetic and rigid observer of vows sent a
disciple to King Parikshit. His name was Gouramukha and he was austere in his penances and well behaved. The
disciple was instructed to ﬁrst ask about the king’s welfare and then come to the real business. Going there, he
swiftly went to the king, the extender of the Kuru lineage. He entered the king’s palace, after ﬁrst having sent notice through servants. The king received the Brahmana Gouramukha with due honour. After resting for a while, he
told the king, in the presence of his advisers, Shamika’s terrible words,124 exactly as he had been instructed.
‘Gouramukha said, “O lord of kings! A rishi named Shamika lives in your kingdom. He is extremely virtuous,
extremely tranquil, a great ascetic and in control of his senses. O tiger among men! He was observing a vow of silence when you used the end of your bow to place a dead snake around his shoulders. He himself forgave the act.
But his son did not. O lord of kings! Without his father’s knowledge, you have been cursed by him today. In seven
nights, Takshaka will be the reason for your death. He125 repeatedly asked his son to save you, but no one can falsify the curse. O king! Since he has not been able to pacify his angry son, he has therefore sent me to you for your
own welfare.” Having heard these terrible words, the king, the descendant of the Kuru lineage and a great ascetic
himself, remembered his evil act and the king was struck with remorse. Having heard that the great hermit in the
forest had been under a vow of silence, the king’s remorse increased even more. On learning about the great compassion Shamika had shown for him and recollecting his sinful act towards the hermit, the king was even more
miserable. The king did not grieve about his impending death. But like a god, he grieved over the act he had perpetrated. The king then sent Gouramukha away, with the message that the illustrious one126 should show him mercy.
‘When Gouramukha had departed, the anxious king immediately sought the advice of his ministers. Having consulted his advisers, the king, who was wise in counsel himself, instructed that a palace be erected on pillars and
guarded day and night. For protection, he placed all around the palace physicians, medicines and Brahmanas who
were skilled in the use of mantras. Thus protected on all sides and surrounded by his virtuous ministers, the king
continued with his royal duties.
‘When the seventh day came, Kashyapa, supreme among Brahmanas, was going with the intention of treating
the king, since he possessed that knowledge. He had heard what had happened and that Takshaka, supreme among
the snakes, would send the king to Yama’s abode. He thought, “I will cure the king of his fever when he has been
bitten by the best of snakes. Through this, I will gain wealth and virtue.” Takshaka, the king of snakes, saw
Kashyapa on the way, single-minded in his desire. He appeared before him in the disguise of an old Brahmana.
Then the king of snakes spoke to Kashyapa, a bull among sages. “Where are you going so swiftly? What is the act
you wish to accomplish?” Kashyapa replied, “Today, Takshaka, the best of the snakes, will use his energy to set on
ﬁre the invincible King Parkishit of the Kuru lineage. O amiable one! The king of snakes is as powerful as Agni in
his energy. I am rushing there today to cure the fever of the king of unlimited energy, who was born in Pandu’s illustrious lineage.”
‘Takshaka said, “O Brahmana! I am that Takshaka, who will set the ruler of the earth on ﬁre. Turn back. You
cannot cure someone who has been bitten by me.” Kashyapa replied, “O snake! I will go to the king and cure him
of his fever when you have bitten him. That I know. I have the power of intelligence and knowledge.”’
39

‘Takshaka said, “O Kashyapa! If you can cure any creature that has been bitten by me, revive this tree once I have
bitten it. O best of the Brahmanas! I will set on ﬁre this ﬁg tree before your very eyes. Try your best and show me
the power of the mantras that you have spoken of.”
‘Kashyapa said, “O king of snakes! If that is what you wish, bite the tree. O snake! I shall revive it, once it has
been bitten by you.”’
Souti said, ‘Thus addressed by the great-souled Kashyapa, the king of snakes, supreme among snakes, went and
bit the ﬁg tree. Bitten by the great-souled snake, the tree imbibed the poison and ﬂared up all around. When he had

burnt the tree down, the snake again spoke to Kashyapa. “O best of the Brahmanas! Try your best and give life to
this lord of the forest.” The tree had been reduced to ashes from the energy of the king of the snakes. But picking
up the ashes, Kashyapa uttered these words. “O king of snakes! Today you will witness the power of my knowledge. O snake! I will revive this lord of the forest in your very presence.” Then the illustrious and learned Kashyapa, supreme among Brahmanas, revived through his learning the tree that had been reduced to a heap of ashes.
First, he created a sapling. Then he created two leaves in it. Then he created twigs and branches. Then he regenerated the entire tree.
‘On seeing that the tree had really been revived by the great-souled Kashyapa, Takshaka said, “O Brahmana! It
is wonderful that you can destroy my poison or that of others like me. O king of the Brahmanas! O you who are
blessed with the power of austerities! Driven by what desire are you going there? I will give you whatever fruits
you hope to gain from that best of kings, however difﬁcult they may prove to get. O Brahmana! Your success is
uncertain, because that king has been afﬂicted with a Brahmana’s curse. His life has been shortened. Your blazing
fame, that is famous throughout the three worlds, will disappear, like the sun robbed of his splendour.” Kashyapa
replied, “O snake! I am going there for riches. O best of the snakes! Give it to me and I will return home.” Takshaka said, “O best of the Brahmanas! I will today give you more riches than you hope to get from the king. Therefore, return.” Having heard what Takshaka had said, Kashyapa, supreme among Brahmanas, intelligent and with
great energy, meditated on the king.
‘The powerful Kashyapa then learnt through his divine knowledge that the life of the Pandava king had indeed
been shortened. He returned, receiving from Takshaka all the riches that he wanted to possess. At the great-souled
Kashyapa’s departure, Takshaka hastened towards Hastinapura.127 On his way, Takshaka heard that the lord of the
earth was leading a careful life, protected by mantras and herbs that cured poison. At that, the snake thought to
himself, “The king must be deceived through my powers of maya. But what is the best way?” In the disguise of
ascetics, Takshaka sent some snakes to the king, with fruits, leaves and water as presents. Takshaka said, “Go
swiftly to the king, as if you have a rite to perform. Make the king a present of the fruits, leaves and water.” Thus
commanded by Takshaka, the snakes did this and took darbha grass, water and fruits to the king. The valorous king
of kings accepted their presents. When their rites were performed, he gave them leave to depart.
‘When those snakes disguised as ascetics had left, the king addressed his advisers and well-wishers. “All of you
eat with me the succulent fruits presented by those ascetics.” O Shounaka! As the king was about to eat the fruit
with his ministers, a small worm appeared in the fruit that he had picked up. It was tiny, with black eyes, and had
the colour of copper. Picking it up, the best of kings told his advisers, “The sun is setting. Today, I no longer have
any fear from poison. Therefore, let this worm become Takshaka and bite me. Let the words of the hermit become
true and let a falsehood not be committed.” Driven by destiny, the advisers applauded him. Having said this, the
king of kings smilingly placed the small worm on his throat, about to die and robbed of his senses. He was still
laughing when Takshaka, who had come out of the fruit that had been given to the king, coiled around him.’
40

Souti said, ‘When the ministers saw their king in Takshaka’s coils, their faces paled and they wept in great grief.
Hearing his roars, the ministers began to ﬂee. As they were running away in their grief, they saw the wonderful
serpent Takshaka, the king of snakes, ﬂying through the sky, like a streak with the colour of a lotus parting heaven’s hair. The palace that the king had inhabited was set on ﬁre from the snake’s poison and blazed away. In panic,
they128 abandoned it and ﬂed in all directions. The king fell down, as if struck by lightning. When the king was
struck down with Takshaka’s energy, the royal priest, pure Brahmanas and all the king’s advisers performed the
funeral rites.
‘All the citizens assembled and placed on the throne the king’s young son. The people called him Janamejaya,
the slayer of enemies and a hero of the Kuru lineage. Though only a child, that best of kings, the eldest of the bulls
among the Kurus, was wise. Together with his ministers and priest, he ruled over the kingdom, like his brave greatgrandfather129 once had.

‘Seeing that the king was now able to burn down his enemies, the king’s ministers went to Suvarnavarman, the
king of Kashi, and asked him to give his daughter Vapushtama in marriage. After enquiries, the king of Kashi married Vapushtama to that hero among the Kurus, in accordance with the precepts of dharma. After obtaining her,
he130 was very happy and never gave his heart to any other woman. In pursuit of pleasure, the valorous one,
supreme among kings, roamed happily in lakes, blossoming woods and forests, like Pururava131 did in ancient
times, on obtaining Urvashi. Vapushtama, the most beautiful among women, obtained a king of the earth as her
handsome husband and at times of pleasure, pleased him with great love.’
41

Souti said, ‘At about this time, the great ascetic Jaratkaru roamed the entire earth, having adopted the vow of
sleeping at night wherever he happened to ﬁnd himself in the evening. The immensely energetic hermit roamed
around, bathing in the waters of many tirthas, practising vows that those who lack in resolution ﬁnd impossible to
accomplish, abstaining from food and living on air, thus drying up his body from one day to another.
‘He saw his ancestors suspended head downwards in a cave, hanging on to a single strand of grass. Even that
single strand was being eaten away by a rat that lived in the cave. Without food, they were lean and in a wretched
state, eagerly awaiting their deliverance. Himself in a wretched state, he went to these wretched ones and asked,
“Who are you, hanging from this single strand of grass, which becomes weaker as the rat that lives in the cave
gnaws at the roots? The rat is slowly biting away the root of the strand still left with its sharp teeth and soon the
little that is left of the strand will break. There is no doubt that you will then fall, head downwards, into the cave.
Seeing you hang upside down and in this miserable state, I am extremely distressed. How can I help? Quickly tell
me if I can prevent this calamity by giving you a quarter, a third or even half of my austerities.132 Or if you can
save yourselves with all my austerities, I am willing to do that. What is best?”
‘The ancestors replied, “O Brahmana! You are old and celibate133 and you wish to deliver us. O best of Brahmanas! You cannot save us with your austerities. O son! O supreme among eloquent speakers! Our state is the outcome of austerities. We are descending into this hell because of lack of offspring. O son! Hanging in this cave, our
knowledge has become dim. Therefore, though you are famous in the worlds because of your manliness, we do not
know you. You are old, you have great good fortune and you sorrowfully grieve for us. O Brahmana! Learn who
we are and the reason behind the grief. We are rishis named yayavaras, rigid in their vows. We have been cast off
from the holy regions because of lack of offspring. Our sacred austerities have not all been destroyed yet and we
have a single strand left. We have a single strand left, but it matters little whether it exists or not. We have bad fortune, or little fortune. We have a single strand in our lineage. He is known as Jaratkaru and he is learned in the
Vedas and the Vedangas. He is great-souled, rigid in his vows, a great ascetic and is in control of his senses. But in
his greed for austerities, he has reduced us to this state. He has no wife, no son and no relatives. Having lost our
senses, that is the reason we are hanging in this cave, like those without protectors. If you meet him, out of kindness for us, tell him that his wretched ancestors are hanging head downwards from a cave. Tell that holy one that
he should have a wife and offspring. O Brahmana! O one blessed with the power of austerities! This single strand
of grass that you see, the one from which we are hanging, is the strand of our family lineage. O Brahmana! The
strands that you see being eaten up, are being eaten up by time. O Brahmana! The half-eaten root from which we
are all hanging is the last of our lineage, practising austerities. O Brahmana! The rat that you see is time, immensely powerful. He134 is slowly killing the misguided Jaratkaru, engaged in austerities, who is greedy for austerities,
but has lost his mind and senses. O supreme one! His austerities cannot deliver us. Our roots have been destroyed,
we have fallen and our senses have been confounded by time. Look at us descend downwards into hell like sinners.
We are descending, with all our earlier ancestors. Severed by time, he too will descend into hell. O son! Austerities, sacriﬁces and other sacred and great acts are inferior to obtaining offspring. That is the view of the learned.
When you see him, tell all this to the ascetic Jaratkaru. O Brahmana! If you wish to be our protector, describe in
detail what you have witnessed to him and deliver our message that he should have a wife and offspring.”’
42

Souti said, ‘Having heard all this, Jaratkaru became extremely miserable with grief. He told his ancestors in a
voice that was choked with tears, “I am Jaratkaru, your evil son. I have committed a foolish wrong. Please punish
me.” The ancestors replied, “O son! O Brahmana! It is fortunate that you have happened to come here. Why have
you not taken a wife?” Jaratakaru said, “O ancestors! It has always been my objective to carry my seed inside my
body and to take this entire body to the next world. O grandfathers! But having seen you hanging here like birds,
my mind has been diverted from a life of celibacy. There is no doubt that I will do that which brings pleasure to
you. If I get a lady who bears my own name, who comes to me of her own volition, who comes to me as alms and
whom I will not have to maintain, I will accept her as my wife. O ancestors! Otherwise, I will not marry. That is
my truthful promise.” Having said this to the ancestors, the sage continued to roam the earth. O Shounaka! Though
he grew old, he could not ﬁnd a wife.
‘He was sorry that he was not successful in keeping his promise to his ancestors. He went to the forest and cried
out aloud in his grief. “Whatever creatures there are, mobile or immobile, visible or invisible, hear my words. I am
a man engaged in severe austerities. But my grief-stricken ancestors told me to have a wife. Instructed by my ancestors and wishing to marry and do what they want, I am now roaming the world, poor and miserable, looking for
a maiden as alms. If any of the beings I have addressed has a daughter, please bestow that daughter on me, since I
am wandering in all directions. The maiden has to have the same name as mine. She has to be given to me as alms
and I should not need to maintain her. I ask for such a maiden.” Thereupon, the snakes who had been appointed to
watch over Jaratkaru took this news about his intentions to Vasuki.
‘Hearing this, the king of snakes immediately went to the forest where the hermit was, taking his maiden sister
with him, adorned in various ornaments. O Brahmana! Having gone there, Vasuki, the king of snakes, offered the
maiden as alms to that great-souled sage. But he did not immediately accept her, thinking that she might not have
the same name as his and that the issue of maintaining her remained unsettled. He hesitated and was in two minds
about accepting her. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! He then asked Vasuki for the maiden’s name and said that
he would not support her.’
43

Souti said, ‘Then Vasuki told the rishi Jaratkaru, “This maiden has the same name as yours. She is my sister and is
an ascetic. O best of the Brahmanas! I shall support her. O one blessed with the power of austerities! I shall protect
her with all my might.” When the snake made the promise that he would maintain his sister, Jaratkaru went to the
snake’s house.
‘Thereupon, the aged sage of great vows, best among ascetics, devoted to dharma and learned in mantras, accepted her hand in accordance with the prescribed rites. Worshipped by maharshis, he went with his wife to a
beautiful house built by the king of snakes. In that house, there was a beautiful bed covered with unmatched
spreads and Jaratkaru slept there with his wife. At that time, the supreme one made an agreement with his wife.
“Never do anything or say anything that causes me displeasure. If you ever cause me displeasure, I shall leave you
and no longer live in this house. Please remember these words I have spoken.” In great anxiety and great sorrow,
the sister of the king of snakes agreed. Wishing to bring pleasure to her husband, the fortunate one served her
melancholy husband with the dedication of a white crow.135
‘One day, at the time of her season, Vasuki’s sister bathed and following the norms, slept with her husband, the
great hermit. She then conceived a child who was like the ﬁre, blessed with the power of austerities and radiant
like the god of ﬁre himself. Like the moon in the bright lunar fortnight, the child grew in her womb.
‘A few days later, the immensely famous Jaratkaru fell asleep with his head in his wife’s lap, like a tired person.
When the best of Brahmanas was thus sleeping, the setting sun entered the peaks of the mountains. O Brahmana!
Vasuki’s excellent sister was frightened at the possible loss of dharma, because the day was coming to an end.
“What shall I do now? Should I wake my husband or should I not? He leads a hard life and is devoted to dharma.
How can I act so as not to cause him offence? On one side is his anger. On the other, since he lives by dharma,
there is the loss of dharma. It seems to me that the loss of dharma is the greater evil. If I wake him, he will certainly be angry. But if the time for evening prayers passes, he will certainly lose dharma.” Having thought this over in
her mind, the snake Jaratkaru136 spoke in a sweet voice to the rishi, asleep like a ﬁre, blazing in his austerities. “O

greatly illustrious one! Wake up, the sun is setting. O illustrious one! O one who is rigid in his vows! Touch the
water and perform the evening prayers. The fearful and beautiful moment for agnihotra137 has arrived. O lord!
Dusk is gradually spreading over the western direction.” Having been thus addressed, the illustrious and great ascetic Jaratkaru told his wife, his lips quivering in anger, “O snake! You have insulted me. I shall no longer live
with you. I will go away to the place from where I had come. O lady with the beautiful thighs! If I am asleep, I
know for certain that the sun does not have the power to set. No one likes to stay in a place where he has been insulted, let alone those who are like me and are devoted to dharma like me.” Thus addressed by her husband,
Jaratkaru’s heart began to tremble.
‘Vasuki’s sister told him, “O Brahmana! I did not wake you with a desire to insult you. I did it so that you should
not face a loss in dharma.” But the powerful ascetic Jaratkaru had made up his mind to abandon his wife. Addressed by his wife, the rishi angrily told the snake, “O snake! I have never uttered a lie. Therefore, I have to go. O
beautiful one! That was the agreement I had earlier made with you and your brother. O fortunate one! I have
passed my time happily with you. O timid one! When I am gone, tell your brother that the illustrious one has left.
And when I have departed, please do not grieve for me.” Having been thus addressed, the beautiful Jaratkaru was
ﬁlled with anxiety and sorrow. Her mouth was dry. Her eyes were full of tears. Her voice choked with sobs. Her
heart trembled. But steadying herself, the beautiful one then told her husband Jaratkaru with joined palms, “O you
who follow the path of dharma! It is not proper for you to forsake me in this fashion. I am innocent. You are established in dharma. But I am also always established in dharma, doing that which brings you pleasure. O best of
Brahmanas! I have not yet accomplished the purpose for which I was given to you. I am unfortunate. What will
Vasuki tell me? O supreme one! To save themselves from their mother’s curse, my relatives wanted a son born
from me through you. But he is not yet visible. The welfare of my relatives depends on a son obtained through
you. O Brahmana! I plead with you that you should not go away until I am fertile through our union and can bring
about the welfare of my lineage. O supreme one! Why should a great-souled one like you abandon an innocent one
when the conception is still not apparent?” Thus addressed, the hermit Jaratkaru, blessed with the power of austerities, told his wife words that were ﬁt and appropriate for the occasion. “O fortunate one! The one who is in your
womb now will be a rishi who will be like the god of ﬁre himself. He will be the best of those who follow dharma
and will be learned in the Vedas and the Vedangas.” Having said this, the virtuous and great rishi Jaratkaru went
away. His heart was once again ﬁrmly ﬁxed on the practice of great austerities.’
44

Souti said, ‘O one blessed with the power of austerities! As soon as her husband left, Jaratkaru went to her brother
and told him what had happened. The best of the snakes heard this unpleasant news and told his sister, who was
more miserable than he was, “O fortunate one! You know what had to be done and why you were given. A son was
supposed to be born for the welfare of the snakes. That valorous one was supposed to have saved us from the
snake-sacriﬁce. In ancient times, this is what the grandfather and the gods told me. O fortunate one! Have you conceived through that best of sages? It is my wish that the wise man’s marriage should not be fruitless. Without a
doubt, it is not appropriate that I should ask you a question on such a subject. But the subject is too serious for me
not to ask you. I know that your husband is always engaged in austerities and is prone to anger. I shall not follow
him, because he might curse me. O fortunate one! Tell me what your husband has done and thereby pull out the
terrible stake that has been implanted for a long time in my heart.” Being thus asked, Jaratkaru consoled the tormented Vasuki, king of snakes, and said, “I asked the great-souled and great ascetic about our offspring. He said it
is there and left. I do not recollect his ever having spoken a lie, even in jest. O king! Why should he then utter a lie
on such a serious subject? He said, ‘O snake woman! Do not sorrow over the fruit of your action. A son, resplendent as the ﬁre and the sun, will be born to you.’ O brother! Having said this, my husband went away to his hermitage. Let the great distress that preys on your mind be removed.” On hearing this, Vasuki, the king of snakes,
was delighted and accepted his sister’s words.
‘The best of the snakes worshipped his sister with kindness, appropriate praise, gifts and homage. O best of the
Brahmanas! The immensely radiant embryo grew in her womb like the luminescent sun, like the moon waxing in
the sky during shuklapaksha. O Brahmana! At the appropriate time, the snake’s sister gave birth to a son who was

like a divine child, the destroyer of the fears of his father and mother. He grew up in the house of the king of
snakes and studied the Vedas and the Vedangas from the sage Chyavana, the son of Bhrigu. Even as a child, he was
strict in adherence to his vows and gifted with intelligence, spirituality and qualities. He became famous in the
worlds by the name of Astika. He was known as Astika, because while he was still in his mother’s womb, his father went away to the forest, saying “asti”.138 Even as a child, he was extremely intelligent. He was carefully
watched over in the house of the king of snakes. He was like the golden and illustrious Lord Shulapani,139 the
lord of the gods. To the great delight of all the snakes, he grew up.’
45

Shounaka asked, ‘At that time, what did King Janamejaya ask his ministers about his father’s ascent to heaven?
Tell me that again in detail.’
Souti replied, ‘O Brahmana! Hear what the king asked his ministers and all that they told him about Parikshit’s
death. Janamejaya said, “You know all that happened to my father and how my greatly illustrious father came
about his death. When I have heard all about my father in complete detail from you, I shall learn all that is good
and not that which is evil.”
‘Being asked by the great-souled King Janamejaya, the virtuous and wise ministers replied, “Your father was
devoted to dharma, great-souled and a protector of his subjects. Hear how that great-souled one led his life. The
four varnas were respectively established in their own dharmas and the king, who was himself well versed with
dharma protected them there, in accordance with the dictates of dharma. Illustrious and with inﬁnite might, he protected the goddess earth. He hated no one. Nor did anyone hate him. Like Prajapati himself, he treated all beings
impartially. O king! Established in their respective duties, the Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas, the Vaishyas and the
Shudras were protected impartially by the king. He maintained widows, orphans, the disabled and the poor. He was
handsome and like another moon to all creatures. Through that truthful and greatly powerful king, everyone was
content and blessed with good fortune. The king became Sharadvata’s student in the science of weapons.140 O
Janamejaya! Govinda141 loved your father. He was immensely famous and loved by all the worlds. He was born
in Uttara’s womb when the Kuru lineage was almost destroyed. Therefore, Soubhadra’s142 powerful son came to
be known as Parikshit. The king was learned in royal norms of dharma and artha and had all the qualities. He was
in control of his senses and of himself. He was intelligent and was served by those who were wise. He had great
wisdom and was completely familiar with the norms of righteous conduct. He had conquered the six vices.143
Your father protected his subjects for sixty years. His end was preordained, through a snake, and it couldn’t be
avoided. O best of men! After him, you have lawfully ascended this ancestral kingdom of the Kurus and will rule
for 1000 years. O protector of every being! You were instated when you were a child.”
‘Janamejaya said, “In our lineage, no king has ever been born who did not look after the welfare of his subjects
and please them. Consider especially the conduct of my grandfathers,144 who were always devoted to a great life.
How did my father, who was like them, come to his end? Describe it accurately to me. I wish to hear it.”’
Souti said, ‘Thus asked by the king, the ministers, who were always engaged in that which brought pleasure to
the king, told him everything that had happened. The ministers said, “O king! Your father was always addicted to
hunting, like the greatly fortunate warrior and great archer, Pandu. He handed over all matters concerning the running of the kingdom to us. On one occasion, he was roaming in the forest and pierced a deer with an arrow. Having
thus shot the deer, he pursued it deep into the forest, alone and on foot, with his sword, quiver and bow ready. But
your father could not ﬁnd that lost deer deep inside the forest. He was sixty years old and aged and felt tired and
hungry. He then saw a great sage in that great forest. The lord of kings asked the sage, who at that time was observing a vow of silence and thus the sage did not reply to any of the questions. In his vow of silence, the sage sat
motionless and peaceful like a piece of wood, and hungry and thirsty and not knowing that the sage was observing
a vow of silence, the king became angry with the sage. Being angry, your father insulted the sage. O best of the
Bharata lineage! With the end of his bow, he picked up a dead snake from the ground and placed it around the
shoulders of that pure-souled sage. But that wise one did not utter a word, good or bad, and did not become angry.
He remained as he was, with the snake around his shoulders.”’

46

‘The ministers said, “O lord of kings! Having placed the snake around the shoulders of the sage, the king, who was
weak with hunger, returned to his own city. The rishi had an immensely famous son named Shringi, who had been
born from a cow. He was extremely powerful, with great energy and prone to extreme anger. This sage had gone to
Brahma to worship him. O tiger of the Kuru lineage! When he was given leave to depart, he was returning and
learnt from a friend how your father had insulted his father, how your father had hung a dead snake around his father’s shoulders and that he still bore it, though he had done no injury. O king! His father was a great ascetic and
supreme among sages. He was pure and had control over his senses and the performer of wonderful deeds. His
soul was radiant with the power of his austerities and he had control over all his limbs. His practices were pure and
his words were also pure. He was perfectly balanced, without avarice, without pettiness and without jealousy. He
was old and he was under a vow of silence. He was the refuge of all beings. Such was the person your father
insulted.
‘“However, the rishi’s son cursed your father in anger. Though he was still a child, he had great energy and the
radiance that comes with age. He instantly touched water and, blazing with energy, angrily spoke about your father. ‘Look at the power of my austerities. An evil one has left a dead snake around my innocent father’s shoulders.
Within seven nights from now, the angry and radiant snake Takshaka will burn him down with the energy of his
poison.’ Having said this, he went to where his father was. On seeing his father, he told him about the curse he had
uttered. That tiger among sages sent a message to your father. ‘O lord of the earth! You have been cursed by my
son that Takshaka will burn you down with his poison. O king! Be prepared.’ O Janamejaya! On hearing this terrible news, your father was alarmed and took every possible precaution against Takshaka, supreme among snakes.
‘“When the seventh day arrived, a brahmarshi named Kashyapa was on his way to visit the king. Takshaka,
chief among the snakes, saw Kashaypa as he was hurrying, and asked him, ‘Where are you going so swiftly? What
is it that you want to do?’ Kashyapa replied, ‘O Brahmana!145 I am going to where King Parikshit, the best of the
Kurus, is. Today, he will be killed by the snake Takshaka. I am hurrying there so that I can cure him from his fever.
If I protect him, no snake can oppress him.’ Takshaka said, ‘O Brahmana! Why do you wish to revive the king after I have bitten him? Don’t hesitate to tell me what your desire is and I will give it to you. Return home.’ When he
said he was going there with the desire of acquiring riches, the snake told the great-souled one in pleasant words,
‘O, unblemished one! Take from me more riches than you hope to obtain from the king and return.’ Thus addressed by the snake, Kashyapa, best among men, obtained as much of riches as he obtained from Takshaka and
returned.
‘“After the Brahmana returned, Takshaka disguised himself and went to your virtuous father, king and best of
kings. He was fully prepared in his palace, but he burnt him with the ﬁre of his poison. O tiger among men! It was
after this that you victoriously ascended the throne. O best among kings! Though the account is extremely terrible,
we have told you everything in entirety, the way it was seen and heard. O supreme among kings! You have now
heard how that great king was destroyed and how the rishi Shamika was insulted. Now do what needs to be done.”
‘Janamejaya said, “I ﬁrst wish to hear what was said between Kashyapa and the chief among snakes in that deserted forest. Who witnessed what transpired and how did you hear this? After I have heard this, I will think of a
means to destroy the snakes.”
‘The ministers said, “O king! Listen to how we came to know about the encounter between the chief among the
Brahmanas and the chief among the snakes. O lord of the earth! A man had climbed a tall tree, looking for dry
twigs that could be used as kindling for a sacriﬁcial ﬁre. Perched on the tree, he was not seen by the Brahmana or
the snake. O king! He was also reduced to ashes along with the tree. O lord of kings! The Brahmana’s powers revived him, along with the tree. O chief among kings! He later returned to the city and told us the story. What we
recounted to you about the encounter between Takshaka and the Brahmana was exactly as it happened and exactly
as it was witnessed. O king! O tiger among kings! Now that you have heard it, decide what must be done.”’
Souti said, ‘On hearing the words of his ministers, King Janamejaya burnt in grief and wrung his hands. The lotus-eyed king heaved long and deep sighs and wept, tears streaming from his eyes. Struck with deep grief, the lord
of the earth said, “I have heard from you the account of my father’s ascent to heaven. Now hear from me what my
ﬁrm decision is. I think no time should be lost in taking action against the evil Takshaka, since he is the one who

killed my father. That evil one alone burnt the king and made Shringi’s curse come true. If the evil one146 had
gone, my father would surely have been alive. What harm could have come to him147 had the king been revived
through Kashyapa’s blessings and the precautions taken by his ministers? It was his delusion that made him prevent Kashyapa, supreme among Brahmanas, from reviving the invincible king. The transgression of the evil Takshaka is a great one. He gave riches to the Brahmana so that he might not revive the king. My father must be
avenged, to bring great pleasure to me, Utanka and all of you.”’
47

Souti said, ‘When the illustrious king uttered these words, the ministers approved and the king took an oath that he
would undertake a snake-sacriﬁce. The lord of the earth, Parikshit’s son and the king who was a tiger of the Bharata lineage, then summoned his priest and ofﬁciating priests who knew about the sacriﬁce. He who was eloquent in
the uttered words that would make the deed successful said, “I must act against the evil Takshaka who brought violence to my father. Please tell me what I must do. Do you know of an act whereby the snake Takshaka and his relatives can be hurled into the blazing ﬁre? Just as my father was earlier burnt with the poison, I wish to burn that evil
snake.” The ofﬁciating priests replied, “O king! There is a sacriﬁce that the gods have recommended for those like
you. It is known as the snake-sacriﬁce and it is described in the ancient tales. O lord of men! No one but you can
offer this sacriﬁce. Those who know the ancient tales have told us there is such a sacriﬁce and we know it.” O
supreme one! Thus addressed, the rajarshi thought that Takshaka had already been hurled into the mouth of a blazing ﬁre and burnt.
‘The king then told the Brahmanas who were learned in the mantras, “I will perform the sacriﬁce. Collect the
required ingredients.” O supreme among the Brahmanas! Thereupon the ofﬁciating priests, who were hard in their
resolve and learned in the shastras, measured out a piece of land as the sacriﬁcial platform, in accordance with the
prescribed rites. It was graced by the presence of many learned Brahmanas and adorned with every valuable object, abundant quantities of riches and foodgrains. Before the snake-sacriﬁce could begin, they then instated the
king on this sacriﬁcial platform.
‘Earlier, when the sacriﬁcial platform was being built and the sacriﬁce had not started, a great incident occurred
that suggested the sacriﬁce might be disrupted. There was a man who was a suta. He was an extremely wise
builder and one who was skilled in the knowledge of architecture. He was also a raconteur of ancient tales. This
bard said, “The land on which the platform was constructed and the time at which it was measured indicate that
this sacriﬁce will not be completed. A Brahmana will be the cause.” On hearing this, before being instated, the
king instructed the door-keeper that no one should be allowed entry without his knowledge.
‘The snake-sacriﬁce then started according to the prescribed norms. The ofﬁciating priests, who were learned in
their respective duties, went about prescribed tasks. They dressed themselves in black garments and their eyes became red from the smoke. Chanting mantras, they offered oblations into the sacriﬁcial ﬁre. As they poured oblations into the mouth of the ﬁre and uttered the names of the snakes, the hearts of the snakes trembled in fear.
Thereafter, the snakes dropped into the blazing ﬂames, wretched and screaming piteously at each other. They
swelled, breathed hard and intertwined their heads and tails. In large numbers, they fell into the blazing ﬁre—
white, black, blue, old and young. Crying out terrible screams, they fell into the lofty and blazing ﬂames, in hundreds, thousands, millions and tens of millions. O supreme among Brahmanas! Many snakes perished powerless.
Among those which perished, some were small as rats, others large as trunks of elephants, or gigantic and immensely strong like mad elephants. Snakes of many colours, poisonous, terrible, like clubs and with immense
strength, fell into the ﬁre in large numbers, as a consequence of their mother’s curse.’
48

Shounaka said, ‘At the snake-sacriﬁce of the wise king Janamejaya of the Pandava lineage, who were the supreme
rishis who acted as sacriﬁcial priests? Who were the sadasyas148 at that terrible snake-sacriﬁce that brought great
fear and misery to the snakes? O son! You should describe this in detail. O son of a suta! We should know about
those who knew the secrets of the snake-sacriﬁce.’

Souti said, ‘I shall certainly tell you the names of those wise ones who became ritvijas149 and sadasyas for the
king. The hotar was the Brahmana Chandabhargava, who was born in Chyavana’s lineage and was famous as one
who was learned in the Vedas. The wise and old Brahmana Koutsarya Jaimini was the udgatar. Sharngarava was
the brahman and Bodhapingala was the adhvaryu. Vyasa was a sadasya, together with his sons and disciples—Uddalaka, Shamathaka, Shvetaketu, Panchama, Asita, Devala, Narada, Parvata, Atreya, Kundajathara, the Brahmana
Kutighata, Vatysa, the old Shrutashrava who was always engaged in austerities and studying, Kahoda, Devasharma, Moudgalya and Samasourabha. These and many other Brahmanas who were rigid in their vows became
sadasyas in Parikshit’s son’s sacriﬁce.
‘When the ofﬁciating priests began to offer oblations into the ﬂames of that great snake-sacriﬁce, terrible snakes
that struck fear into living creatures began to fall into the ﬁre. The fat and the marrow of the snakes thus burnt in
the sacriﬁcial ﬁre and ﬂowed like rivers, creating an intolerable stench as snakes continuously burnt. The screams
of snakes that fell into the ﬁre and those which were in the sky and were about to fall in and those that burnt were
piteous.
‘Meanwhile, as soon as Takshaka, king of snakes, heard that King Janamejaya had been instated in the snakesacriﬁce, he went to Purandara’s150 palace. The supreme snake told Purandara everything and confessing the evil
that he had done, fearfully sought refuge. Indra was very pleased and told him, “O Takshaka! O king of snakes!
You have nothing to fear here from the snake-sacriﬁce. For your sake, I have already paciﬁed the grandfather.151
Therefore, you need not be afraid. Drive this fever away from your mind.” Thus being reassured, the supreme
among the snakes happily lived in Shakra’s152 palace.
‘But Vasuki became extremely distressed on seeing that many snakes were continuously falling into the ﬁre and
only a few remained in his lineage. Vasuki, supreme among the snakes, was miserable with grief and told his sister
with a grieving heart, “O fortunate one! My limbs are burning. I can no longer see the directions. I am about to fall
because I have lost consciousness. My mind is whirling. My sight is failing. My heart is about to burst. Completely
numbed, I may fall into the blazing ﬁre without resisting. Parikshit’s son’s sacriﬁce will go on until he has exterminated our race. It is clear that I must also go to the land of the ancestors. O sister! The time for which I gave you to
Jaratkaru has come. O sister! Save us and our race. O supreme among snakes! Astika will send the sacriﬁce153
that is being performed. In earlier times, the grandfather himself told me this. O sister! Therefore tell your beloved
son, who is learned in the Vedas and respected even by those who are aged, to save me and those who are dependant on me.”’
49

Souti said, ‘At that, the snake woman Jaratkaru called her son and told him what Vasuki, king of the nagas, had
told her. “O son! The time has come for attaining the objective for which my brother had given me to your father.
Therefore, do what is necessary.” Astika said, “Why were you given by my uncle to my father? Tell me in detail,
so that I can do what is necessary.” Jaratkaru, the sister of the king of snakes, wished to bring about the welfare of
her relatives.
‘She resolutely told him, “It is said that the mother of all snakes is Kadru. Hear how she came to curse her sons
in anger. She said, ‘O sons! You have refused to change the colour of Ucchaihshrava, the king of horses, despite
my asking and because of the wager, have made me a slave to Vinata. Therefore, the god of ﬁre will burn you in
Janamejaya’s sacriﬁce. Thus being reduced to the ﬁve elements,154 you will go to the land of the dead.’ The great
god, grandfather of all the worlds, himself heard this curse being uttered and approved. O son! On hearing this
curse and the words of the grandfather, Vasuki sought refuge with the gods after the churning of the ocean was
over. Once they had obtained their objective and got the supreme amrita, the gods went to Prajapati155 with their
brother156 leading the way. All the gods and King Vasuki sought to placate the grandfather so that the curse might
have no effect. The gods said, ‘O lord! Vasuki, the king of snakes, feels sorry for his relatives. How can his mother’s curse be rendered ineffective?’ Brahma replied, ‘Jaratkaru will marry a wife named Jaratkaru. The Brahmana
who will be born will save the snakes from the curse.’ O god-like son! When Vasuki, the lord of the snakes, heard

this, he gave me to your great-souled father, long before this incident.157 You were born from me and your father.
That time has now come and you should save us from the fear. You should save me and my brother from the ﬁre,
so that the reason for which I was given to your wise father is not rendered futile. O son! What do you think?” On
hearing his mother’s words, Astika then agreed.
‘He addressed the suffering Vasuki and brought fresh life into him. “O Vasuki! O supreme among snakes! I will
save you. I truly tell you that I shall free you from this curse. O snake! Be reassured and banish all fear. O tranquil
one! I shall endeavour to bring about your welfare. No one can say that my tongue has ever uttered a lie, even in
jest, not to speak of serious occasions. O uncle! I will go to Janamejaya, supreme among kings, now instated in the
sacriﬁce. I shall please him with words that bring him good fortune.158 O supreme one! The king will then restrain
himself from the sacriﬁce. O king of snakes! O one with great intelligence! Believe all that I say. Believe that what
I have resolved is always fulﬁlled.” Vasuki replied, “O Astika! My head is whirling and my heart is splintering. I
cannot see the directions and I am oppressed because of the curse159 of a Brahmana.” Astika said, “O supreme
among snakes! You should not suffer any more. I shall destroy the fear that comes to you from the blazing ﬁre and
the curse of the Brahmana, which has energy like the terrible ﬁre at the time of destruction. You need not fear any
more.” Then, after having removed the terrible fever from Vasuki’s mind and taking it on his own limbs, Astika,
supreme among Brahmanas, swiftly went to where Janamejaya’s sacriﬁce, adorned with all the qualities, was being
held.
‘Having gone there, Astika saw the splendid grounds that had been laid out for the sacriﬁce, populated with numerous sadasyas, as radiant as the sun and the ﬁre. But the gatekeepers refused to allow entry to that best of Brahmanas. To gain entry, the best of Brahmanas praised the sacriﬁce.’
50

‘Astika said, “O son of Parikshit! O best of the Bharata lineage! Soma’s sacriﬁce, Varuna’s sacriﬁce and Prajapati’s
sacriﬁce were held in Prayaga in ancient times. But your sacriﬁce is in no way inferior to theirs. Blessed be those
who are dear to us. O son of Parikshit! O best of the Bharata lineage! Shakra160 performed one hundred sacriﬁces.
But your sacriﬁce is equal to one hundred of his. Blessed are those who are dear to us. O son of Parikshit! O best
of the Bharata lineage! This sacriﬁce of yours is like the sacriﬁces of Yama, Harimedha and King Rantideva.
Blessed are those who are dear to us. O son of Parikshit! O best of the Bharata lineage! This sacriﬁce of yours is
like the sacriﬁces of Gaya, King Shashabindu and King Vaishravana. Blessed are those who are dear to us. O son
of Parikshit! O best of the Bharata lineage! This sacriﬁce of yours is like the sacriﬁces of Nriga, Ajamida and
Dasharatha’s son.161 Blessed are those who are dear to us. O son of Parikshit! O best of the Bharata lineage! This
sacriﬁce of yours is like the sacriﬁce of King Yudhishthira, who was the son of a god and a descendant of Ajamida
and was famous even in heaven. Blessed are those who are dear to us. O son of Parikshit! O best of the Bharata
lineage! This sacriﬁce of yours is like the sacriﬁce of Satyavati’s son, Krishna Dvaipayana,162 in which he himself
was the priest. Blessed are those who are dear to us. Those who are seated here are as radiant as the sun and the
ﬁre and make it equal to the sacriﬁce of Vritra’s slayer.163 There is nothing that they do not know. The gifts given
to them are inexhaustible. I am certain that there is no ritvija in all the worlds who is the equal of your ritvija Dvaipayana. His disciples travel the earth, having become ritvijas skilled in their duties. The great-souled god Vibhavasu164 Chitrabhanu,165 whose seed is golden, who trails black smoke, who consumes everything and whose head
faces the south, is eager for your offerings. In the world of the living, there is no king equal to you in protecting his
subjects. My mind is pleased at your perseverance. You are Varuna or Dharmaraja Yama. Like the wielder of the
vajra, Shakra166 himself, you are the protector of all subjects in this world. In my view, in this world, you are the
lord of all men. There is no king equal to you in sacriﬁces. You are like Khatvanga, Nabhaga and Dilipa. You are
like Yayati and Mandhata in your power. You are like the sun in your splendour. In the rigidity of your vows, you
shine like Bhishma. You are like Valmiki, whose ﬁrmness is subtle. You are like Vasishtha in controlling your
anger. In my view, your sovereignty is like that of Indra and your radiance is like that of Narayana. You are like
Yama in administering dharma. Like Krishna, you have all the qualities. Like the vasus, you are the abode of the

goddess of wealth. You are the source of all sacriﬁces. You are like Dambhodbhava in strength. Learned in the use
of arms, you are like Rama.167 In your energy, you are like Ourva and Trita. Like Bhagiratha, your sight inspires
terror.”’
Souti said, ‘Thus addressed, they were all pleased—the king, the sadasyas, the ritvijas and the ﬁre into which
offerings are given. On seeing the expressions they manifested, King Janamejaya spoke.’
51

‘Janamejaya said, “Though he is but a child, he speaks like a wise old man. He is not a child. I think he is wise and
old. I wish to grant him a boon. O assembled Brahmanas! Give me the required permission.”
‘The sadasyas said, “Even though a child, a Brahmana deserves the respect of kings, even more so if he is
learned. This child deserves that you grant him his wishes, but not before Takshaka has swiftly come here.”’
Souti said, ‘The king was willing to grant the Brahmana boy a boon and was about to say, “Ask a boon from
me.” But the hotar was not pleased at this and said, “Takshaka has not yet come to the sacriﬁce.” Janamejaya said,
“Try your best to complete this sacriﬁce successfully. Use all your powers, so that Takshaka comes here without
any more delay. He is the one I hate the most.” The ritvijas said, “O king! Takshaka now lives in fear in Indra’s
palace. The shastras reveal this to us and the ﬁre also conﬁrms it.” The great-souled suta Lohitaksha was well
versed in ancient tales and had known this before. Asked again by the king on this occasion, he said, “O god
among men! O king! What the Brahmanas have said is true. I know the ancient accounts and I say that Indra has
granted him a boon saying that he should live secretly near him and the ﬁre will not be able to burn him.” On hearing this, the king, who had been instated in the sacriﬁce, was angry and asked the hotar to perform his duties. He
chanted mantras and poured oblations into the ﬁre.
‘Thereupon, Indra himself arrived there. The great god came in his celestial chariot, worshipped by all the gods
surrounding him and followed by masses of clouds and large numbers of vidyadharas168 and apsaras. But the
snake169 hid himself inside Indra’s garments. At that, the king, who was determined to destroy Takshaka, angrily
spoke to his priests who knew the mantras. “O Brahmanas! If Takshaka is in Indra’s palace, hurl him into the ﬁre
with Indra himself.” The ritvijas said, “O king! Look. Takshaka is coming now and will soon be under your power.
His terrible roars and fearful cries can be heard. The snake has been given up by the wielder of the vajra. He has
fallen and his body has been disabled through our mantras. Deprived of his consciousness, the king of snakes is
falling from the sky. His sharp sighs and deep breaths can be heard. O lord of kings! Your deed is being properly
performed. It is now proper for you to grant a boon to this best of Brahmanas.” Janamejaya said, “O one who is
beyond measure! You are so handsome and so childlike that I wish to grant you a worthy boon. Therefore, ask for
the desire that is in your heart. I promise you that I will grant it to you, if it can be granted.” Takshaka, the king of
snakes, was about to fall into the sacriﬁcial ﬁre in a moment.
‘At that very instant, Astika spoke. “O Janamejaya! If you wish to grant me a boon, I wish that this sacriﬁce
should be stopped. Let no more snakes fall down.” O Brahmana! At these words, Parikshit’s son wasn’t happy and
told Astika, “O illustrious one! I will give you gold, silver, cows or whatever else you wish to possess. O Brahmana! I shall give you your boon. But let this sacriﬁce not be stopped.” Astika replied, “O king! I do not ask you
for gold, silver or cattle. Let this sacriﬁce be stopped, so that my mother’s relatives are safe.” Thus addressed by
Astika, Parikshit’s son repeatedly told Astika, greatest among eloquent ones, “O supreme among supreme Brahmanas! O fortunate one! O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! Choose another boon.” But he170 refused. Thereupon, all the sadasyas, who were learned in all the Vedas, unanimously told the king, “Let the Brahmana have his
boon.”’
52

Shounaka said, ‘O son of a suta! I wish to hear the names of all the snakes that fell into the ﬁre at the time of the
snake-sacriﬁce.’
Souti said, ‘O you who are learned in the Vedas! There were many thousands, millions and tens of millions.
There were so many that I am unable to count them all. As far as I can remember, hear the names of the chief

snakes that fell into the sacriﬁcial ﬁre. First, hear the names of the chief ones in Vasuki’s family. They had the
colours blue, red and white and were of terrible form, with gigantic bodies and virulent poison—Kotika, Manasa,
Purna, Saha, Paila, Halisaka, Picchila, Konapa, Chakra, Konavega, Prakalana, Hiranyavaha, Sharana, Kakshaka
and Kaladantaka. These are the snakes from Vasuki’s lineage that entered the sacriﬁcial ﬁre.
‘Now hear the names of those of Takshaka’s lineage as I mention them—Pucchandaka, Mandalaka, Pindabhetta,
Rabhenaka, Ucchikha, Surasa, Dranga, Balaheda, Virohana, Shili, Shalakara, Muka, Sukumara, Pravepana,
Mudgara, Shasharoma, Sumana and Vegavahana. These were the snakes from Takshaka’s lineage that entered the
sacriﬁcial ﬁre.
‘Paravata, Pariyatra, Pandara, Harina, Krisha, Vihanga, Sharabha, Moda, Pramoda and Samhatangada—these
are the ones from Airavata’s lineage that entered the sacriﬁcial ﬁre.
‘O best of Brahmanas! Now hear the names of the snakes born into the Kouravya lineage as I recount them—
Aindila, Kundala, Mundo, Veni, Skandha, Kumaraka, Bahuka, Shringavega, Dhurtaka, Pata and Patara.
‘O Brahmana! Now hear the names of the snakes born into the Dhritarashtra lineage as I mention them. They
were all extremely powerful and swift as the wind, with virulent poison—Shankukarna, Pingalaka, Kutharamukha,
Mechaka, Purnangada, Purnamukha, Prahasa, Shakuni, Hari, Amahatha, Komathaka, Shvasana, Manava, Vata,
Bhairava, Mundavedanga, Pishanga, Udraparaga, Rishabha, Vegavana, Pindaraka, Mahahanu, Raktanga, Sarvasaranga, Samriddha, Pata, Rakshasa, Varahaka, Varanaka, Sumitra, Chitravedika, Parashara, Tarunaka, Maniskandha and Aruni.
‘O Brahmana! I have thus recited the names of only the chief snakes, all famous for their great deeds. I have not
been able to mention all, because there are too many to enumerate. Countless are the numbers of their sons, grandsons and other progeny who fell into the blazing ﬁre. I am unable to mention them. Some had seven heads, some
two and some ﬁve. They were terrible of form and their poison was like the ﬁre at the time of destruction. They
were sacriﬁced in hundreds and thousands. They had gigantic bodies, great might and were as large as peaks of
mountains. Some of them were as extensive as a yojana, others two yojanas long. They were capable of assuming
any form at will and of going anywhere at will. Their poison was as virulent as the blazing ﬁre. They were all
burnt there at the great sacriﬁce, oppressed by the Brahmana’s curse.’
53

Souti said, ‘I have heard that at that time Astika brought about another great miracle. The king who was Parikshit’s
son was about to grant a boon. The snake,171 though thrown off from Indra’s hand, remained suspended in the air.
At that, King Janamejaya became pensive. Although offerings were being poured into the sacriﬁcial ﬁre according
to the rituals, the frightened Takshaka did not fall into the ﬂames.’
Shounaka asked, ‘O suta! Did those wise Brahmanas not remember the mantras? Why did Takshaka not fall into
the ﬁre?’
Souti said, ‘When that supreme snake had been cast off from Indra’s hand and had lost consciousness, Astika
told him thrice, “Stay! Stay! Stay!” Though his heart trembled, he remained suspended in the air, like a man inside
a circle. At that, being repeatedly urged by his sadasyas, the king said, “Let it be done as Astika wishes. Let the
sacriﬁce be stopped. Let the snakes be saved. Let Astika be satisﬁed. Also, let the words of the suta172 come true.”
When Astika was granted his boon, a tumultuous roar of joy was heard in the sky. The sacriﬁce of Parikshit’s son,
the king of the Pandava dynasty, came to an end. King Janamejaya of the Bharata lineage was pleased and gifted
riches in hundreds and thousands to the ritvijas and sadasyas who were assembled there. The lord also gave lots of
riches to the suta Lohitaksha, the builder who had predicted at the beginning that the snake-sacriﬁce would be
brought to an end through the action of a Brahmana. Thereafter, in accordance with the prescribed rites, he concluded the sacriﬁce. Exceedingly pleased, the king honoured Astika and sent him back to his home. The sage was
also pleased, because his object had been attained. The king told him, “You must come again and be a sadasya in
my great horse-sacriﬁce.” Astika agreed. After performing his unrivalled deed and having pleased the king, Astika
was delighted and swiftly returned to his uncle and mother. Touching their feet, he told them in detail all that had
transpired.

‘Having heard his words, the assembled snakes were extremely delighted with Astika. They were now freed
from their worries. They wished to bestow a boon on Astika. All of them repeatedly asked him, “O learned one! O
child! What is it that you desire? What can we do to please you? We are happy that we have now been freed by
you. What boon can we grant you?” Astika replied, “Let Brahmanas and other men, who read about this virtuous
act of mine with a tranquil mind in the morning and evening, have no reason to fear you.” With cheerful hearts,
they told their nephew, “It shall be exactly as you wish. We will happily do what you have asked us to do. He who
invokes the immensely famous and truthful Astika, born to Jaratkaru from Jaratkaru, will be protected from
snakes. Those who remember Asita, Artimana and Sunitha,173 during the day or the night, will never face any
danger from snakes.” Having thus saved the snakes at the snake-sacriﬁce, that supreme among Brahmanas, with
dharma in his soul, met his destiny at the appointed time. He left behind many sons and grandsons.
‘Thus have I narrated to you Astika’s story, exactly as it occurred. When recounted, this story dispels all fear of
snakes. O Brahmana! On hearing this virtuous and blessed account of Astika’s exploits from the beginning, an account that increases one’s store of merit, one has no fear of snakes.’
Shounaka said, ‘O son of a suta! O son! You have narrated to me the great and extensive story of the Bhrigu lineage. I am extremely pleased with you. O son of a suta! I now ask you to recite for me again the wonderful accounts composed by Vyasa, exactly as they were recited by the great-souled sadasyas at the long-extending sacriﬁce,174 during intervals at the ceremonies. O son of a suta! O great poet! O learned one! I wish to hear exactly the
reasons behind those narrations.’
Souti replied, ‘During intervals at the ceremonies, the Brahmanas spoke about many accounts based on the
Vedas. But Vyasa recounted the wonderful and great history known as Bharata.’
Shounaka said, ‘I wish to hear that sacred account known as the Mahabharata, which spread the fame of the
Pandavas. Asked by Janamejaya, Krishna Dvaipayana had it properly recited during intervals in the sacriﬁce. It
had its origins in the ocean-like mind of the maharshi of pure deeds. O best of men! O son of a suta! Recite it again
to me. I am not satisﬁed.’
Souti replied, ‘I shall recite from the beginning the great and supreme account of the Mahabharata, as Krishna
Dvaipayana conceived it in his mind. O Brahmana! Listen to it. I too derive great pleasure in recounting it.’

Section Six
Adi-vamshavatarana Parva
This parva has 257 shlokas and ﬁve chapters.
Chapter 54: 24 shlokas
Chapter 55: 43 shlokas
Chapter 56: 33 shlokas
Chapter 57: 106 shlokas
Chapter 58: 51 shlokas
Ansha means partial or secondary incarnation, while avatarana means descent. The parva is thus the descent of partial incarnations. It relates the story of Uparichara Vasu and Vyasadeva’s birth from Parashara and Satyavati. It ends with the partial or secondary incarnations of
the gods and the demons.
54

Souti said, ‘Hearing that Janamejaya had been instated at the snake-sacriﬁce, the learned rishi Krishna Dvaipayana
went there. The grandfather of the Pandavas was born on an island in the river Yamuna, in the womb of the virgin
Kali1 and from Shakti’s son Parashara. As soon as he was born, the sage of great fame developed his body through
the power of his will, and mastered the Vedas, the Vedangas and the histories.2 He achieved that which cannot be
surpassed through austerities, study of the Vedas, rites, fasting, having progeny or through sacriﬁces. The best
among those who know the Vedas, ﬁrst divided the one Veda into four parts. He was a brahmarshi, knower of
everything, a wise poet, truthful and pure. That sage of great fame and holy deeds begot Pandu, Dhritarashtra and
Vidura in order to continue Shantanu’s3 lineage.
‘Accompanied by his disciples, learned in the Vedas and the Vedangas, this great soul entered the sacriﬁcial assembly of rajarshi Janamejaya. There he saw King Janamejaya seated, surrounded by his many sacriﬁcial assistants,4 like Purandara5 surrounded by the gods. There were the lords of many countries who had undergone sacriﬁcial baths and skilled ofﬁciating priests, the equals of Brahma, seated on the kusha grass laid out at the sacriﬁce.
On seeing the rishi approach, rajarshi Janamejaya, the best of the Bharata lineage, advanced in great delight, with
all his companions. With the approval of the sacriﬁcial assistants, the lord offered a golden seat, as did Shakra6 to
Brihaspati.7 When the granter of boons was seated, worshipped by the devarshis,8 the lord of kings worshipped
him according to norms laid down in the sacred texts. Then the king offered his grandfather Krishna9 water to
wash his feet and mouth, oblations and a cow, as laid down in the rituals. Vyasa was delighted and accepted the offerings made by the Pandava Janamejaya, including the cow.
‘Thus having worshipped his great grandfather, bowed before him, and having joyfully seated himself below
him, the king asked him about his health. The great lord looked at him and asked him about his welfare. He then
worshipped all the sacriﬁcial assistants, who had already worshipped him. Thereupon, with folded hands, Janamejaya and all the sacriﬁcial assistants addressed the best of the Brahmanas. Janamejaya said, “O Brahmana! You
witnessed with your own eyes the great deeds of the Kurus and the Pandavas. I wish to hear them narrated by you.
What was the reason for the great quarrel between these men of great and virtuous deeds? Why did the great battle,
which caused the destruction of beings, take place among my grandfathers,10 their minds clouded by destiny? O

best of the Brahmanas! Tell me the details as they exactly happened.” On hearing these words, Krishna Dvaipayana spoke to his disciple Vaishampayana, seated by his side, and said, “Relate in full, exactly as you had heard
it from me, the account of the ancient quarrel between the Kurus and the Pandavas.” Thereupon, that bull among
Brahmanas, instructed by his preceptor, recited in its entirety that old history to the king, the sacriﬁcial assistants
and all the assembled kings about the quarrel between the Kurus and the Pandavas and the destruction of the
kingdom.’
55

‘Vaishampayana said, “Bowing down ﬁrst before my preceptor, with my mind and intellect concentrated and worshipping with devotion, reverence and single-mindedness all the Brahmanas and learned men, I shall now recite in
its entirety the account I heard from the great-souled Vyasa, a wise maharshi famous in the three worlds, inﬁnite in
his accomplishments. O king! You are a worthy person to hear the history of Bharata. Having received the account
from my preceptor, I am delighted to be able to recite it. O king! Hear how the quarrel between the Kurus and the
Pandavas occurred. In a desire for the kingdom, hear about the exile11 as a result of the game of dice. O bull of the
Bharata lineage! At your bidding, I shall recount to you how a battle ensued that destroyed the earth. On their father’s death, these warriors12 returned to their home from the forest. In a short while, they became skilled in the
art of archery and knowledge of the Vedas. However, the Kurus became envious of the Pandavas, who were all
gifted with immense physical strength, beauty and energy, fame and fortune. They were also loved by the citizens.
‘“Thereupon, the evil-minded Duryodhana, with Karna and the son of Subala,13 tried to banish them and oppressed them in various ways. That evil son of Dhritarashtra gave poison to Bhima with his food, but the warrior
Vrikodara14 digested it. One day, the evil one tied the sleeping Vrikodara on the banks of the Ganga and throwing
Bhima into the water went away to the city. But when the son of Kunti woke up, he tore the ropes with which he
was tied with his strong arms and Bhima’s pains disappeared. While he was asleep, he was bitten everywhere in
his body by black snakes with virulent poison, but that destroyer of enemies did not die. However, in all this oppression, the great-souled Vidura was always on guard, to neutralize the evil plans and save them from oppression.
As Shakra15 ensures happiness in heaven and the world of living beings, thus did Vidura always ensure happiness
for the Pandavas. When the Pandavas were not killed through all these means, open and hidden, since they were
protected by fate and destiny, he16 consulted his advisers: Vrisha,17 Duhshasana and the others. With Dhritarashtra’s consent, he had a house of lac built. The Pandavas, of unlimited energy, were forced to live there and it was
burnt down by ﬁre when they18 least suspected it. Because of Vidura’s warning, a trench was dug and that gave
them a wonderful means of escape and they were freed from danger.
‘“Later, in a large and terrible forest, Bhima, who had fearsome strength when angered, killed a rakshasa named
Hidimba. Then, in complete agreement, those powerful warriors went to the town of Ekachakra and lived there,
with their mother, disguised as Brahmanas. Having won Droupadi, they lived there for one year. And having been
recognized, those destroyers of foes returned to Hastinapura. King Dhritarashtra and the son19 of Shantanu then
told them, ‘Sons, so that conﬂict doesn’t ensue between you and your brothers, we have thought and decided that
Khandavaprastha will be your abode. Therefore, give up your resentment and go and live in Khandavaprastha,
which has many towns and wide roads.’ On hearing these words, they and their friends went to Khandavaprastha,
taking many jewels with them. And the sons of Pritha20 lived there for many years. Through the force of their
weapons, they brought many kings under their vassalage. Thus they gradually increased in power, setting store to
virtue and the way of truth, not roused by anger, calm and subjugating those who wished to do them harm. The immensely powerful Bhimasena subjugated the east, the brave Arjuna the north, Nakula the west and Sahadeva, the
conqueror of brave enemies, the south. Having conquered everything, their kingdom extended over the whole
world. With ﬁve such sun-like ones and the sun himself extended, the earth seemed to have six suns with the truthful and valorous Pandavas.
‘“Then, for some reason, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira sent his brother Dhananjaya21 to the forest. He lived in the
forest for one year and one month. He once went to Hrishikesha22 in Dvaravati and there obtained as his wife Sub-

hadra, with eyes like the blue lotus, sweet of speech and Vasudeva’s younger sister. As Shachi23with the great Indra and Shri24 with Krishna, Subhadra was delighted to be united with Pandu’s son, Arjuna. O supreme among
kings! Kunti’s son and Vasudeva then satisﬁed Agni by giving him Khandava25 to burn. Aided by Keshava, this
task wasn’t difﬁcult for Bibhatsu Partha, 26 just as when Vishnu sets his mind to destroying enemies, no task is too
difﬁcult. Agni gave Partha the supreme of bows, Gandiva, an inexhaustible quiver of arrows and a chariot with a
monkey on the standard. It was on that occasion that Bibhatsu freed the great demon Maya. He27 built the divine
assembly hall, adorned with all kinds of jewels and precious stones. Seeing this, the evil-minded and deluded
Duryodhana was driven by avarice.
‘“Thereupon he deceived Yudhishthira in a game of dice, played by Soubala,28 and banished him to the forest
for twelve years, with an additional year to be spent in disguise, adding up to thirteen years. When in the fourteenth year they29 returned and claimed their property, they didn’t get it. O king! Then war was declared and after
destroying all the Kshatriya lineages and killing King Duryodhana, the Pandavas obtained their kingdom back,
mostly unpopulated. O great king! This is the ancient history of those whose deeds were everlasting, the account of
the conﬂict, the destruction of the kingdom and the victory.”’
56

‘Janamejaya said, “O supreme among Brahmanas! You have told me in brief the account known as Mahabharata,
containing stories about the great Kurus. O blameless performer of austerities! But I now feel a great desire to hear
this wonderful history in detail, with all descriptions. You should therefore recite it in its entirety. I am not satisﬁed
with hearing a brief account of this great story. It cannot be for a triﬂing reason that the virtuous Pandavas killed
those who should not be killed, and yet continue to be praised by men. Why did those tigers among men, despite
being innocent and capable of wreaking vengeance on their enemies, suffer the oppressions of those evil ones quietly? O supreme among Brahmanas! Why did Vrikodara, who in his mighty arms had the strength of 10,00030 elephants, keep his anger under control, despite being oppressed? Why did not the pure Krishna Droupadi, oppressed
by the evil sons of Dhritarashtra, burn them with her angry eyes, capable though she was of doing it? Why did
those tigers among men, the two sons31 of Pritha and the two sons of Madri,32 though oppressed by the evil ones,
follow Yudhishthira, addicted to the evil vice of gambling? Why did Yudhishthira, the best among righteous men
and the son of Dharma himself, suffer extreme misfortune, though he knew the path of virtuous conduct? Why did
Pandu’s son Dhananjaya, with Krishna as his charioteer, and capable of dispatching many warriors to the land of
the dead with his arrows, suffer so much oppression? O blessed with the power of austerities! Tell me everything
that those great warriors did in every situation.”
‘Vaishampayana said, “I shall recount the entire history, that which was composed by the great-souled maharshi
Vyasa, whose powers are inﬁnite and who is worshipped in all the worlds. This contains 100,000 sacred shlokas,
composed by Satyavati’s son, Vyasa, of inﬁnite powers. The learned man who recites it to others and also those
who hear its recital attain the world of Brahma and become the equals of the gods. This is equal to the Vedas. It is
sacred and supreme. It is the best of all that can be heard. It is a purana worshipped by the rishis. It contains all the
useful instructions on artha and kama. This immensely sacred history makes the mind desire to attain salvation.
The learned man who recites Krishna’s33 Veda to those who are noble, generous, truthful and faithful, will attain
great fortune. Even sins like the killing of embryos in wombs are destroyed. On hearing it, the most evil is freed
from the most evil of sins. This history, called jaya, should be heard by those who wish to attain victory. On hearing it, a king can bring the entire world under his subjugation and defeat all his enemies. This is the best way to obtain a son and the great path to ensure welfare. It should be heard several times by heirs apparent and their wives.
‘“Vyasa, of inﬁnite intelligence, has said that it is the sacred arthashastra and the supreme dharmashastra. It has
been said that it is also the great mokshashastra. It is recited in the present time and it will be recited in the future.
He who hears it obtains sons, descendants and servants who perform desired acts. He who hears it is immediately
freed from all sins committed in body, mind and speech. He who hears the history of Bharata, without ﬁnding
fault, is freed from all fear of disease, not to speak of fear in the next world. Krishna Dvaipayana, in a desire to

bring welfare to the world, composed this to bring wealth, fame, long life, pure deeds and attainment of heaven,
spreading in the world the fame of the great-souled Pandavas and other Kshatriyas of immense energy. It is said
that this Bharata is the treasury of jewels, like the ocean who is the lord and the great snow-clad mountain.34 The
learned man who recites it to Brahmanas during sacred parvas35 is cleansed of his sins and becoming victorious
over heaven36 attains union with the eternal brahman. He who causes even a single line from it to be read to Brahmanas at his shraddha makes his shraddha becomes inexhaustible and his ancestors are satisﬁed with the offerings
that are made to them. The sins committed ignorantly by men every day are destroyed on hearing the account of
the Mahabharata. It is said that the Mahabharata is the history of the births of the Bharata lineage. He who knows
the etymology of this name is freed from all sin. The sage Krishna Dvaipayana arose regularly37 for three years
and composed this wonderful history known as the Mahabharata. O bull among the Bharatas! Whatever is found
here on dharma, artha, kama and moksha, may be found elsewhere. But whatever is not in it, cannot be found anywhere else.”’
57

‘Vaishampayana said, “There was a king, a ruler of the earth, always devoted to righteous conduct. His name was
Uparichara and he loved hunting. That descendant of the Puru lineage was also named Vasu and, on Indra’s instructions, conquered the beautiful and handsome kingdom of Chedi. After some time, the king gave up the use of
weapons and lived in a hermitage, practising austerities. One day, the thunder-wielding god38 came to him.
‘“Believing that he was trying to become the king of the gods through the practice of austerities, he tried to
wean the king away from his austerities. Indra said, ‘O ruler of the world! You should ensure that the path of righteous conduct is not confused. Protect the path of righteous conduct, because that holds up the world. Protect meticulously and rigidly the practice of virtue in the world. If you protect virtue, you will see many other eternal and sacred worlds.39 Though I am in heaven and you are on earth, you have become a dear friend to me. O ruler of men!
Live in that place that is the udder of the earth, stable with animals, ﬂowers, wealth and foodgrains. It has a pleasant climate meant for enjoyment and has all the qualities of the earth and is well protected like heaven. O king of
Chedi! Beyond compare on earth, this land is full of wealth, precious stones, other objects and minerals. The citizens in the cities in this land are contented, pious and follow righteous ways. They never indulge in falsehood, not
even in jest. The sons there never divide their wealth with their fathers and are engaged in the welfare of their superiors. Thin cows are never yoked to ploughs or carts for carrying goods. O king who gives reason for pride! In
Chedi, all the castes are always engaged in their respective duties. Nothing that exists in the three worlds is unknown to you. I shall give you a great and excellent ﬂying chariot,40 made of crystal and possessed by the gods
alone, that is capable of carrying you through the sky. Among all the mortals on earth, you alone, though you possess a physical body, will ride in that best of ﬂying chariots, as if in the form of a god. I shall also give you this
garland known as vaijayanti,41 made of lotuses that never fade. If you wear this, you will never be hurt by
weapons in battle. O ruler of men! This unparalleled, supreme and great garland, known as Indra’s, will be your
distinctive mark.’ The slayer of Vritra also gave a staff made of bamboo to protect the good and the peaceful. After
one year was over, the lord of the earth42 planted this in the earth for the sake of worshipping Shakra. O ruler of
the earth! From that day till now, all kings, following the example that was started, plant a bamboo pole in the
ground. After that, the kings make it stand upright and decorate it with garlands, perfumes, ornaments and baskets.
The worshipping is done in accordance with the rites, with garlands and ornaments, and the god who brings fortune is worshipped in his smiling form, a form he himself adopted out of his love for the great-souled Vasu. On
seeing this welfare-granting and god-directed worship done, the great Indra was pleased with Vasu, chief among
kings, and said, ‘The men and kings who worship me and observe my festival like the king of Chedi will gain
prosperity and victory, with their kingdoms. Their cities will also expand and will always be full of joy.’ O lord of
men! Thus did the great-souled and great Maghavan43 Indra bless the great king Vasu, out of his love for him.
Men who observe this festival of Shakra’s, with gifts of land and jewels, become pure and are blessed with boons,

like Vasu, lord of Chedi and the performer of great sacriﬁces, was blessed by Maghavan. Ruling Chedi in a righteous way, Vasu, the lord of Chedi, was loved by Indra, and continued with Indra’s festival and protected the earth.
‘“He had ﬁve sons, who had great valour and inﬁnite might. He44 was a universal emperor and instated his sons
in many kingdoms. His famous maharatha45 son Brihadratha was instated in the kingdom of Magadha. Others46
were Pratyagraha and Kushamba, also known as Manivahana and Macchilla, and Yadu, powerful kings invincible
in battle. O king! These were the sons of that rajarshi with unbounded powers. They established kingdoms and
cities named after them. Thus, the ﬁve kings, sons of Vasu, established separate dynasties that were eternal. When
he seated himself or travelled through the sky in the crystal chariot obtained through Indra’s grace, the apsaras and
the gandharvas worshipped the great king. And he became famous as Uparichara.47
‘“The river that ﬂowed near his city, Shuktimati, was once attacked by the mountain Kolahola, maddened by
lust.48 The mountain Kolahola was kicked by Vasu with his foot and the river ﬂowed out freely through the gully
caused by the kick. From the embrace of the mountain, the river gave birth to twins and, grateful, the river gave
them to the king. Vasu, supreme among rajarshis and the provider of prosperity and vanquisher of enemies, made
the son the general of his army.
‘“The daughter of the river was named Girika and the king49 made her his wife. Once, the time for intercourse
arrived and Vasu’s wife, Girika, having puriﬁed herself by bathing at the fertile time, informed her husband about
her state. But on that very day, his ancestors came to him and asked the best of kings and wisest of men to kill
some deer. Thinking that the command of his ancestors should be followed, he went out to hunt, thinking of Girika, who was exceedingly beautiful and like Shri50 herself. He was so excited that the semen was discharged in the
beautiful forest and wishing to save it, the king of the earth collected it in the leaf of a tree. The lord thought that
his semen should not be wasted in vain and that his wife’s fertile period should not pass barren. Then the king
thought about this many times and the best of kings ﬁrmly decided that his semen would be productive, since the
semen was issued when his queen’s time was right. Learned in the subtleties of dharma and artha, the king consecrated the semen, which was productive for producing progeny, and addressed a hawk that was seated nearby. ‘O
amiable one! Please take this seed to my wife Girika. She is in her season now.’ The swift hawk took it from him
and ﬂew speedily through the sky.
‘“When the bird was thus swiftly ﬂying through the sky, another hawk saw him and thought that the hawk was
carrying some meat and ﬂew at him. The two birds fought with their beaks in the sky. When they were thus ﬁghting, the semen fell into the waters of the river Yamuna. An apsara known by the name of Adrika lived in the water
of the Yamuna as a ﬁsh, because she had been cursed by Brahma. In the form of a ﬁsh, Adrika speedily came to
where Vasu’s semen fell from the hawk’s claw and swallowed it up immediately. O best of the Bharata lineage!
Some time after this, the ﬁsh was caught by ﬁshermen and she was in her tenth month.51 From the stomach of the
ﬁsh there emerged twins in human form, a boy and a girl. They52 marvelled at this and went and told the king, ‘O
king! These two have been born in human form inside a ﬁsh.’ Then King Uparichara accepted the male child and
he later became the righteous and truthful king named Matsya. As soon as the children were born, the apsara was
also immediately freed from her curse. The beautiful one had earlier been told by the illustrious god53 that she
would be freed from her non-human form when she gave birth to two human children. Following these words, after giving birth to two children and after being killed by the ﬁshermen, she left the form of a ﬁsh and assumed her
own divine form. The beautiful apsara then went up to the sky, following the path of the siddhas,54 rishis and charanas.55 The girl, the daughter of the ﬁsh, smelt of ﬁsh. She was given by the king to the ﬁshermen, saying that
she would be their daughter.
‘“This girl was called Satyavati. She was possessed of great beauty and had every quality and character. But because she lived among ﬁshermen, that sweet-smiling girl carried the smell of ﬁsh for a long time. Wishing to serve
her father, she plied a boat on the water. One day, when going on a pilgrimage, Parashara saw her. She was extremely beautiful and an object of desire even to siddhas. As soon as the wise one saw the beautiful one, the best of
the sages wanted to make love to Vasu’s daughter. She told him, ‘O holy hermit! The rishis are standing on both
banks of the river. How can we have intercourse when they are looking at us?’ Thus addressed by her, the great

lord56 created a fog so that the entire place seemed to be covered in darkness. On witnessing this sudden creation
of fog by the great rishi, the girl was surprised and overcome with modesty. Satyavati spiritedly said, ‘O great lord!
Know me to be a virgin and under my father’s protection. O unblemished one! My virginity will be sullied if I
unite with you. O best of the Brahmanas! If my virginity is lost, how will I be able to return home? O wise one! I
will not be able to stay at home. O great lord! Bear this in mind and then do what is proper.’ The best of the rishis
was very pleased at her words and replied, ‘Even after you do that which pleases me, you will remain a virgin. O
beautiful, but timid one! Ask me for any boon that you desire. O one with beautiful smiles! My boon has never
proven to be fruitless.’ Having been thus addressed, she asked for the boon that her body might always have sweet
scents. The great lord granted her what her heart desired. Then, having obtained the boon, she was extremely happy. The one adorned with all the charms of a woman had intercourse with that rishi of wonderful deeds. Thereafter,
she became known on earth as Gandhavati.57 Men on earth could smell her fragrance from the distance of one yojana and after that, she was also known as Yojanagandha.
‘“The great lord Parashara went on to his own home. And Satyavati was extremely happy to have obtained this
matchless boon. On that very day, she conceived as a result of the intercourse with Parashara and gave birth to
Parashara’s immensely powerful son on an island in the Yamuna. With his mother’s permission, he decided to
adopt a life of asceticism and went away, saying that he would instantly appear before her whenever she remembered him for any speciﬁc act. Thus was Dvaipayana born in Satyavati’s womb through Parashara. Because he was
born on an island, he came to be known as Dvaipayana. Knowing that dharma loses one leg at the end of every
yuga58 and that human life expectancy on earth and strength follow the pattern of the yugas, and moved by his desire to please Brahma and the Brahmanas, the learned one divided the Vedas. Thus, he came to be known as
Vyasa.59 The greatest lord and granter of boons then taught the Vedas and the ﬁfth Veda Mahabharata to Sumantu,
Jaimini, Paila, his own son Shuka and his disciple Vaishampayana. Separately through them the Bharata Samhita
became manifest. Then, Bhishma, of great valour and great fame, successor to Shantanu, was born in Ganga’s
womb through the semen of the Vasus.
‘“There was a great and famous ancient rishi known as Animandavya. Though not a thief, he was suspected of
being a thief and was impaled on a stake. Thereupon, the ancient maharshi summoned Dharma60 and addressed
him in these words. ‘In my childhood, I pierced a locust61 with a blade of grass. O Dharma! I remember that sin of
mine. But I cannot remember any other. Since then, I have practised austerities a thousand times. Have not these
great austerities neutralized a single sin? The killing of a Brahmana is more heinous than the killing of all other beings. O Dharma! Because of your sin,62 you will be born in the womb of a Shudra.’ Being thus cursed, Dharma
was born in the womb of a Shudra in the form of Vidura, learned, righteous and pure of body. From Gavalgana,
Sanjaya,63 who was like a sage, was born as a suta.
‘“Karna, of great strength, was born from Surya when Kunti was still a virgin. He emerged from his mother’s
womb with natural armour64 and a face adorned with earrings.65
‘“Vishnu himself, worshipped by all the worlds, appeared in Devaki through Vasudeva, for the welfare of the
world. He is of great fame, the god without beginning and without end, the lord and creator of the universe, unmanifest, without decay, the brahman, the chief, without any attributes, the great soul, eternal, nature, the lord who
controls, the prime being, the creator of the universe, the source of the sattva quality, perennial, without deterioration, inﬁnite, incapable of being moved, the god who is the supreme soul, Lord Narayana, the upholder, perpetual,
the supreme one without decay. This prime being, with inﬁnite wealth and the lord and grandfather of all beings,
took his birth in the lineage of the Andhakas and the Vrishnis in order to increase righteousness in the world.
‘“The great warriors Satyaki and Kritavarma, skilled in the use of weapons and well versed in the use of all
arms, always obedient to Narayana, were born from Satyaka and Hridika, as experts in use of weapons. The spilt
semen of maharshi Bharadvaja, great in the practice of austerities, was kept in a vessel. There it grew and from that
was born Drona. Goutama’s semen fell on a clump of reeds and from that were born twins, Kripa66 of immense
strength and Ashvatthama’s mother.67 Ashvatthama was born from Drona, blessed with the boon of knowing all
weapons. From the sacriﬁcial ﬁre was then born Dhrishtadyumna, as radiant as the ﬁre itself. The mighty hero was

born with a bow in his hand, for Drona’s destruction. From the sacriﬁcial altar was born Krishna,68 beautiful and
radiant. She had a fascinating body and shone with supreme beauty. Then were born Prahlada’s disciples, Nagnajit
and Subala. Subala had a son named Shakuni. Through the curse of the gods, the son of the king of Gandhara69
became the enemy of virtue and a destroyer of beings. The other70 became Duryodhana’s mother. Both71 were
skilled in material pursuits.
‘“In Vichitravirya’s ﬁeld, from Krishna Dvaipayana, were born Dhritarashtra, lord of men, and also Pandu, of
immense strength. Through his two wives, from Pandu, were born ﬁve separate sons, the equals of the gods. Yudhishthira was the ﬁrst-born, the eldest, born from Dharma. Vrikodara was born from Maruta.72 The best of all,
blessed with the boon of knowing all weapons, was Dhananjaya, born from Indra. From the Ashvins were born the
handsome twins Nakula and Sahadeva, always devoted to serving their superiors. One hundred sons were born to
the wise Dhritarashtra—Duryodhana and the others and the inter-caste Yuyutsu.73
‘“From Arjuna, Abhimanyu, the great-souled Pandu’s grandson, was born to Subhadra, Vasudeva’s sister. From
the ﬁve Pandavas, ﬁve sons were born to Krishna,74 handsome and skilled in the usage of all weapons—Prativindhya from Yudhishthira, Sutasoma from Vrikodara, Shrutakirti from Arjuna, Shatanika from Nakula and the mighty
Shrutasena75 from Sahadeva. From Bhima, Hidimba gave birth to Ghatotkacha in the forest. Drupada76 had a
daughter named Shikhandi, but later, she was transformed into a son. For the sake of her welfare, she was transformed into a man by the yaksha Sthuna. At that great battle of the Kurus, hundreds of thousands of kings assembled, eager to ﬁght with each other. Their names are so many that I cannot recount them, for it would take many
years. I have only mentioned the principal ones who ﬁgure in this account.”’
58

‘Janamejaya said, “O Brahmana! You have mentioned some and others you have not. I wish to hear in detail the
accounts of all the radiant kings. O man of good fortune! Why were these great warriors, the equals of the gods,
born on earth? Tell me in detail.”
‘Vaishampayana said, “O king! We have heard that what you ask is unknown even to the gods. However, after
paying my respects to Brahma, I shall tell you that. In ancient times, after destroying the Kshatriyas on earth twenty-one times, Jamadagni’s son77 went to Mahendra, supreme among mountains, and began to practise austerities.
O king! When the world was thus bereft of Kshatriyas by the one of the Bhrigu lineage, Kshatriya women used to
come to Brahmanas to ﬁll their wombs. O tiger among men! Brahmanas who were rigid in observance of their
vows had intercourse with them during their productive periods, not out of lust, nor when they were not in season.
O king! Thus, thousands of Kshatriya women conceived and gave birth to many Kshatriyas of great power, boys as
well as girls, so that the Kshatriya race might thrive. Thus the Kshatriya race originated from Kshatriya women
through the ascetic Brahmanas.
‘“This new generation had long lives and prospered through righteous conduct. The four castes were again established, with Brahmanas at the head. At that time, every man went to his wife only when she was in season, nor
for lust, nor when she was not in season. O bull of the Bharata lineage! All other beings, even those that were not
human, also went to their wives at the right season. Thus they prospered in a righteous way and lived for hundreds
and thousands of years. O ruler of the earth! All subjects faithfully followed dharma and the right rituals. All men
were free from sorrow and disease. O king, you who have the gait of an elephant! Kshatriyas once again governed
the wide earth, with the mountains, forests and groves, with the ocean as the boundary. When the earth was again
governed righteously by the Kshatriyas, the other castes, with Brahmanas at their head, were ﬁlled with immense
joy. All the rulers of men were freed from the sins of lust and anger and, punishing righteously those who deserved
to be punished, they protected their subjects. On seeing that the Kshatriyas followed dharma, the one with thousand eyes and performer of a hundred sacriﬁces78 poured down sweet rain at the right time and the right place, so
that subjects prospered. O ruler of men! No child died then. No one knew a woman before attaining the right age.
O best of the Bharata lineage! Right up to the shores of the ocean, the earth was full of people who lived for a long
time. Kshatriyas performed great sacriﬁces in which a lot of alms were given. The Brahmanas studied the Vedas,

the Vedangas and the Upanishads. O king! At that time, no Brahmana sold the knowledge of the brahman. Nor
were the Vedas recited in the hearing of Shudras. The Vaishyas were engaged in farming and tilled the earth well
with cattle, never yoking cows to ploughs and taking care of the lean ones. Men did not milk cows whose calves
were still drinking the froth. No seller sold goods with false scales. O tiger among men! Men thus performed all
acts with their eyes on dharma and followed the righteous path in every way. O ruler of men! Men of all castes followed the respective duties of their own castes. O tiger among men! At that time, there was no decline from the
path of dharma. O bull of the Bharata lineage! Both women and cows gave birth at the right time. Trees bore ﬂowers and fruit in the right seasons. O king! With Krita Yuga having thus arrived successfully at that time, the entire
earth was ﬁlled with many beings.
‘“O bull of the Bharata lineage and lord of men! When the world was in such a ﬂourishing state, the asuras began to take birth in royal dynasties. Having been often defeated in battle by the gods, the sons of Diti were dislodged from heaven and their prosperity, and began to take birth on earth. O lord of kings! Wishing to attain divinity in the world of men, the powerful demons took birth as different beings—cows, horses, asses, camels, buffaloes,
predatory beasts, elephants and deer. O ruler of the earth! On account of those that were already born and those
that were being born, the earth was no longer capable of supporting herself. Some of Diti and Danu’s offspring,
dislodged from heaven, took birth as kings on earth, powerful and insolent. With great valour and strength, they
covered the earth in many forms. Crushing their enemies, they oppressed the earth, right up to the shores of the
ocean. They began to oppress the Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas, the Vaishyas and the Shudras. They persecuted all
other creatures with their power. O king! Terrorizing and killing all the myriad beings, they roamed over the earth
in their hundreds and thousands. Devoid of righteousness and drunk with the power of their valour and strength,
they even regularly persecuted the maharshis in their hermitages.
‘“O ruler of the earth! Oppressed by the great asuras, who were swollen because of valour, power and strength,
the earth approached Brahma. O king! At that time, invaded by the strength of the danavas, the wind, the mountain
or the serpent79 could no longer support the earth. O ruler of the earth! Therefore, the earth, frightened and overburdened, sought refuge with the god who is the grandfather of all beings. She saw the great and eternal god Brahma, the creator of the worlds, seated, surrounded by gods, Brahmanas and maharshis. Gandharvas and apsaras
were engaged in divine tasks, worshipping him through hymns and chants. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In
the presence of all the rulers of the worlds, the earth saluted him and sought refuge, narrating all that had happened. But the reason for the earth’s arrival was already known to the omniscient self-creator who dwells high
above and is the source of matter. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He is the creator of the world. How could
he not know what was in the minds of all beings, including the gods and the demons?
‘“O great king! The source of all beings, Prajapati, Isha, Shambhu, the lord of the earth, spoke to earth. ‘O Vasundhara!80 So as to accomplish the task for which you have come to me, I will appoint all those who live in heaven.’ O king! Having thus addressed the earth, the god Brahma bid her farewell, and then the creator of all beings
commanded the gods. ‘So as to free earth from this burden, all of you go and ensure parts of you are born on earth
and seek the conﬂicts81 you want.’ Then the great lord summoned the hosts of gandharvas and apsaras and spoke
to them these supreme words: ‘Go and ensure that parts of you are born on earth in the forms that please you.’ On
hearing these words of the foremost among the gods, words that were appropriate and full of meaning, all the gods,
with Shakra82 at their head, accepted them. Impatient to go to earth and be born there in their respective parts,
they went to Vaikuntha, to Narayana, the wielder of the chakra and the gada,83 he who is dressed in yellow, he
who is radiant white, he who destroys the enemies of the gods, he who has the lotus on his navel and he whose
eyes are soft, wide and sloped downwards. For the puriﬁcation of the earth, Indra told the supreme of beings,
‘Please incarnate yourself.’ Hari84 replied that thus it would be.”’

Section Seven
Sambhava Parva
This parva comprises 2394 shlokas and sixty-ﬁve chapters.
Chapter 59: 54 shlokas
Chapter 60: 69 shlokas
Chapter 61: 102 shlokas
Chapter 62: 14 shlokas
Chapter 63: 26 shlokas
Chapter 64: 42 shlokas
Chapter 65: 42 shlokas
Chapter 66: 17 shlokas
Chapter 67: 33 shlokas
Chapter 68: 80 shlokas
Chapter 69: 51 shlokas
Chapter 70: 46 shlokas
Chapter 71: 58 shlokas
Chapter 72: 23 shlokas
Chapter 73: 36 shlokas
Chapter 74: 12 shlokas
Chapter 75: 25 shlokas
Chapter 76: 35 shlokas
Chapter 77: 27 shlokas
Chapter 78: 41 shlokas
Chapter 79: 30 shlokas
Chapter 80: 27 shlokas
Chapter 81: 16 shlokas
Chapter 82: 13 shlokas
Chapter 83: 13 shlokas
Chapter 84: 21 shlokas
Chapter 85: 27 shlokas
Chapter 86: 17 shlokas
Chapter 87: 18 shlokas
Chapter 88: 26 shlokas
Chapter 89: 55 shlokas
Chapter 90: 96 shlokas
Chapter 91: 22 shlokas
Chapter 92: 55 shlokas
Chapter 93: 46 shlokas
Chapter 94: 94 shlokas
Chapter 95: 14 shlokas
Chapter 96: 59 shlokas
Chapter 97: 26 shlokas
Chapter 98: 33 shlokas
Chapter 99: 49 shlokas
Chapter 100: 30 shlokas
Chapter 101: 28 shlokas
Chapter 102: 23 shlokas
Chapter 103: 17 shlokas
Chapter 104: 21 shlokas
Chapter 105: 27 shlokas
Chapter 106: 14 shlokas
Chapter 107: 37 shlokas

Chapter 108: 18 shlokas
Chapter 109: 31 shlokas
Chapter 110: 45 shlokas
Chapter 111: 36 shlokas
Chapter 112: 34 shlokas
Chapter 113: 43 shlokas
Chapter 114: 66 shlokas
Chapter 115: 28 shlokas
Chapter 116: 31 shlokas
Chapter 117: 33 shlokas
Chapter 118: 30 shlokas
Chapter 119: 43 shlokas
Chapter 120: 21 shlokas
Chapter 121: 23 shlokas
Chapter 122: 47 shlokas
Chapter 123: 78 shlokas
The word sambhava means what can originate or be in existence. Hence, this parva is about the origins of the core story. It is one of the longest parvas.
59

Vaishampayana said, ‘Thereupon, Narayana and Indra agreed that, together with the gods, they would descend
from heaven and be born on earth in their respective parts. Having instructed the gods, Shakra1 returned from
Narayana’s abode. One after another, for the destruction of the enemies of the gods and for the welfare of all the
worlds, the dwellers of heaven took birth on earth. O tiger among kings! Thereupon, as it pleased them, the gods
took birth in the dynasties of the rajarshis and the maharshis. They killed the danavas, the rakshasas, the gandharvas, the nagas and other creatures that killed men, in great numbers. O best of the Bharata lineage! The danavas,
the rakshasas, the gandharvas and the nagas could not kill the gods. Because, even when they were infants, they
were strong.’
Janamejaya said, ‘I wish to hear accounts of the births of gods, danavas, gandharvas, apsaras, men, yakshas, rakshasas and other beings, from the beginning and in detail. You know everything. Please tell me.’ Vaishampayana
replied, ‘Bowing down to the god who creates himself,2 I shall narrate to you the origins and end of the worlds of
the gods and other beings.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Through the powers of his mind, Brahma had six sons3—Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha and Kratu. Marichi’s son was Kashyapa and all beings were born from Kashyapa. Daksha had thirteen daughters who were illustrious. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Daksha’s daughters4 were Aditi, Diti,
Danu, Kala, Anayu, Simhika, Muni, Krodha, Prava, Arishta, Vinata, Kapila and Kadru. The sons and grandsons of
these daughters were immensely powerful and inﬁnite in number.
‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! From Aditi were born the twelve adityas, the rulers of the worlds. I shall
now mention their names to you—Dhata, Mitra, Aryamana, Shakra, Varuna, Amsha, Bhaga, Vivasvana and Pusha.
In the tenth place was Savita, the eleventh was Tvashta and the twelfth was Vishnu. However, the youngest surpassed all the other adityas in qualities.
‘It is heard that Diti had only one son, named Hiranyakashipu. But he had ﬁve great-souled sons and their names
were famous. Prahlada was the eldest, followed by Samhrada. After that was Anuhrada. And after him, Shibi and
Bashkala. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Three sons of Prahlada are known everywhere—Virochana,
Kumbha and Nikumbha. Virochana had one son, the immensely powerful Bali. Bali in turn had a son, the great
asura named Bana.
‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Danu’s forty sons are known everywhere. The ﬁrst one was the famous
king Viprachitti. In addition, one knows of Shambara, Namuchi, Puloman, Asiloman, Keshi, the danava Durjaya,
Ayahshira, Ashvashira, the valorous Ashvashanku, Gaganamurdhana, Vegavan, Ketuman, Svarbhanu, Ashva, Ashvapati, Vrishaparva, Ajaka, Ashvagriva, Sukshma, the great asura Tuhundu, Isripa, Ekachakra, Virupaksha, Hara,
Ahara, Nichandra, Nikumbha, Kupatha, Kapatha, Sharabha, Shalabha, Surya and Chandrama. Thus is recited the
names of the famous danavas in Danu’s lineage. The gods Surya5 and Chandrama6 are different. O great king!

Besides these, ten other immensely powerful and great danavas are known as Danu’s sons—Ekaksha, the valorous
Mritapa, Pralamba, Naraka, Vatapi, Shatrutapana, the great asura Shatha, Gavishtha, Danayu and the danava
Dirghajihva. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Their sons and grandsons were innumerable.
‘Simhika gave birth to a son named Rahu, the persecutor of the sun and the moon, and to three others—Suchandra, Chandraharta and Chandravimardana. The numerous sons and grandsons of Krodha were as cruel as she herself was. That line was the performer of evil and cruel deeds, oppressing their enemies. Anayu had four sons, the
best among the asuras—Vikshara, Bala, Vira and the great asura Vritra. Kala’s sons were like Yama himself, immensely famous on earth, great danavas who were powerful oppressors of their enemies and of great valour—
Vinashana, Krodha, Krodhahanta and Krodhashatru. It is heard that Kala also had other sons, including those
known as the kaleyas.
‘Shukra, the son of a rishi, was the great preceptor of the asuras. The famous Shukra Ushanas7 had four sons,
who were also ofﬁciating priests for the asuras. Their names were Tvashtavara and Atri and two others who knew
about the incantations of mantras. In energy, they were like the sun and they always tried to inﬂuence Brahma’s
world. Thus I have narrated to you, as I heard it in the ancient tales, the origins of the dynasties of the gods and the
powerful and strong demons. O ruler of the earth! Their progeny were so many and multiplied so much that I cannot count them.
‘Tarkshya,8 Arishtanemi, Garuda, Aruna, Aruni and Varuni are known as the sons of Vinata. Shesha, Ananta,
Vasuki, the serpent Takshaka, Kurma and Kulika are known as the sons of Kadru.
‘O king! Bhimasena, Ugrasena, Suparna, Varuna, Gopati, Dhritarashtra, Suryavarcha the seventh, Pattravan,
Arkaparna, the famous Prayuta, Bhima, Chitraratha, all famous and learned in all matters, Shalishira, Pradyumna
the fourteenth, Kali the ﬁfteenth and Narada the sixteenth, these divine gandharvas are known as the sons of Muni.
‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I shall now recount to you many other beings—Anavadya, Anuvasha,
Anuranuna, Priya, Anupa, Subhaga and Bhasi were born to Prava, while Siddha, Purna, Barhi, the famous Purnayu, Brahmachari, Ratiguna, the seventh Suparna, Vishvavasu, Bhanu and the tenth Suchandra, these divine
gandharvas are also known as the sons of Prava. It is also known that in times long past, the lady of good fortune
known as Prava, through a devarshi,9 gave birth to the race of apsaras with holy qualities—Alambusha,
Mishrakeshi, Vidyutparna, Tulanagha, Aruna, Rakshita, the lovely Rambha, Asita, Subahu, Suvrata, Subhuja and
Supriya. Atibahu, and the famous Haha and Huhu and Tumbura—these four are known as the supreme among
gandharvas.10
‘The ancient accounts tell us that the ambrosia, the Brahmanas, cattle, gandharvas and apsaras were the progeny
of Kapila.11 Thus, I have recounted to you the origins and exact numbers of all beings, including the gandharvas,
the apsaras, the serpents, Suparna, the rudras, the maruts, cattle and the fortunate Brahmanas who perform holy
deeds. This history brings long life, is sacred, and is worthy of being heard and is also worthy of praise. It should
always be heard and recited to others in the right frame of mind. He who reads this account of the origins of great
souls with proper rites and in the presence of gods and Brahmanas, obtains progeny, good fortune, prosperity, fame
and a beautiful outcome after death.’
60

Vaishampayana said, ‘It is known that Brahma gave birth to six maharshis through the powers of his mind.
Sthanu12 had eleven great sons through the powers of his mind—Mrigavyadha, Sarva, the famous Nirriti, Aja,
Ekapada, Pinaki the destroyer of enemies, Dahana, Ishvara, the greatly radiant Kapali, Sthanu and the great lord
Bhaga. These are known as the eleven rudras. The powerful maharshis Marichi, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha
and Kratu are Brahma’s six sons. It is well known in all the worlds that Angiras had three sons, Brihaspati, Utathya
and Samvarta, all of whom were rigid in their vows. O ruler of men! It has been heard that the sons of Atri were
many. They were all maharshis, learned in the Vedas, tranquil in their souls and attained salvation. From Pulastya
were born the rakshasas, the monkeys and the kinnaras.13 From Pulaha were born the deer, the lions, the tigers and

the kimpurushas.14 The sons of Kratu were the equals of Kratu and were companions of the sun.15 They were famous in the three worlds because of truthfulness and rigidity of their vows.
‘O protector of the earth! The revered rishi Daksha, great son and great father, was born from Brahma’s right
toe. From the left toe was born the great-soul’s16 wife. Through her, the sage had ﬁfty daughters. These daughters
were lotus-eyed and were all unblemished in features. Since Prajapati17 had no sons, he made these daughters his
putrikas.18 O king! In accordance with the divine rites, he gave ten to Dharma, twenty-seven to Indu19 and thirteen to Kashyapa. Listen to me as I recite the names of Dharma’s wives—Kirti, Lakshmi, Dhriti, Medha, Pushti,
Shraddha, Kriya, Buddhi, Lajja and Mati. As decreed by the one who created himself,20 these ten wives of Dharma are the doors to Dharma. The twenty-seven wives of Soma21 are known throughout the worlds. These wives of
Soma are pure in their vows and have been appointed to measure the progression of time. They are the magical
nakshatras,22 used to regulate the movement of the worlds.
‘The grandfather23 had another son named Manu. He was a prajapati24 and his sons were the eight vasus. I
shall name them in detail—Dhara, Dhruva, Soma, Aha, Anila, Anala, Pratyusha and Prabhasa. These are known as
the eight vasus. Dhara was the son25 of Dhumra, and so was Dhruva, who had knowledge of the brahman. Chandra was the son of Manasvini and Shvasa’s son was Shvasana.26 Aha was Rata’s son and the ﬁre27 was
Shandilya’s son. It is known that Pratyusha and Prabhasa were the sons of Prabhata. Dhara again had two sons,
named Dravina and Hutahavyavaha. Dhruva’s son was the illustrious Kala, the regulator of the worlds. Soma’s son
was the lustrous Varcha and the beautiful Varcha had sons named Shishira, Prana and Ramana. The sons of Aha
were Jyoti, Shama, Shanta and Muni. Agni’s son28 was the illustrious Kumara, born in a bed of reeds. Since he
was reared by the krittikas,29 he is also known as Kartikeya. Other sons30 were Shakha, Vishakha and Naigamesha, as the youngest. Anila’s wife was Shiva and her sons were Purojava and Avijnatagati. These were the two
sons of Anila. It is known that Pratyusha’s son was the rishi Devala. Devala himself had two sons who were
learned and forgiving. Brihaspati’s31 sister was celibate and the ﬁrst among women. Unattached to the world and
attached to yoga, she roamed the world and became the wife of the eighth vasu, Prabhasa. Thus was born the illustrious Vishvakarma, founder of all crafts, creator of a thousand arts, artisan to the thirty gods, maker of all ornaments, best of craftsmen and maker of celestial chariots for the gods. Men thrive on the arts created by this great
soul and it is for this reason that the everlasting Vishvakarma is eternally worshipped.
‘The illustrious Dharma emerged by cleaving Brahma’s right breast, assuming human form and bringing happiness to all the worlds. Dharma had three supreme sons, beautiful to all beings—Shama, Kama and Harsha. They
support the worlds through their energy. Kama’s wife was Rati, Shama’s was Prapti and Harsha’s was Nanda. The
worlds depend on them for sustenance. Kashyapa was Marichi’s son and Kashyapa’s sons were the gods and the
demons. O tiger among kings! He is therefore the origin of the worlds. Tvashtri,32 in the form of a mare, became
the wife of Savita33 and this fortunate one gave birth to the two Ashvins in the sky. O ruler of men! Aditi had
twelve sons, headed by Shakra.34 The youngest of them was Vishnu, on whom the worlds depend. These are the
thirty-three gods. I shall now recount to you their progeny, according to their groups,35 families36 and classes.37
One must know that the rudras, saddhyas, maruts, vasus, bhargavas and vishvadevas are each a group. Vinata’s son
Garuda, the powerful Aruna and the illustrious Brihaspati are counted among the adityas. The two Ashvins and all
herbs and animals are counted among the guhyakas.38 O king! These are the classes of the gods, recited in sequence. When a man recites this narration, he is cleansed from all sins.
‘The illustrious Bhrigu emerged by cleaving open Brahma’s heart. Bhrigu’s son was the learned Shukra, wise
and the son of one who was wise, and a planet. On being appointed by the one who created himself,39 he travels
the sky to sustain life in the three worlds, presiding over rain and drought, fear and freedom from fear. He is celibate, faithful in his vows, wise, learned in yoga and has great intelligence. He is the preceptor of the gods and the
demons. Bhrigu’s son was thus appointed by the mighty one40 to look after that which should be obtained and preserve that which has been obtained. Bhrigu had another son named Chyavana, learned, righteous and radiant in his

austerities. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In his anger, he emerged from his mother’s womb and set her
free.41 Manu’s daughter Arushi became that wise one’s42 wife and Ourva,43 of great fame, was born from her,
ripping open her thighs. Even when young, he had great energy and all the qualities and practised great austerities.
His son was Richika and Richika’s son was Jamadagni. Jamadagni had four great-souled sons—the youngest of
them was Rama,44 superior to the others in all qualities, skilled in the use of all weapons and the destroyer of
Kshatriyas. Ourva had one hundred sons, Jamadagni45 being the foremost. He46 had thousands of sons and thus
Bhrigu’s offspring proliferated.
‘Brahma had two other sons, whose signs can be seen in the worlds. They are Dhata and Vidhata and they lived
with Manu. Their sister is the beautiful goddess Lakshmi, whose abode is the lotus and her sons, born of the mind,
are the horses that travel in the sky. The goddess Jyeshtha was born from Shukra and became Varuna’s wife. She
gave birth to a son known as Bala and a daughter named Shura,47 who brings joy to the gods.
‘When hungry creatures began to devour each other for food, Adharma, the destroyer of all beings, was born.
His wife was Nirriti and so rakshasas48 are known as nairritas. She also had three other terrible sons, always engaged in evil deeds—Bhaya,49 Mahabhaya50 and Mrityu,51 the destroyers of beings. The divine Tamra gave birth
to ﬁve daughters known in the worlds as Kaki, Shyeni, Bhasi, Dhritarashtri and Shuki. O, ruler of men! Kaki gave
birth to the owls, Shyeni gave birth to the hawks, Bhasi gave birth to the cocks and vultures, Dhritarashtri gave
birth to all the ducks, swans and geese and the learned and righteous Shuki, blessed with the best qualities and
adorned with the best marks, gave birth to the parrots.
‘Krodha gave birth to nine daughters who were prone to anger—Mrigi, Mrigamanda, Hari, Bhadramana, Matangi, Sharduli, Shveta, Surabhi and the famous Surasa, blessed with every fortunate mark. O best of men! Mrigi’s
offspring are all the deer. O scorcher of enemies! Mrigamanda’s offspring are bears, other forms of deer and yaks.
Bhadramana had the elephant Airavata as her son. Her son Airavata is a great elephant and the divine elephant.
Hari’s progeny were tawny monkeys and nimble monkeys. It is said that the golangula52 monkeys are also Hari’s
sons. O fortunate one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Sharduli gave birth to lions and tigers and certainly
also to big panthers and leopards. O ruler of men! The offspring of Matangi are the elephants. Shveta gave birth to
a swift cardinal53 elephant named Shveta. O king! Surabhi gave birth to two daughters, the beautiful Rohini and
the famous Gandharvi. In addition, cattle were born from Rohini and horses from Gandharvi. Surasa gave birth to
the nagas and Kadru to the pannagas.54 Anala gave birth to the seven kinds of trees that produce round fruit.
‘Anala had another daughter named Shuki. Surasa55 was Kadru’s daughter. Shyeni was Aruna56’s wife. She
gave birth to two mighty and powerful sons, named Sampati and the valorous Jatayu. Vinata had two famous sons,
Garuda and Aruna. O lord over men and chief among those who are wise! Thus have I completely described to you
the origins of all principal creatures. The man who hears this is cleansed from all his sins, gets to know everything
and ﬁnally attains the highest state after death.’
61

Janamejaya said, ‘O great-souled and revered one! I wish to hear in detail accounts of the origins and deeds among
men of all creatures who assumed human form—gods, demons, yakshas, rakshasas and other beings.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O Indra among men! I shall tell you everything about those gods who took birth among
men, and about the demons. The bull among the danavas was known as Viprachitti, and as a bull among men, he
was known as Jarasandha. O king! The son of Diti, known as Hiranyakashipu, was known in the world of men as
the mighty Shishupala. Prahlada’s younger brother, known as Samhrada, became known as Shalya, chief among
the Bahlikas. O lord over men! Known as Anuhrada, the mighty youngest brother became famous in this world as
Dhrishtaketu. O king! The son of Diti, known as Shibi, became the famous king Druma on earth. O ruler of men!
The best of the asuras, known as Bashkala, was born as the famous Bhagadatta. O king! The ﬁve valorous and
swift asuras—Ayahshira, Asvhashira, Ayahshanku, Gaganamurdha and Vegavan—were born on earth in the illustrious lineage of Kekaya and became great kings. The mighty asura who was known as Ketumana, was born on
earth as King Amitouja. The great, fortunate and famous asura, Svarbhanu, became King Ugrasena of terrible

deeds. The great and fortunate asura, known as Ashva, became the valorous and invincible King Ashoka. O king!
O bull among men! His younger brother Ashvapati, son of Diti, was born as King Hardikya. The great and fortunate asura, famous as Vrishaparva, became King Dirghaprajna on earth. Vrishaparva’s younger brother, known as
Ajaka, became King Malla on earth. The strong and great asura known as Ashvagriva became King Rochamana on
earth. The wise and illustrious asura known as Sukshma became the famous King Brihanta on earth. Tuhunda,
supreme among asuras, became King Senabindu on earth. The extremely strong asura, known as Isripa, became
King Papajit on earth, and his valour was well known. The great asura known as Ekachakra became known on
earth as Prativindhya. The great asura known as Virupaksha, capable of displaying different modes of ﬁghting, was
known on earth as King Chitravarmana. The supreme danava Hara, the abductor of his enemies, was born as Suvastu, a bull among men. The mightily powerful asura, destroyer of enemy armies and known as Ahara, became
famous on earth as King Bahlika. The supreme among asuras, Nichandra, whose face was like the moon, became
famous on earth as the fortunate King Munjakesha. The wise and invincible asura known as Nikumbha became
Devadhipa on earth, the best of kings. Sharabha, the great asura who was a son of Diti, became rajarshi Pourava
among men. The asura who was known as the second Shalabha, became King Prahrada in the land of the Bahlikas
on earth. Chandra, the best of Diti’s sons and as handsome as the lord of the stars57 in the world, became rajarshi
Rishika on earth, supreme among kings. O best of kings! The best of asuras, known as Mritapa, became King
Paschimanupaka on earth. The great and powerful asura known as Gavishtha became King Drumasena on earth.
The fortunate and great asura, famous as Mayura, became Vishva, ruler of the earth. The asura who was his58
younger brother and was known as Suparna, became King Kalakriti on earth. The supremely powerful among
asuras, known as Chandrahanta, became rajarashi Shunaka on earth, supreme among kings. The great asura known
as Chandravinashana became rajarashi Janaki on earth, supreme among kings. O descendant of the Kuru lineage!
The supreme danava known as Dirghajihva became famous on earth as the ruler of the kingdom of Kashi. The
planet who was born from Simhi and who oppressed the sun and the moon,59 became famous as Kratha, ruler of
men. It is said that the eldest of the four sons of Anayu, the asura Vikshara, became the powerful King Vasumitra.
The great asura who was Vikshara’s second brother, became king of the land of Pamsu. The best of the asuras
known as Balavira became Poundramatsyaka, ruler of men. O king! The great asura known as Vritra became rajarshi Manimana on earth, ruler of men. The asura who was his60 younger brother and was known as Krodhahanta, became the famous King Danda on earth. The asura known as Krodhavardhana became Dandadhara on earth,
ruler of men.
‘O ruler of men! The eight sons of the asura Kalaka were all born on earth and became kings who were as powerful as tigers. Out of the eight great kaleya asuras, the eldest became the illustrious King Jayatsena of Magadha.
The illustrious second, equal to Harihaya,61 became King Aparajita on earth. O great king! The third great asura,
immensely powerful and with immense valour, became the king of the nishadas on earth. The fourth is known on
earth as Shrenimana, supreme among rajarshis. The ﬁfth great asura, greatest among them, became King Mahouja
on earth, the tormentor of his foes. The great and wise asura who was the sixth, became Abhiru on earth, best of
rajarshis. From that group62 came Samundrasena, renowned all over the earth, right up to the shores of the ocean,
for his learning in dharma and artha. O ruler of men! The eighth of the kaleyas and a tormentor of enemies, known
as Brihata, became a righteous king, devoted to the welfare of all beings.
‘O ruler of men! From the race of asuras known as krodhavasha,63 many famous kings were born on earth. I
have mentioned them to you—Nandika, Karnaveshta, Siddhartha, Kitaka, Suvira, Subahu, Mahavira, Bahlika,
Krodha, Vichitya, Surasa, the handsome king Nila, Viradhama, Dantavakra, Durjaya, Rukmi, King Janamejaya, a
tiger among kings, Ashada, Vayuvega, Bhuriteja, Ekalavya, Sumitra, Vatadhana, Gomukha, the kings known as
Karushaka, Kshemadhurti, Shrutayu, Uddhava, Brihatsena, Kshema, Ugratirtha, Kuhara, the king of Kalinga and
Matimana, an Indra among men and known as Ishvara. O descendant of the Kuru lineage and O ruler of the earth!
O great king! In ancient times, these kings were born on earth from the race known as krodhavasha and they had
great strength and performed great deeds. O ruler of men! Devaka, who was as resplendent as the king of the gods,
was born on earth as the chief of the gandharvas.

‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona, the son of Bharadvaja, was not born from a womb. He was a part
of the illustrious devarshi Brihaspati. O tiger among kings! He had great energy and great fame and performed
great deeds. He was the best among those who were skilled in the knowledge of all weapons. Those who had
knowledge of the Vedas knew him to be learned in the Vedas, as well as in knowledge of weapons.64 Drona
brought fame to his lineage and was like Indra in his deeds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage and O ruler of
men! The brave and lotus-eyed Ashvatthama, of great valour, tormentor of enemies and fearful to enemy armies,
was born from three parts of Mahadeva that merged into one—yama,65 kama66 and krodha.67 Through the curse
of Vashishtha and the design of Vasava,68 the eight vasus were born as the sons of Shantanu,69 through Ganga.
The youngest was Bhishma, intelligent, learned in the Vedas, the best of speakers, fearful to enemy armies and the
dispeller of fear among the Kurus. He was supreme among those who had all knowledge, had great energy and
fought with the great-souled Bhargava Rama, son of Jamadagni. O king! The brahmarshi who was known on earth
as Kripa and who was the embodiment of virility, was born from the group of rudras. O king! Know the king and
great warrior,70 known in the world as Shakuni, the tormentor of foes, to be Dvapara himself. He, who was known
as Satyaki, truthful to his promises, upholder of the pride of the Vrishni lineage and the tormentor of enemies, was
born from parts of the divine maruts. Rajarshi Drupada, best among those skilled in the usage of all weapons, was
also born in the world of men from the same gods.71 O king! Know that Kritavarma, the best of bulls among
Kshatriyas, performer of unparalleled deeds and chief among lords of men and rajarshi Virata, the conqueror of
other kingdoms and scorcher of foes, were also born from the class of maruts.
‘Arishta’s son, renowned as Hamsa and king of the gandharvas, was born to propagate the Kuru lineage. He was
known as Dhritarashtra, Krishna Dvaipayana’s son. He had great energy, long arms and he was a ruler of men with
wisdom in his eyes. Through his mother’s fault and the anger of a rishi, he was born blind. Know that he who was
known in the world as Vidura, best among all wise men, was the greatly fortunate son of Atri himself and the best
among all sons. The evil-minded and evil-spirited King Duryodhana, who brought disgrace to the lineage of the
Kurus, was born on earth from Kali’s part. O ruler of the earth! He was responsible for destroying everything on
earth, he created discord and was hated by everyone in the world. He fanned enmity and the great ﬁre of destruction that ended all beings. Among men, Pulastya’s sons72 were born as his brothers. Duhshasana onwards, there
were 100 in number, all performer of cruel deeds. Durmukha, Duhsaha and the others, whose names will not be
mentioned. All of them assisted Duryodhana. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were all sons of Pulastya.
‘O king! Know that King Yudhishthira was a part of Dharma, Bhimasena of the god of wind and Arjuna of the
king of the gods. Nakula and Sahadeva, most handsome and enchanting to all beings, were parts of the Ashvins.
He who was known as Suvarcha, the mighty son of Soma, became Arjuna’s son Abhimanyu, the performer of
great deeds. Know that maharatha Dhrishtadyumna was born from Agni’s part. O king! Know that the male-female
Shikhandi was born from a rakshasa. O bull of the Bharata lineage! Know that Droupadi’s ﬁve sons were born
from the class of the vishvadevas.73 Know that the greatly famous maharatha Karna, who parted with his natural
armour, was born from the celestial sun. From the eternal god of the gods, whose name is Narayana, was born, in
the world of men, the mighty Vasudeva. The immensely powerful Baladeva was a part of the naga Shesha. O king!
Know that Pradyumna, of great energy, was a part of Sanatkumara. O Indra among men! In this way, the parts of
many of other gods were born in Vasudeva’s lineage and increased its glory.
‘O king! I have already told you about the class of apsaras. As instructed by Vasava, their parts were also born
on earth. O lord of men! Sixteen thousand parts of these goddesses were born in this world as the wives of
Narayana. A part of Shri74 herself was born on earth out of love. She was born as a faultless daughter in the house
of Drupada, from the middle of a sacriﬁcial altar. She was neither tall nor short, and had the fragrance of a blue lotus. Her eyes were long, like lotus leaves. Her hips were well formed. Her hair was long and black. She had all the
auspicious marks on her body and she had the shine of lapis lazuli.75 She charmed the minds of ﬁve men who
were like Indras. The goddesses Siddhi and Dhriti became the mothers of the ﬁve and were known as Kunti and
Madri. Mati76 became the daughter of Subala.

‘O king! Thus have I described to you the birth and incarnations of the parts of the gods, asuras, gandharvas and
also rakshasas, those who were born as kings on earth, drunk with the desire to ﬁght and the great souls who were
born in the extensive lineage of the Yadus. Hearing this account of anshavatarana brings wealth, fame, progeny,
long life and victory and should be heard without questioning. On hearing the anshavatarana of devas, gandharvas
and rakshasas, learned men know of creation, preservation and destruction and are unmoved in adversities.’
62

Janamejaya said, ‘O Brahmana! I have heard completely from you the account of the incarnations of devas,
danavas, rakshasas, gandharvas and apsaras. O Brahmana! I now wish to hear from the beginning the account of
the origin of the Kuru lineage. Please narrate it in front of these Brahmana sages.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O best of the Bharata lineage! The founder of the Pourava dynasty was the valorous
Duhshanta.77 The victorious one protected the entire earth up to its four limits and was the lord of the four quarters of the earth and also regions that are in the middle of the ocean. That chastiser of enemies was also lord of the
entire country of the mlecchas,78 which was populated by the four varnas and beyond the ocean full of gems. During this king’s rule, there was no mixture of castes and no performer of evil deeds. No one needed to plough the
land. No one needed to mine the earth. O tiger among men! Everyone was devoted to dharma and everyone acted
in accordance with the norms of righteous conduct. O son! While he was the ruler of the land, there was no fear
from thieves and no fear from famines. While he was the ruler of the land, there was no fear from disease. All the
four varnas took pleasure in undertaking their own duties, without an eye to the fruits of the action. Depending
upon him as a protector of the earth, they confronted no fear from anywhere. Parjanya79 showered down rain at
the appropriate time and the crops were succulent. The earth abounded with great stores of riches then.
‘He was young and his great prowess was extraordinary. His body was capable of withstanding the vajra. He
could have raised up and carried in his arms Mandara,80 with all its woods and forests. He was skilled in ﬁghting
with the bow and arrow, the club and all weapons, on the back of an elephant and on the back of a horse. He was
like Vishnu in his strength and like the sun in his radiance. He was like the ocean in his equanimity and like the
earth in his tolerance. The great king was loved by all his subjects, in cities and in the country. Everyone abided by
dharma.’
63

Vaishampayana said, ‘Once upon a time, the mighty-armed king went to the dense forest, with hundreds of horses
and elephants and accompanied by many men and mounts. As he progressed, he was surrounded by hundreds of
warriors armed with swords, spears, clubs, maces, javelins and lances in their hands. As the king marched on, the
warriors roared like lions. Conches and drums sounded. The wheels of the chariots thundered. The huge elephants
trumpeted. The horses neighed. And there was the sound of arms, all resulting in a deafening roar. Beautiful
women came out on the balconies of terraced palaces to gaze upon the royal and famous warrior. The women
knew their king to be the equal of Shakra81 in destroying his enemies. In fending off enemy elephants, it was as if
the women gazed upon the wielder of the vajra himself. They saw a tiger among men, extremely powerful in battle. The strength of his arms allowed no enemy to be alive. Having uttered these words of praise, the women, out
of love for the king, showered down ﬂowers on his head. Wherever he went, the best of Brahmanas paid homage
to him along the way.
‘Extremely pleased, he went to the forest for a hunt. For a long distance, the citizens and residents of the country
followed the king. They were restrained from going further only on the king’s instructions. The lord of the earth’s
chariot ﬁlled the earth, even heaven, with its roar. It was like Suparna.82 After progressing, the wise one saw a
beautiful forest like Nandana.83 It was full of bilva, arka, khadira, kapittha and dhava trees. It was uneven and
full of mountains and valleys and was strewn with boulders. There was no water and no human habitations. It
stretched on for many yojanas. This terrible forest abounded with herds of deer and other forest animals. With the
help of his servants, force and mounts, Duhshanta, tiger among men, killed deer of many kinds. Many families of

tigers were killed as they came within the reach of his arrows. Many were pierced with Duhshanta’s arrows. That
bull among men killed those that were near with his sword. Supreme among those who wield spears, he killed
many in that way. His valour was boundless and he was skilled in the circular motions of the club. He roamed
around the forest, killing wild animals with his spear, sword, mace, club and javelin. The great forest was perturbed by the extraordinarily powerful king and his soldiers, who loved the ﬁght, and the larger animals ﬂed. Having lost their leaders, their herds dispersed, the deer screamed out in fright and ﬂed in all directions. The river beds
were dry. Emaciated in their thirst for water and their hearts tired with exhaustion, they dropped down unconscious, hungry, thirsty and tired.
‘Some of them were eaten raw by those hungry tigers among men. Others built a ﬁre and, having ignited it, cut
up the pieces of meat and ate them in the proper way. Many mighty elephants were wounded by weapons and went
mad. Raising their trunks, they stamped violently, ﬂowing blood and emitting urine and dung in fear. These wild
elephants trampled to death many men. With the cloud of strength and the rain of arrows, the king eliminated the
once teeming forest of its large animals, as if a buffalo had run amuck.’
64

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having killed thousands of animals, the king and his many mounts entered another forest to
hunt deer. Though supremely strong, he was hungry and thirsty. Travelling alone, he penetrated the deep forest until he came to a vast wilderness. Passing beyond this, he came to a wood that was full of holy pilgrimages, beautiful to the eyes and a joy to the heart. Beyond this, he came to another great wood where a cool breeze blew. The
trees were full of ﬂowers and soft grass extended on all sides. The great wood echoed with the sweet songs of
birds. There were trees all around, with branches that offered pleasant shade. Bees84 swarmed over the creepers
and there was a supreme beauty there. There was no tree without ﬂowers and fruit and none with thorns. Nor did
that wood have one85 not made dark with swarming bees. Resounding with the sweet songs of birds, adorned with
beautiful ﬂowers that blossomed in all seasons, with the pleasant shade of blossoming trees everywhere, and with
pleasant expanses of grass, that supreme wood was beautiful. And the great archer86 entered it. Bedecked with
ﬂowers, the trees were shaken by the breeze and repeatedly showered wonderful ﬂowers. They rose up into the
sky, full of the sweet songs of birds. The trees there were attired in many-coloured garments of wonderful ﬂowers.
They were heavy with the weight of new shoots and ﬂowers and full of the sweet songs of birds and bees.
‘On seeing that expanse, adorned with many ﬂowers and surrounded by pleasant creepers that seemed to form
canopies, the greatly energetic one was delighted. With branches laden with ﬂowers intertwined with one another,
the wood then seemed to shine like Indra’s pennant. A pleasant, cool and fragrant breeze, carrying the pollen of
ﬂowers, wafted around the wood and sported with the trees. Such were the qualities of the wood the king gazed
upon. It was located in the delta of a river and had the beauty of ﬂagpoles. In that forest, the abode of extremely
happy birds, the king saw a charming hermitage. It was full of many trees and blazing ﬁres.87 Many yatis,88
valakhilyas and other groups of sages were there. Many places for sacriﬁcial ﬁres were around and the ﬂowers
formed carpets on the ground. O king! The sacred river Malini, which gladdens the heart, ﬂowed by and created
beautiful and large pools89 of water. It was full of many waterfowl and made the hermitage even more beautiful.
The king was delighted to see predatory beasts and deer peacefully together.
‘The king, whose chariot no one could obstruct, entered that enchanting hermitage, which was like the world of
the gods and beautiful everywhere. He saw the river with sacred waters embracing the hermitage, as if the mother
of all beings was established there. Chakravaka90 birds swarmed along its banks. The water carried ﬂowers and
foam. Groups of kinnaras and monkeys and bears lived there. The sound of holy chants and studying resounded
along the sand banks. Rutting elephants, tigers and gigantic snakes frequented the place. Having seen the sacred
hermitage ornamented by the river Malini with beautiful banks and islands, the king then desired to enter it. It was
like the abode of Nara and Narayana, beloved by the waters of the Ganga and echoing with the sound of madly
dancing peacocks.
‘The bull among men entered the great wood, which resembled Chitraratha’s91 garden. He wished to see the radiant maharshi Kanva, descendant of Kashyapa, blessed with all the qualities and the power of austerities. He

stopped his retinue of chariots, cavalry and infantry at the entry to the wood and told his soldiers, “I will go to see
the descendant of Kashyapa, blessed with the power of austerities and free of passion. Remain here until I return.”
As soon as he entered the wood, which was like Nandana, the lord of men derived great pleasure and forgot his
hunger and thirst. The ruler of men put aside his signs of kingship. He entered the supreme hermitage with only his
priest and his adviser. He wished to see the sage whose store of ascetic powers was everlasting. He saw that the
hermitage was like Brahma’s world, with buzzing bees and singing birds.
‘In one place, that tiger among men heard chanting of the Rig Veda, recited in proper word and metre by the best
of Brahmanas, as they went about their work. Another place was adorned by those who were learned in various
branches of sacriﬁcial rituals.92 That hermitage was adorned by ascetics who were controlled and rigid in their
vows. In another place, those who were learned in the Atharva Veda, respected by the assembled, recited the
samhitas in the proper tone and metre. In other places, Brahmanas learned in the science of tones recited other
mantras, so that all these holy sounds made the hermitage seem like the illustrious world of Brahma. There were
those who were skilled in the art of sacriﬁces and rules of recital. Others were learned in the Vedas and knew the
principles of logic, self-realization and salvation. There were those who knew the meaning of words and were accomplished in combining them. Others were skilled in special rituals and the rites for salvation. Some were skilled
in arguments, refuting redundant arguments and knew the secrets of words, philosophy and time. The sound of
chanting and hymns was everywhere. The destroyer of enemy armies saw around him many learned Brahmanas of
rigid vows, all engaged in meditation and offerings.
‘The lord of the earth was astonished to see the beautiful and coloured seats that had been carefully laid out. On
observing the rituals with which the Brahmanas worshipped the gods, that supreme among kings thought that he
was in the world of Brahma. The more the king saw of the beautiful, holy and solitary hermitage of Kashyapa’s
descendant,93 protected by his austerities and qualities, the more he wished to see. Kashyapa’s descendant’s hermitage was full of great rishis, powerful in their austerities and rigid in their vows. Thus, the slayer of enemies entered there, with his adviser and his priest.’
65

Vaishampayana said, ‘Thereupon, the mighty-armed one left his advisers behind and went on inside the hermitage
alone. But he did not ﬁnd the rishi of rigid vows.94 On seeing that the rishi was not there and the hermitage was
deserted, he called out in a loud voice that echoed in the wood, “Who is here?” On hearing his words, a maiden
emerged from the hermitage. She was dressed in the attire of an ascetic and was as beautiful as Shri.95 As soon as
the black-eyed maiden saw King Duhshanta, she welcomed him and paid him homage. She offered him a seat,
gave him water to wash his feet and the gift due to a guest. O king! She then asked that lord of men about his welfare. Having honoured him in the appropriate way and asked about his welfare, the maiden then smilingly asked
the king what she could do. Having been thus honoured in the appropriate way, the king spoke to the maiden who
was unblemished in form and sweet in speech. “I have come to pay my respects to the illustrious rishi Kanva. O
beautiful and fortunate one! Where has the revered one gone?” Shakuntala replied, “My revered father has gone
out of the hermitage to collect fruit. Please wait for a while. You will see him when he returns.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘The king did not see the rishi there. But having been thus addressed by the maiden, he
saw that she was dazzling, with a charming smile and beautiful hips. She was dazzling in her beauty, austerities
and humility and endowed with beauty and youth. The ruler of the earth told her, “O one with the beautiful hips!
Who are you? Who do you belong to? Why have you come to this forest? O beautiful one! You are blessed with
beauty and qualities. From where have you come? O beautiful one! You have robbed me of my heart from the ﬁrst
glance. O beautiful one! I wish to learn all about you. Please tell me.” Having been thus addressed by the king in
the hermitage, the maiden smiled and told him in sweet words, “O Duhshanta! I am regarded as the daughter of the
illustrious, righteous, great-souled ascetic Kanva, wise in the path of dharma.” Duhshanta said, “That illustrious
and extremely fortunate one is worshipped by all the worlds and is known to have never spilled his seed. The god
of dharma may stray from the right path, but not this ascetic of rigid vows. O beautiful and charming one! How
can you be his daughter? Dispel this great doubt from my mind.”

‘Shakuntala said, “O king! Then listen to how I have learnt what occurred in earlier times and how I came to be
the sage’s daughter. Once upon a time, a rishi came here and asked questions about my birth. O king! Hear what
the illustrious one96 told him about me. Kanva said, ‘In ancient times, Vishvamitra alarmed and oppressed
Shakra,97 the king of the gods, with his great austerities. He feared that with the blazing energy of his austerities,
he would dislodge him from his seat. Purandara98 therefore told Menaka, “O, Menaka!
You are the best of the celestial apsaras in your qualities. O amiable one! Please listen to what I have to say and
do that which will bring about my welfare. The great ascetic Vishvamitra possesses the sun’s radiance. He has
been engaged in such austerities that my mind is trembling. O Menaka! O you with the slender waist! Vishamitra
is your burden now. His soul is ﬁxed on meditation and he is engaged in the performance of awesome austerities.
He is unassailable and may dislodge me from my seat. Go to him and seduce him. Bring obstructions to his austerities. Do that which is good for me. O one with the beautiful hips! Turn him away from his austerities with your
beauty, youth, sweetness, efforts, smiles and words.”
‘“Menaka said, “O, illustrious one! That illustrious one has great energy and the power of great austerities. You
yourself know that he is prone to anger. The energy, asceticism and wrath of that great-souled one have made even
you afraid of him. Why should I not be scared? He made even the illustrious Vashishtha suffer grief through the
premature death of his sons. He was born a Kshatriya, but became a Brahmana through his powers. For the sake of
performing ablutions, he created a river with such a lot of water that it is difﬁcult to cross. That sacred river is still
known in the worlds by the name of Koushiki.99 In ancient times, the great-souled one’s wife was maintained
there by the righteous rajarshi Matanga, who had become a hunter. O lord! After the famine was over, the powerful
sage returned to his hermitage and gave the river the name of Para. O king of the gods! Extremely pleased with
Matanga, he himself was the ofﬁciating priest at his sacriﬁce and out of fear, you yourself went there to drink the
soma. In his anger, he who was descended from the stars100 created a wealth of other stars, beginning with Shravana101 and beyond the existing stars. I am afraid to go to a person whose deeds are like this. O lord! Tell me how
I can escape being burnt from his anger. He can burn down the worlds with his energy. He can make the earth
quake with a kick. He can uproot the great Meru and whirl it around. How can a woman like me touch someone
with such austerities, such energy that is like a blazing ﬁre and who is in complete control of his senses? His
mouth is radiant as the blazing ﬁre. The pupils of his eyes are like the sun and the moon. His tongue is like Yama.
O best of the gods! How can someone like me touch him? Yama, Soma, the maharshis, the saddhyas, the vishvadevas and the valakhilyas are all alarmed of him. Why should someone like me not be afraid? O lord of the
gods! Nevertheless, commanded by you, I must go to that sage. O king of the gods! Find a means so that I can accomplish your wishes under your protection. O god! When I sport before him, let Marut102 strip me of my garments. On your instructions, let Manmatha103 be there to help me in my work. Let the breeze carry soft fragrances
from the wood when I tempt the rishi.”’ Having said this and once her wishes had been catered to, she went to
Koushika’s hermitage.”’
66

‘Shakuntala said,104 “Having been thus addressed, Shakra105 commanded the wind, who was always mobile, to
be present with Menaka. The beautiful-hipped Menaka then timidly entered the hermitage and saw Vishvamitra,
who had burnt all his sins through austerities, but was still engaged in austerities. Having paid her homage to the
rishi, she began to play around before him. At that instant, the wind robbed her of her garments, which were as
white as the moon. Bashful at Marut’s conduct, the beautiful one dropped to the ground, in an attempt to catch the
garment. The supreme among sages saw Menaka grasp at her garment. He saw her nude and that she was beautiful, with no marks of age on her body. On seeing her beauty and qualities, the bull among Brahmanas was struck
with desire and wished to unite with her. He invited her and the unblemished one accepted his invitation.
‘“The two of them then passed a long time in the wood, making love as they wished. It seemed to be but a single
day. Through the sage, Shakuntala was born to Menaka. Menaka went to the banks of the Malini, which passed

through a lovely plain in the Himalayas. Having given birth, Menaka left the child on the banks of the Malini and
left. Her objective accomplished, she quickly returned to Shakra’s assembly.
‘“The daughter lay in a deserted forest frequented by carnivorous lions and tigers. On seeing this, vultures106
surrounded her from all sides, so as to protect her. The birds protected Menaka’s child. Having gone there to perform ablutions, I107 saw her in the deep and lonely wood, surrounded by birds. I took her home and brought her
up as my own daughter. According to the sacred texts, there are three kinds of fathers. In proper order, they are the
one who gives a body, the one who protects and the one who provides food. Because she was found in the solitude
of the forest, surrounded by birds, I have given her the name of Shakuntala. O amiable one! Know that it is thus
that Shakuntala became my daughter. The unblemished Shakuntala also thinks of me as her father.”’
‘“When asked, this is how the maharshi described the account of my birth. O ruler of men! I do not know my
own. But this is how I think of Kanva as my father. O king! I have told you exactly as I heard it.”’
67

‘Duhshanta said, “O princess! O fortunate one! You have spoken well. O one with the beautiful hips! Be my wife.
Tell me what I can do for you. O beautiful one! Today, I will present you with golden necklaces, garments, golden
earrings, sparkling gems and jewels from many countries, golden coins and skins. Let my entire kingdom be yours
today. O beautiful one! Be my wife. O lovely one! O timid one! O one with the beautiful thighs! Marry me according to gandharva108 rites, because it is said that a gandharva marriage is the best.”
‘Shakuntala replied, “O king! My father has left the hermitage to collect fruits for food. Please wait for a while.
He will return and give me to you.”
‘Duhshanta said, “O unblemished one! O one with the beautiful hips! I wish that you accept me yourself. Know
that I am standing here because of you. Know that my heart is completely in you. One is one’s own best friend.
One can certainly resort to one’s own self. Therefore, in accordance with what is dharma, you can give your own
self to others. Eight kinds of marriage are known to have the sanction of dharma—brahma, daiva, arsha, prajapatya, asura, gandharva, rakshasa and paishacha. Manu, descended from the one who is self-created,109 has respectively described which of these is in accordance with dharma. O unblemished one! Know that according to
dharma, the ﬁrst four are sanctioned for Brahmanas and the ﬁrst six for Kshatriyas. For kings, even the rakshasa
form is permissible. The asura form is sanctioned for Vaishyas and Shudras. Of the ﬁve,110 three are in accordance with dharma and two are not sanctioned. The paishacha and asura forms should never be used. These are the
principles laid down by dharma and one should follow them. The gandharva and rakshasa forms are sanctioned for
Kshatriyas. Therefore, you need not be scared. There is no doubt that either one, or a mix of the two, is appropriate
for us. O beautiful one! I am full of desire for you and so are you. You should become my wife according to the
gandharva form of marriage.”
‘Shakuntala said, “O best of the Puru race! O lord! If this is the path indicated by dharma and I am really my
own mistress, know my terms before I give myself. Give me your word to this secret agreement between us. O
king! O Duhshanta! Give me your truthful promise that the son who is born to me will succeed you. If that is accepted, you may unite with me.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Without any hesitation, the king said, “O one with a sweet smile! It shall be that way. I
will even take you to my capital. O one with the beautiful hips! It is what you deserve and I promise you truthfully.” Saying this, the rajarshi accepted the hand of she whose gait was without blemish according to the proper rites
and she accepted him. He returned to his capital after reiterating his promise and repeatedly assuring her, “I will
send a fourfold army111 to escort you. O one with a sweet smile! I will take you to my palace with that.” O
Janamejaya! Having thus promised her, the king went away. As he went away, the king began to worry about
Kashyapa’s son.112 “What will the illustrious one, with all his ascetic powers, do when he hears?” Thinking in this
way, he entered his capital.
‘A little after the king had left, Kanva returned to his hermitage. But Shakuntala was too ashamed to go and
meet her father. However, the great ascetic Kanva had divine sight and knew everything. Having seen everything
with his divine sight, the illustrious one was pleased and said, “O fortunate one! What you have done secretly to-

day, this act of union with a man without my sanction, is not against dharma. A secret gandharva marriage between
a desiring man and a desiring woman, without mantras, is said to be the best for Kshatriyas. O Shakuntala!
Duhshanta, the one you have accepted as a husband, is the best among men, great-souled and devoted to dharma.
You will give birth to a son who will be known in this world as great-souled and immensely mighty. He will extend his sway over this entire earth that is bounded by the oceans. When that great-souled king of kings marches
out against his enemies, he will always be irresistible.”
‘Shakuntala then came to the tired sage and washed his feet. She took down his heavy load and properly laid out
the fruits. She said, “I have chosen King Duhshanta, best among men, as my husband. Please give me and his advisers your blessings.” Kanva replied, “O beautiful one! I am prepared to bless him for your sake. O fortunate one!
Ask for a boon that you wish.” Wishing to bring welfare to Duhshanta, Shakuntala then asked for the boon that
kings of the Puru lineage should always be virtuous and would never be dislodged from their kingdoms.’
68

Vaishampayana said, ‘When Duhshanta left, after making his promise to Shakuntala, the one with the beautiful
thighs gave birth to a son who had immense energy. She bore him for three years. He had the splendour of a blazing ﬁre. O Janamejaya! Duhshanta’s son had great beauty, generosity and all the qualities. Kanva, supreme among
holy ones, performed all the stipulated rites, including those of birth, and the wise one began to grow. The boy had
sharp and white teeth and the young one was strong enough to kill lions. He was handsome and immensely strong,
with a broad head. On his palm, he had the sign of a chakra.113 He quickly grew up, like a son of the gods. When
he was only six years old, he was so strong that he tied up lions, tigers, boars, buffaloes and elephants to trees near
Kanva’s hermitage. He rode them, tamed them, played with them and chased them. The inhabitants of Kanva’s
hermitage gave him a name. “Since he has subjugated everything, let him be called Sarvadamana”.114 Thus the
boy came to be known as Sarvadamana. He had great strength, valour and energy.
‘On seeing the boy’s superhuman exploits, the sage told Shakuntala that the time had come for him to be instated as the heir apparent.115 On seeing his great strength, Kanva told his disciples, “Quickly take Shakuntala and
her son away from this hermitage and to her husband. She is blessed with all the auspicious marks. It is not ﬁt that
women should live forever with their relatives.116 Such acts destroy fame, character and virtue. Take her away
without delay.” The greatly energetic disciples all agreed and left for Gajasahrya117 with Shakuntala and her son.
Taking her lotus-eyed son, who was like a divine child, the one with the beautiful brows left the forest where she
had ﬁrst got to know Duhshanta.
‘She went to the king, with her son with the brilliance of the morning sun, and entered. Having paid homage,
Shakuntala said, “O king! This is your son. Let him be instated as the heir apparent. O king! This god-like son was
begotten by you on me. O best of men! Now fulﬁl the promise you made to me. O immensely fortunate one! Remember the promise you made to me in Kanva’s hermitage, when we united long ago.” Having heard her words,
the king remembered everything. But he said, “O evil ascetic! I remember nothing. Who do you belong to? I do
not remember having had any relation with you for dharma, artha or kama. Go or stay, as you wish. Do what you
want.” Being thus addressed, the ascetic with the beautiful hips was ashamed. In her grief, she lost her senses and
stood immobile like a pillar.
‘Soon, her eyes turned as red as copper in anger. Her lips began to quiver. Through the sides of her eyes, she
cast glances at the king that seemed to burn him. Though driven by wrath, she calmed her demeanour and the energy accumulated through her austerities. In grief and anger, she stood for a moment, collecting her thoughts. Then
she looked straight at her husband and said, “O great king! Knowing everything very well, how can you unconcernedly say that you know nothing, lying like a common person? Your heart knows the truth or falsity of my
words. You yourself are the witness. Do what is good and do not degrade yourself. He who knows one thing in his
mind, but represents it in another way, is a thief and robs his own self. What sin is he not capable of committing?
You think that you are alone with your own self. But don’t you know the ancient and omniscient one who dwells in
your heart? He knows all your acts and all your evil deeds. It is in his presence that you lie. When sinning, a man
thinks that no one sees him. But he is seen by the gods and by the being who dwells in every heart. The sun, moon,

wind, ﬁre, sky, earth, water, his heart, Yama, day, night, the two twilights and Dharma know man’s every act. If the
god in the heart, who is a witness to all acts, is pleased, Vaivasvata Yama ignores the evil a man has done. But
when the great being is not pleased, Yama punishes the sinner for his evil deeds. He who degrades his own self and
represents falsely cannot ﬁnd refuge with the gods. He is not blessed by his own soul. I am a faithful wife to my
husband. Do not disrespect me because I have come on my own. I am your wife and deserve to be treated with honour. In this assembly, why do you treat me as if I am a commoner? I am certainly not crying in the wilderness.
Why do you not hear me? O Duhshanta! If you do not do what I am asking you to do, your head will today be
splintered into a hundred pieces. The wise ones of ancient times knew that the husband himself entered the womb
of his wife and emerged as a son. That is the reason a wife is known as jaya.118 A son born to a learned man saves
with his lineage the deceased ancestors. Since the son saves his ancestors from the hell known as put, the self-created one119 has said that a son is known as putra. She is a true wife who looks after the house. She is a true wife
who bears children. She is a true wife whose life is devoted to her husband. She is a true wife who is faithful to her
husband. A wife is half the man. A wife is the best of friends. A wife is the source of the three objectives.120 A
wife is a friend at the very end. Those who have wives can perform rites. Those who have wives can be householders. Those who have wives are happy. Those who have wives have good fortune. Sweet-spoken wives are friends
in solitude, fathers in religious acts and mothers in suffering. Even in the wilderness, a wife refreshes the wandering husband. A man who has a wife is trusted. Therefore, a wife is the best means of salvation. When a husband
goes to the land of the dead and is transiting, it is the faithful wife alone who accompanies him there, for he is always her husband, in all adversities. If the wife goes before, she stays and waits for the spirit of her husband. If the
husband dies before, the devoted wife soon follows. O king! It is for these reasons that man seeks marriage. The
husband obtains a wife, in this life and the next. The wise have said that a man is himself born as his son. Therefore, a man should regard the mother of his son as his own mother. Looking at the face of a son born from a wife, a
man sees his own face, as in a mirror, and is as delighted as a virtuous man on attaining heaven. Burnt through
mental grief or afﬂicted with disease, men rejoice in their wives, like perspiring ones do in water. Even in anger, a
man should not utter unpleasant words to his beloved wife, because love, joy, virtue and everything are in her. The
wife is the sacred ground in which the husband is born again. Even sages are unable to have offspring without
wives. A son embraces his father, his limbs covered with dirt. Is there greater happiness to a father than that? Why
do you frown and reject your son, who has come to you on his own and is glancing fondly at you? Even ants carry
their eggs and do not break them. You are learned in the ways of dharma. Will you not support your own son? The
touch of fragrances, women and water is not as pleasing as the embrace of one’s own infant son. The Brahmana is
the best among bipeds. The cow is the best among quadrupeds. The preceptor is the best among all superiors. The
son is the best among all objects one touches. Let this handsome son touch you in embrace. There is no feeling
more pleasant in the worlds than the touch of a son. O chastiser of enemies! O lord of kings! I bore this son, the
dispeller of your grief, for three years. O descendant of the Puru lineage! When I was giving birth, a voice was
heard from the sky, ‘He will perform one hundred horse sacriﬁces.’ Men who have gone to another village lovingly take up the sons of other men on their laps and feel great happiness on smelling their heads. At the time of the
birth ceremony of a son, you know that Brahmanas utter the following mantra from the Vedas: ‘You are born from
my limbs. You are born from my heart. You are me in the form of a son. May you live for a hundred autumns. My
life depends on you and my eternal lineage. Therefore, my son, live in happiness for a hundred autumns.’ He has
been born from your limbs, one man from another. Look on your son as your second self, like a reﬂection in a clear
pond. Like the ahavaniya ﬁre is kindled from the garhapatya ﬁre,121 this one has been born from you. Though
you are one, you have been divided into two. O king! In earlier times, you were on a hunting expedition and had
been led away by a deer. I was a virgin in my father’s hermitage and was approached by you. The six supreme apsaras are Urvashi, Purvachitti, Sahajanya, Menaka, Vishvachi and Ghritachi. Among them again, Menaka, the apsara born from Brahma, is the foremost. Descending from heaven to earth, she gave birth to me through her union
with Vishvamitra. The apsara Menaka gave birth to me in a plain in the Himalayas. Without any feelings, she
abandoned me there, as if I was someone else’s child. Earlier, what sins did I commit in another life that I was

abandoned by my relatives in my childhood and by you now? Forsaken by you, I am ready to go back to my hermitage. But do not forsake this child who is your own son.”
‘Duhshanta said, “O Shakuntala! I do not know that this son born from you is mine. Women are liars. Who will
believe your words? Your mother Menaka was a courtesan. She was merciless and abandoned you on the plains of
the Himalayas, like a faded garland. Your father Vishvamitra was also merciless and was born in the Kshatriya lineage. But driven by desire, and lustful, he became a Brahmana. If Menaka is the best of the apsaras and your father
is the best of the maharshis, how can you speak like a harlot and be their daughter? Are you not ashamed to utter
these disrespectful words, especially in my presence? O wicked ascetic! Go away. Where is that best of maharshis?
Where is Menaka, the best of apsaras? And where are you, who are wretched, clad in an ascetic’s garb? Your son is
gigantic. And he is strong, even though a child. How has he, in such a short span, grown up like the trunk of a shala tree? You were born in a lowly lineage and you speak like a harlot. It seems that Menaka gave birth to you from
lust alone. O ascetic! Everything that you say is unknown to me. I do not know you. Go away, as you please.”’
69

‘Shakuntala said, “O king! You see the faults of others, even though they are as small as a mustard seed. But you
do not see your own, even though they can be seen as large as a bilva fruit. Menaka is one of the thirty gods.122
She is foremost among the thirty. O Duhshanta! My birth is nobler than your own. O lord of kings! You are established on earth. But I roam the sky. Know that the difference between you and me is that between a mustard seed
and Mount Meru. O king! Behold and understand my powers. I can go to the abodes of the great Indra, Kubera,
Yama and Varuna. O unblemished one! Not out of hatred towards you, but as an illustration, I am going to tell you
a popular saying. Therefore, pardon me and listen. Until he sees his face in a mirror, the ugly man thinks himself to
be more handsome than others. But when he sees his malformed face in a mirror, it is then that he realizes the difference between him and others. He who is extremely handsome never demeans others. He who slanders others a
lot is only considered to be evil-mouthed. Like a pig searches out ﬁlth, the fool seeks out evil words when he hears
good and evil in men’s speech. But the swan always searches out milk from the water. Like that, the wise one
seeks out words of quality when he hears good and evil in men’s speech. Honest ones are always pained to speak
ill of others. But wicked ones are satisﬁed at this. Good ones always ﬁnd pleasure in paying respect to the aged.123
However, fools always derive pleasure from berating good men. Those who seek no evil live happily. But fools are
happy when they ﬁnd evil. Even when they are injured by the words of evil ones, the good never do them injury. In
this world, there is nothing more ridiculous than the evil representing the good as evil. Even those who do not believe in god fear those who have been dislodged from truth, like snakes with virulent poison, not to speak of those
who believe in god. A man who has begotten a son like himself, but does not accept him, doesn’t attain the superior worlds. The gods destroy his prosperity. The ancestors have said that the son establishes the family and the lineage and, thus, giving birth to a son is the best of all dharmas. Therefore, a son should never be abandoned. Manu
has said there are sons begotten on one’s wife and ﬁve others—obtained, bought, reared, adopted and those begotten on other women. Sons support the dharma and fame of men and bring happiness to their hearts. Sons are like
the boats of dharma in transporting the ancestors from hell. O tiger among kings! Therefore, it is not proper for
you to forsake your son. O lord of the earth! Protect him like you protect yourself, truth and dharma. O lion among
kings! It is not proper for you to be deceitful on this. A pond124 is better than that of a hundred wells. A sacriﬁce
is better than a hundred ponds. But a son is better than a hundred sacriﬁces. Truth is better than a hundred sons. If
1000 horse sacriﬁces and truth are weighed on a pair of scales, truth will weigh more than 1000 horse sacriﬁces. O
king! I tell you that truth is equal to studying all the Vedas and bathing in all the tirthas. There is no dharma higher
than the truth and nothing is superior to truth. And no evil is known to be ﬁercer than a lie. O king! Truth is the
supreme brahman. Truth is the great vow. O king! Therefore, do not violate your oath. Let truth and yourself be
united. However, if you are united with falsehood and if you yourself have no belief in my words, I shall go away
from here on my own. A relationship with one like you should not be sought after. O Duhshanta! But when you are
dead, my son will rule over the entire earth, crowned by the king of the mountains and surrounded by oceans in
four directions.”’

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having uttered these words to the king, Shakuntala prepared to leave. Thereupon, a disembodied voice spoke to Duhshanta from the sky, as he sat surrounded by his ofﬁciating priests, his priest, his preceptors and his ministers. “O Duhshanta! The mother is only a vessel for holding water. Born from the father, the
son is the father himself. O Duhshanta! Support your son and do not reject Shakuntala. O god among men! A son
who has semen is the saver from Yama’s abode. You are the creator of this embryo. Shakuntala has spoken the
truth. The wife gives birth to a son by dividing her body into two. O king! O Duhshanta! Therefore, protect this
son of yours, born from Shakuntala. To abandon one’s own son and continue to live is a great misfortune. O descendant of the Puru lineage! Therefore, cherish this great-souled son of Shakuntala and Duhshanta. Since you will
maintain this son because of these words, this son will be known as Bharata.”125 Having heard these words of
those who dwell in the sky, the king of the Puru lineage was delighted. He addressed his priests and advisers, “All
of you have heard what the messenger of the gods has to say. I myself know very well that this is my son. But if I
had accepted him today as my son on her words alone, there would have been suspicion among all the people and
he would never have been considered to be pure.” O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The king was then cleared
of all suspicion because of the words of the messenger of the gods. He was extremely pleased and accepted his
son.
‘He smelt his son’s head and embraced him with affection. The Brahmanas pronounced their blessings on him
and he was praised by the bards. The king then enjoyed the great happiness one feels at the touch of one’s own
son. Duhshanta also paid homage and accepted his wife according to the rites of dharma. The king paciﬁed her and
told her, “O lady! My union with you was not known to the people. That is the reason I argued with you. It was
natural for people to think that the union I had with you was because you were a woman and had my son been instated by me in the kingdom, he would have been considered to be impure. Therefore, I thought about how best to
clear you. O beloved one! O large-eyed one! I have forgiven you all the harsh words you spoke in anger. I love
you.” O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having thus spoken to his beloved queen, rajarshi Duhshanta honoured
her with garments, food and drink. Thereupon, King Duhshanta instated Shakuntala’s son as the heir apparent and
the name of Bharata was conferred on him.
‘From that day, the glorious wheel of the great-souled Bharata traversed the worlds with a great thunder, radiant,
divine and invincible. He conquered all the kings of the earth and brought them under his sway. He always trod the
path of dharma and attained supreme fame. That powerful king was known as Chakravarti126 and Sarvabhouma.
Like Indra, lord of the maruts, he performed many sacriﬁces. Like Daksha, he made Kanva the ofﬁciating priest at
a sacriﬁce and offered a lot of alms. The fortunate one performed a horse sacriﬁce that was named after the large
number of cows offered. At this, Bharata gave Kanva one thousand padmas127 as the sacriﬁcial fee. From Bharata
springs the fame of the Bharata lineage and others of the Bharata lineage. All other kings who followed him were
known as those of the Bharata lineage. In this Bharata lineage were born many greatly energetic and divine kings.
They were supreme kings, like Brahma himself, and their many names are beyond recounting. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! I shall only mention the names of the chief ones, those who were immensely fortunate and devoted to truth and honesty. They were like the gods themselves.’
70

Vaishampayana said, ‘O unblemished one! O king! I will now recount to you in entirety the lineages of Prajapati
Daksha, Vaivasvata Manu, Bharata, Kuru, Puru, Ajamidha and Yadava. These are great and holy accounts that lead
to bliss. The histories of these illustrious ones bring wealth, fame and long life.
‘Prachetas128 had ten righteous sons, who were like maharshis in their energy and possessed a radiance that
was ascending. They were known as the ﬁrst ancestors. In earlier times, these greatly energetic ones were burnt
with the lightning from clouds. O tiger among men! Daksha was born from Prachetas and from Daksha were born
all subjects. Hence he is the grandfather of the worlds. He united with Virini and gave birth to 1000 sons, all rigid
in their vows like he himself. In an assembly of these 1000 of Daksha’s sons, Narada taught them the supreme philosophy of sankhya,129 the means to salvation. O Janamejaya! In a desire to create more beings, Prajapati Daksha

created ﬁfty women and accepted them as his daughters. He gave ten to Dharma, thirteen to Kashyapa and twentyseven to Chandra, with the last given the task of reckoning time.
‘Kashyapa was Marichi’s son. Dakshayani was supreme among his thirteen wives. Through her, he gave birth to
the valorous adityas, Indra and the others and also to Vivasvat. From Vivasvat was born a son, the lord Yama. O
king! Martanda was born as Yama’s son and Martanda had the wise lord Manu as his son. Manu’s lineage became
famous as that of men.130 All men, including Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and others, were descended from Manu. O
king! At that time, the Brahmanas were united with the Kshatriyas. The Brahmanas among men were devoted to
the study of the Vedas and their branches. It is said that Manu131 had ten mighty sons who were devoted to the
pursuit of the Kshatriya dharma—Vena, Dhrishnu, Narishyanta, Nabhaga, Ikshvaku, Karusha, Saryati, Ila as the
eighth and Prishadhra as the ninth. Nabhagarishtha was the tenth. In addition, Manu had ﬁfty other sons on earth.
But it is heard that they all quarrelled with each other and perished.
‘The learned Pururava was born from Ila and it is said that she was both his father and mother. Pururava ruled
over thirteen islands in the ocean. He was immensely famous and though human, was always surrounded by superhuman beings. Pururava was intoxicated with his valour and waged war against the Brahmanas. Paying no heed to
their protests, he robbed them of their riches. O king! On seeing this, Sanatkumara came from Brahma’s world and
showed him the right way. But he did not accept this. At this, the maharshis were angry and cursed him. That king
of men perished because of avarice, power and arrogance. He lived in the world of the gandharvas with Urvashi.
He brought to the earth the three types of sacriﬁcial ﬁre. Through Urvashi, six sons were born to this son of Ila’s—
Ayus, Dhiman, Amavasu, Dridhayus, Vanayus and Shatayus. It is said that Ayus had ﬁve sons through Svarbhanu’s
daughter—Nahusha, Vriddhasharma, Raji, Rambha and Anenas. Nahusha was Ayus’s son. He was wise and devoted to the truth. O lord of the earth! Following the dictates of dharma, he ruled over a large kingdom. Nahusha protected the ancestors, gods, rishis, Brahmanas, gandharvas, uragas132 and rakshasas. He treated Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas equally. He killed hordes of dasyus133 and made them pay tribute to the rishis. Like animals,
that valorous one forced them to carry him on their backs. He overwhelmed the gods with his energy, austerities,
valour and power and became like Indra himself. Through Priyavasa, Nahusha had six sons—Yati, Yayati, Samyati, Ayati, Pancha and Uddhava.
‘Nahusha’s son Yayati was devoted to the truth and became an emperor. He ruled over the entire earth and performed many sacriﬁces. With great power, he worshipped the ancestors and the gods, who were always present.
Yayati was always invincible and showed great kindness towards his subjects. His sons were great archers who
possessed all the qualities. O great king! They were born from his wives, Devayani and Sharmishtha. From Devayani were born Yadu and Turvasu. From Sharmishtha were born Druhyu, Anu and Puru. O king! In accordance
with dharma, he ruled over his subjects for a long time. Then he was attacked by the dreadful old age and he lost
his beauty. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having been overcome by old age, the king told his sons Yadu,
Puru, Turvasu, Druhyu and Anu, “O sons! I desire to savour the pleasures of youth. As a young man, I wish to
spend my time with young women. Help me.” Yadu, the eldest son and born from Devayani, replied, “For what
purpose do you want our youth? What act do you wish to perform?” Yayati told him, “Accept my old age from me.
With your youth, I will satisfy my senses. During a long sacriﬁce, I was cursed by the sage Ushanas. Therefore, I
have lost all my powers of enjoying desire. O sons! I am suffering because of this. Any one of you can rule over
the kingdom with my body. And I will satisfy my desire by taking up a new and young body.” Yadu and the other
brothers did not agree to take up his old age.
‘At this, the youngest son, Puru, always devoted to the truth and powerful, said, “O king! Enjoy yourself with a
new and young body. As you command, I will take up your old age and rule over the kingdom.” At these words,
the rajarshi134 used the power of his austerities to transfer his old age to his great-souled son. The king again became a young man with Puru’s age. Puru ruled over the kingdom with Yayati’s age. After a thousand years, the invincible Yayati had still not satisﬁed his desires and told his son Puru, “You are my heir. You are the son through
whom my lineage will continue. From now on, my lineage will be known in this world as Puru’s lineage.” O tiger
among kings! Then he instated Puru as the king. After a long time, he succumbed to the laws of time.’

71

Janamejaya asked, ‘Our ancestor Yayati was tenth in the line from Prajapati. How did he obtain Shukra’s
daughter,135 who was difﬁcult to obtain? O supreme among Brahmanas! I wish to hear this in detail. Also tell me
separately and in detail the accounts of the chiefs of the Puru lineage.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O Janamejaya! Yayati was a rajarshi who was as radiant as the king of the gods himself. I
will answer your question and tell you how, in ancient times, Shukra and Vrishaparva gave him their daughters and
how the union between Devayani and Nahusha’s son Yayati took place. Many years ago, a great ﬁght occurred between the gods and the demons over who would rule over the three worlds, with all their movable and immovable
riches. In a desire to obtain victory, the gods appointed the son of Angirasa,136 who was a sage, as the priest for
their sacriﬁces. The others137 appointed the wise Ushanas.138 These two Brahmanas were bitter rivals. The gods
killed all the demons who had assembled for battle. But they were revived by Kavya with his knowledge. Having
thus been brought to life, they fought with the gods again. In turn, the demons killed many gods in battle. However, though immensely learned, Brihaspati could not revive them. He did not possess the knowledge known as sanjivani139 that the valorous Kavya possessed. Thus, the gods were immersed in supreme misery.
‘In great anxiety and afraid of Kavya Ushanas, the gods went to Brihaspati’s eldest son Kacha and said, “Worship us as we worship you. Please help us in this supreme task. That Brahmana with unlimited energy possesses
knowledge. Quickly bring us that knowledge from Shukra and you will have a share in all sacriﬁcial offerings
made to us. You will ﬁnd the Brahmana with Vrishaparva.140 He always protects the demons, but does not protect
those who are not demons. You are younger than him. Therefore, you can worship that wise one. You can also pay
homage to Devayani, the beloved daughter of that great-souled one. You alone are capable. There is no one else.
You are certain to obtain the knowledge by propitiating Devayani with your conduct, magnanimity, sweetness, action and self-control.” Having been thus honoured and addressed by the gods, Kacha, Brihaspati’s son, agreed. He
then went to Vrishaparva.
‘O king! Having been thus sent by the gods, he soon arrived at the capital of the king of the demons. On seeing
Shukra there, he said, “O illustrious one! Please accept me as your disciple. I am the grandson of Angirasa and the
son of Brihaspati. I am known by the name of Kacha. Accepting you as my supreme preceptor, I will practise brahmacharya for a thousand years. Therefore, allow me.” Shukra replied, “O Kacha! You are extremely welcome and
I will accept your words. You deserve respect and I will treat you with respect. Because, by doing that, Brihaspati
will also be honoured.” Shukra Ushanas, the son of Kavi, commanded Kacha to take the vow and he did so. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Accepting the vow and the duration of the vow, as he had promised, he began to
worship his preceptor and Devayani. The young man was at the peak of his youth and pleased Devayani with his
constant worship, singing, dancing and the playing of musical instruments. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Devayani was a maiden who had just attained the bloom of her youth and he pleased her through his conduct and
offerings of ﬂowers and fruit. The Brahmana rigidly stuck to his vows and when they were alone, Devayani also
sang with him and sported with him. Five hundred years passed in this fashion and Kacha stuck to his vows. Then
the danavas came to know that he was Kacha.
‘One day, they saw him alone in the forest when he was tending to the cattle. Without hesitation, out of hatred
for Brihaspati and in a desire to protect the knowledge, they killed him. After killing him, they chopped him up
into pieces as small as sesamum seeds and fed it to jackals and wolves. The cows returned home without the
cowherd. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Devayani saw that the cows had returned home from the forest without Kacha, she immediately said, “O lord! The sun has set and the agnihotra ﬁre141 has not yet been lit.
The cows have returned without the cowherd and Kacha is not to be seen. O father! It is certain that Kacha must
have died or been killed. I tell you truthfully that I cannot live without him.” Shukra replied, “If he is dead, I will
revive him by uttering the words: ‘Come back to life’.” With the aid of the knowledge of sanjivani, he summoned
Kacha. Having been thus summoned, Kacha joyfully reappeared. When the Brahmana’s daughter asked him, he
said that he had been killed. On another occasion, at Devayani’s request, the Brahmana Kacha again went to the
forest to collect ﬂowers. The danavas saw him and killed him a second time. The asuras burnt him, ground the ashes and mixed them with wine, feeding this to the Brahmana.142Devayani again spoke to her father, “O father!

Kacha was sent to gather ﬂowers. But he cannot be seen.” Shukra replied, “O daughter! Kacha is Brihaspati’s son
and he has gone to the land of the dead. Though revived by my knowledge, he has again been killed. What shall I
do? O Devayani! Do not grieve and do not weep. Someone like you should not grieve over a mortal man. The gods
and the entire world must accept that which comes.” Devayani said, “The oldest Angirasa is his grandfather. Brihaspati, blessed with the power of austerities, is his father. He is the son and the grandson of a rishi. Why should I
not grieve and weep? He himself is a brahmachari blessed with the power of austerities. He is always attentive and
skilled in every work. I will happily follow the path that Kacha has trod on. O father! I love the handsome Kacha.”
Shukra replied, “It is certain that the asuras hate me. They have killed my innocent disciple. These terrible danavas
want to make me a non-Brahmana. The killing of a Brahmana oppresses Indra himself. Let this evil come to an
end now.” Having been spurred by Devayani, maharshi Kavya again summoned Kacha, Brihaspati’s son.
‘Summoned by the knowledge, but scared about his preceptor’s safety, Kacha softly replied from inside the
stomach. Shukra then asked him, “O Brahmana! How did you come to be inside my stomach? Tell me truly.”
Kacha replied, “Through your grace, my memory has remained with me. I remember exactly what happened and
how and can therefore bear this unending misery and insufferable pain. O Kavya! The asuras killed me. They burnt
me and ground and mixed the ashes with wine, which they then gave you. But when you are there, how can the
asuras’ powers of delusion overcome the powers of a Brahmana?” Shukra said, “O daughter! How can I now do
what is dear to you? Kacha can only be brought to life through my death. O Devayani! Kacha is inside me. He can
only reappear by ripping my stomach apart.” Devayani said, “Both the sorrows will burn me like ﬁre—your destruction and Kacha’s. I will have no protection after Kacha’s death. And if you die, I will not be able to bear life.”
Shukra replied, “O Brihaspati’s son! You have attained success, since Devayani worships you so much. Unless you
are Indra in Kacha’s disguise, accept today the knowledge of bringing the dead back to life. No one can emerge
alive from my stomach, but a Brahmana cannot be killed. Therefore, accept the knowledge I give you. Return to
life as my son. O son! Possessed of the knowledge that I give you, bring me back to life after I leave my body.
When you emerge from my stomach with the knowledge your preceptor gives you, act in accordance with
dharma.” Receiving the knowledge from his preceptor, the Brahmana emerged from the stomach. The handsome
Kacha emerged from the Brahmana’s right side, like the full moon in shuklapaksha.143 He saw his preceptor’s remains, lying in a heap of Brahmana powers. Kacha revived him with the secret knowledge he had received.
‘Then Kacha paid homage to his preceptor and said, “The preceptor is an object of worship. The giver of knowledge is supreme. He is the most precious of all precious objects in the four directions. He who doesn’t revere him
is never established and goes to the worlds of the evil.” Having been deceived through drinking wine and remembering the terrible consequences of losing consciousness, and also seeing the reappearance of the handsome Kacha
whom he had drunk when intoxicated with wine, the mighty Kavya arose in anger. He wished to bring about the
welfare of Brahmanas. The illustrious one himself spoke this injunction against the drinking of wine. “From this
day, if a stupid Brahmana commits the crime of drinking wine, he will be considered to have committed the crime
of killing a Brahmana. He will be hated in this world and the next. I am laying down this dharma for Brahmanas in
all the worlds. Let this be heard by good Brahmanas who worship their preceptors, by the gods and by all the
worlds.” Having said this, the illustrious repository of immeasurable ascetic powers summoned the danavas, who
had been deprived of their senses by destiny. Having summoned them, he said, “O danavas! You are strong. But
know that Kacha has obtained his wish and will live with me. Having obtained the great knowledge of sanjivani,
the Brahmana is now as powerful as Brahma himself.” Kacha lived for a thousand years in his preceptor’s house.
With his preceptor’s permission, he then prepared to return to the land of the thirty gods.’
72

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the period of his vow was over and he had obtained his preceptor’s permission, Kacha
prepared to leave for the land of the thirty gods.
‘Devayani told him, “O grandson of rishi Angirasa! You are dazzling in your conduct, birth, learning, austerities
and self-control. Just as the immensely famous rishi Angirasa is honoured by my father, so must I worship and honour Brihaspati. O one blessed with the power of austerities! Know this and hear what I have to say. You are aware
of my behaviour while the rigid observance of your vow was going on. You have now achieved your learning. I

love you and you should love me in return. Accept my hand in accordance with the proper rites and mantras.”
Kacha replied, “O unblemished lady! You are an object of my honour and worship, as your illustrious father is.
You are an object of greater reverence to me. You are dearer to the great-souled Bhargava144 than his own life. O
fortunate one! You are my preceptor’s daughter and, in accordance with dharma, I must always worship you. Just
as your father Shukra, my preceptor, is always honoured by me, so must I always honour you. O Devayani! You
should therefore not speak to me in this way.” Devayani replied, “O supreme among Brahmanas! You are not my
father’s son. You are only the son of his preceptor’s son.145 Therefore, you are an object of my honour and worship. O Kacha! You must remember the love I showed you when the asuras killed you again and again, and even
now. O you who know dharma! Remembering my friendship, love and devotion towards you, you should not forsake me when I love you and have not shown any guilt.” Kacha replied, “You are pure in our vows. But you are
now asking me to be engaged in a task that is not recommended. O lovely one with the beautiful brows! You are
greater to me than my preceptor. Be gracious. O lady with the large eyes! O lady with a face like the moon! O fortunate one! You have dwelt in Kavya’s loins and I have dwelt in the same place. O one with the fair face! According to dharma, you are my sister. O fortunate one! Do not say that. I have lived here happily and I hold no bad feelings. I ask your permission to leave. Bless me on my way. Remember me in your conversations as someone who
has never transgressed dharma. Always serve my preceptor with single-minded alertness.” Devayani said, “O
Kacha! If you spurn me for the sake of dharma, artha or kama, despite my asking, your knowledge will never
achieve success.” Kacha replied, “You are my preceptor’s daughter and there is no sin in refusing you. Nor has my
preceptor given me instructions about this. Curse me if you so wish. O Devayani! I have told you the dharma the
sages have decreed. I deserve no curse. Nevertheless, you have cursed me, not out of dharma, but out of desire.
Therefore, your desire will never be satisﬁed. No rishi’s son will ever accept your hand. You have said that my
knowledge will never bear fruit. So be it. But it will bear fruit for the one I teach it to.”
‘Having said this to Devayani, Kacha, the best among Brahmanas, supreme among Brahmanas, quickly left for
the abode of the thirty gods. On seeing him arrive, the gods, with Indra at their head, were delighted. They paid
homage to Brihaspati and told Kacha, “You have performed a supreme and extraordinary act for our welfare and
your fame will never diminish. You will have a share in our sacriﬁcial offerings.”’
73

Vaishampayana said, ‘O bull of the Bharata lineage! The gods were delighted that Kacha had attained the knowledge. They learnt the knowledge that Kacha had learnt and were content. They assembled together and told
Shatakratu,146 “O Purandara!147 The time has come to display your valour and kill your enemies.” Having been
thus addressed, Maghavan148 agreed and set out with the assemblage of thirty gods. He saw many women in the
forest. The ladies were sporting in a forest that was like Chitraratha’s.149 Changing himself into the wind, he
mixed up all their garments. After emerging from the water, the women then each picked up a garment that was
nearest her. Devayani’s garment was then picked up by Sharmishtha, the daughter of Vrishaparva, who did not
know about the mixing up. O lord of kings! At that, a quarrel arose between Devayani and Sharmishtha. Devayani
said, “O asuri! Despite being inferior to me,150 how did you dare to take up my garment? You are devoid of good
conduct. No good will come to you.” Sharmishtha replied, “Whether my father is seated or lying down, your father
is always humbly below him and always praises him. You are the daughter of a man who begs, praises and holds
up his hand for alms. I am the daughter of a man who is praised and stretches out his hand to give alms, not to receive. You are defenceless and deserted. You are a beggar who trembles before me, who is armed. Find an equal. I
do not regard you as one.” On hearing this, Devayani stood up erect and clung to the garment. But Sharmishtha
threw her into a well and went off to her city. The evil Sharmishtha took her to be dead. In extreme anger, she did
not even bother to look down.
‘Nahusha’s son, Yayati, came to that place, looking for deer to hunt. He was thirsty and his two horses were
tired. Nahusha’s son saw a well in which there was no water. But the king saw a maiden who was as radiant as the
ﬂames of a ﬁre. Seeing her there, he addressed the maiden who was celestial in beauty. The best of kings paciﬁed
her with extremely soft words and asked, “O one with nails the shade of copper! O one with the dusky complex-

ion! O one adorned in beautiful gems and earrings! Who are you? Why are you in such deep grief? Why are you
sighing in distress? How did you come to fall into this well that is full of creepers and grass? O one with the slender waist! Whose daughter are you? Tell me truly.” Devayani replied, “I am Shukra’s daughter, who uses his
knowledge to revive the daityas when they are killed by the gods. He does not know what has become of me. O
king! Here is my right hand, with nails that are the shade of copper. You seem to have been born into a good family. I know you to be gentle, brave and famous. Grasp me by the hand and pull me out of the well into which I have
fallen.” Having learnt that she was the daughter of a Brahmana, the king, who was Nahusha’s son, grasped her by
the right hand and pulled her out of the well. After pulling the one with beautiful hips out of the well, Yayati gently
bid farewell and returned to his capital.
‘Devayani said, “O Ghurnika!151 Quickly go to my father and tell him what has happened. From now on, I
refuse to enter Vrishaparva’s city.” Ghurnika swiftly went to the asura’s palace. On seeing Kavya, she spoke to
him, her senses ﬂustered. “O immensely wise one! O immensely fortunate one! I tell you that Devayani has been
struck in the forest by Sharmishtha, Vrishaparva’s daughter.” Having heard that his daughter had been struck by
Sharmishtha, Kavya quickly set out for the forest with a heavy heart. When he found his daughter Devayani in the
forest, he engulfed her in his arms and sorrowfully said, “It is through their own faults that people reap happiness
and sorrow. I am sure that you must have done something wrong, which has now been purged.” Devayani replied,
“Whether it is the purging of my fault or not, listen attentively to what Sharmishtha, Vrishaparva’s daughter, told
me. I am telling you truthfully. She said that you chanted praises to the daityas. With eyes red in anger and a harsh
and sharp voice, this is what Vrishaparva’s daughter, Sharmishtha, said. She said that I was the daughter of someone who always begged, chanted the praises of others and stretched out his hand for alms. And she was the daughter of one who was always praised, always granted and stretched out his hand to give alms. Eyes red with anger
and full of pride, this is what Sharmishtha, Vrishaparva’s daughter, repeatedly said. O father! If I am really the
daughter of one who chants praises of others and stretches out his hand for alms, I must pay homage to
Sharmishtha to obtain her favour. I have already told my friend152 that.” Shukra replied, “O Devayani! You are
not the daughter of someone who always praises, asks for alms and receives. You are the daughter of someone who
is always praised, but never praises. Vrishaparva knows this and so do Shakra and the king who is Nahusha’s son.
Know my strength to be as inconceivable and incomparable as the supreme brahman.”’
74

‘Shukra said, “O Devayani! Know that a man who pays no heed to the evil words of others conquers everything.
The learned regard as a true charioteer he who reins in his anger like horses, not he who hangs onto the reins tightly. O Devayani! Know that he who restrains his rising anger through feelings of non-anger conquers everything. A
man who restrains his anger through forgiveness is compared to a snake that casts off its old skin. He who is not
hurt through the evil words of others and does not retaliate attains all the objects of life. Between two men, one
who performs sacriﬁces continuously every month for a hundred years and one who does not feel anger, the one
without anger is the superior one. Young boys and girls are not always sensible and quarrel with each other. They
do not know true strength or weakness. The wise never imitate them.”
‘Devayani replied, “O father! Even though I am a girl, I know what is virtue and what is duty. I also know the
difference between anger and forgiveness and the strength and weakness of each. But when a disciple behaves disrespectfully towards a preceptor, it should not be condoned. I do not wish to live among people whose conduct is
unbecoming. A wise man who desires welfare should not live among people with evil intent, who speak ill of high
birth and good conduct. It is said that the best place to live is among honest ones, where high birth and good conduct are known and respected. I can think of nothing more intolerable in the three worlds than the terrible and evil
words of Vrishaparva’s daughter. It is the inferior one who thrives on the success of a rival.”’
75

Vaishampayana said, ‘Kavya, the best of the Bhrigu lineage, was very angry. He went to the place where Vrishaparva was seated and unhesitatingly told him, “O king! Unlike a cow, the fruits of evil actions are not immediate.
Such fruits are certainly manifested, if not in one’s own self, in one’s son or in one’s grandson. They are like a

heavy meal in the stomach. You killed the Brahmana Kacha, descended from Angirasa, when he lived with me,
even though he was devoted to dharma, committed no sin and served me. You killed one who did not deserve to
die. You caused injury to my daughter. O Vrishaparva! For this reason, I have to forsake you and your relatives. O
king! I can no longer live with you in your territory. O daitya! Do not take me to be one who utters a falsehood.
Why do you overlook the faults of your own and do not check them?”
‘Vrishaparva said, “O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! Never have I known falsehood or non-adherence to
dharma in you. Dharma and truth are established in you. O illustrious one! Please show me your grace. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! If you forsake us and depart, we will have no refuge and will drown in the ocean.”
Shukra replied, “O asura! I do not care whether you sink to the bottom of the ocean or disappear in the various directions. I cannot tolerate any unpleasant act directed at my daughter, whom I love. Pacify Devayani, because my
life is based on her. Just as Brihaspati ensures Indra’s welfare, my ascetic powers are for your protection.” Vrishaparva replied, “O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! You are the master of everything that belongs to the lord of the
asuras—riches, elephants, cattle, horses. You are their lord, even of me.” Shukra said, “O great asura! If it is true
that I am the lord of everything that is possessed by the lord of the daityas, go and try to pacify Devayani.” Devayani said, “O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! O father! If you are really the lord of all the wealth of the king
and he himself, ask the king to come to me and state it himself. Otherwise, I won’t accept it.”153 Vrishaparva said,
“O Devayani! O one with the beautiful smile! I will give you whatever you desire to possess, regardless of how
difﬁcult it is to obtain.” Devayani replied, “I desire that Sharmishtha, together with 1000 other ladies, should be
my maid servants. She must also follow me when my father gives my hand in marriage.” Vrishaparva said, “O
nurse! Quickly go and fetch Sharmishtha here. She must do whatever Devayani wishes.” The nurse then went and
told Sharmishtha, “O fortunate one! Arise and do what is good for your relatives. Urged by Devayani, the Brahmana is about to forsake his disciples. O unblemished one! You must now do exactly what Devayani wishes.”
Sharmishtha replied, “I will today do exactly what she desires. Because of me, Shukra and Devayani must not
leave.” Commanded by her father, she then quickly emerged from the supreme palace on a palanquin, accompanied by 1000 maidens.
‘Sharmishtha said, “I am your maid servant and will serve you, with 1000 other slaves. I will follow you wherever your father bestows you.” Devayani retorted, “I am the daughter of one who chants praises, begs and stretches
out his hand for alms. You are the daughter of one who is praised. How can you be my slave?” Sharmishtha
replied, “Whatever be the way, one must be prepared to bring about the welfare of one’s afﬂicted relatives. I will
follow you wherever your father bestows you.” O best of kings! When Vrishaparva’s daughter promised to be her
slave, Devayani told her father, “O supreme among Brahmanas! I will now enter the capital. I know that your
knowledge and the strength of your learning are invincible.” Having been thus addressed by his daughter, the immensely famous one, the best of Brahmanas, was pleased and entered the city. All the danavas paid him homage.’
76

Vaishampayana said, ‘O best of kings! After a long time, the beautiful Devayani went to the same forest to play.
With Sharmishtha and the 1000 maid servants, she reached the same spot and began to roam around as she
pleased. Being attended by all those friends, she felt very happy. All of them sported in abandon, drinking the nectar from madhavi creepers, eating diverse food and biting into fruit. In search of deer to hunt, the king who was
Nahusha’s son again came to the same place, exhausted and thirsty. He saw Devayani and Sharmishtha, with all
those ladies. They were drinking and languid, adorned in celestial ornaments. He saw the sweet-smiling Devayani
seated there. Among all those beautiful women, she was unparalleled in her loveliness. She was waited upon by
Sharmishtha, who was massaging her feet.
‘Yayati said, “It seems that these 1000 women are surrounding the two of you. O beautiful ones! Tell me your
names and your clans.” Devayani replied, “O ruler of men! Hear my words and know that I am the daughter of
Shukra, the preceptor of the asuras. This friend is my slave. She goes wherever I go. She is Sharmishtha, the
daughter of Vrishaparva, the king of the danavas.” Yayati asked, “This maiden is beautiful. She has lovely eyebrows. I am curious to know how this daughter of the asura king, your friend, has come to be your slave.” Devayani replied, “O tiger among men! Everything follows what has been destined. Do not be surprised at what

seems to be out of the ordinary and know that everything is determined by destiny. Your form and attire is like that
of a king. Your speech is like that of one who knows the Vedas. What is your name? Where have you come from?
Whose son are you? Tell me.” Yayati replied, “During my years of brahmacharya, the entire knowledge of the
Vedas penetrated my ears. I am a king and the son of a king. I am known as Yayati.” Devayani asked, “O king!
Why have you come to this region? Is it to gather lotuses or hunt for deer?” Yayati replied, “O fortunate one! I
came to hunt for deer and came here to search for water. You speak a lot. Please allow me to leave now.” Devayani
said, “With the slave Sharmishtha, the two of us and 1000 maid servants are at your command to serve you. O fortunate one! Please be my friend and husband.” Yayati replied, “O beautiful one! I am not worthy of you. You are
the daughter of Ushanas. O Devayani! Your father cannot marry you to a king.” Devayani replied, “Brahmanas
have already been united with Kshatriyas and Kshatriyas have been united with Brahmanas. You are a rishi and the
son of a rishi. O son of Nahusha! Therefore, marry me.” Yayati replied, “O beautiful one! There is no doubt that
the four varnas have sprung from a single body. But their purity varies and so does their dharma. The Brahmana is
superior to the others.” Devayani said, “O son of Nahusha! Earlier, no man except you has ever touched my hand.
Therefore, in accordance with the dharma of accepting the hand, I accept you as my husband. My hand has been
touched by you, who are a rishi and the son of a rishi. How can a proud one like me allow any other man to touch
my hand?” Yayati replied, “The learned men know that a Brahmana is more to be avoided than a virulently poisonous and angry snake or a blazing ﬁre that spreads in all directions.” Devayani asked, “O bull among men! Why
do you say that a Brahmana is more to be avoided than a virulently poisonous and angry snake or a blazing ﬁre
that spreads in all directions?” Yayati replied, “The snake kills only one. The sharpest weapon kills only one. But if
angry, a Brahmana can destroy many cities and kingdoms. O timid one! Therefore, I think that it is harder to fend
off a Brahmana. O fortunate one! I cannot marry you unless your father bestows you on me.”
‘Devayani said, “O king! I have chosen you. It is agreed that my father will bestow me on you and you will marry me. You need have no fear you have not asked for me. You will receive what is given to you.” Devayani quickly
sent a message to her father. On hearing this, Bhrigu’s descendant went to meet the king. On seeing Shukra come,
Yayati, the lord of the earth, paid homage to the Brahmana Kavya with joined palms, worshipped him and waited.
Devayani said, “O father! This is the king who is Nahusha’s son. He grasped my hand when I was in trouble. Bestow me to him. I will accept no one else in the world as my husband.” Shukra said, “O son of Nahusha! You are
brave. You have been chosen by my beloved daughter as her husband. I give her to you. Accept her as your
queen.” Yayati replied, “O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! I seek a boon from you. Let no great sin descend on
me as a consequence of my begetting offspring of mixed caste.” Shukra said, “I free you from this non-adherence
to dharma. You will receive your desired boon. No sin will befall you as a result of this marriage. Maintain the
slender-waisted Devayani as your wife in accordance with dharma. With her, may you ﬁnd incomparable happiness. O king! Always respect this maiden Sharmishtha, Vrishaparva’s daughter, and you must never call her to
your bed.” Having been thus addressed, Yayati circumambulated Shukra. With the great-souled one’s permission,
he returned happily to his own city.’
77

Vaishampayana said, ‘Yayati’s capital resembled Indra’s capital. He entered his capital and instated Devayani in
the women’s quarters. There was a grove of ashoka trees nearby. With Devayani’s permission, he instated Vrishaparva’s daughter in a house that he built there. He honoured asuri Sharmishtha with 1000 maid servants and made
good arrangements for her food and clothing. Like the gods, the king who was Nahusha’s son, passed many happy
years in Devayani’s company. When her season arrived, the beautiful Devayani conceived and gave birth to a boy
as her ﬁrst child.
‘When a thousand years had passed, Vrishaparva’s daughter Sharmishtha saw that having attained youth, her
season had arrived. She began to think, “My season has arrived, but I do not yet have a husband. What will happen? What shall I do? What is proper for me to do? Devayani has given birth, but my youth is in vain. I shall
choose as my husband the same person and in the same way as her. I am certain in my mind that the king will give
me a son. Will the one who is devoted to righteous conduct come and meet me in private?” On one occasion, the
king emerged and came to the ashoka grove. On seeing Sharmishtha there, he came and stood before her. The

sweet-smiling Sharmishtha found the king alone before her. She greeted the king with joined palms and said, “O
son of Nahusha! No one can touch the women who dwell in the inner quarters of Soma, Indra, Vishnu, Yama,
Varuna and you. O king! Know that I am beautiful, have been born in a good lineage and show good conduct. O
ruler of men! I seek your favour for my season.” Yayati replied, “I know about your conduct, since you are an unblemished maiden born among the daityas. I can also see your beauty. I do not even see a blemish that is as small
as the point of a needle. However, when I married Devayani, Kavya Ushanas told me that Vrishaparva’s daughter
should never be in my bed.” Sharmishtha said, “O king! It is no sin to commit a falsehood in ﬁve cases—in jest, to
women, at the time of marriage, when confronting death and when all one’s riches are liable to be lost. O lord of
men! It is true that he who bears false witness is demeaned. When a general purpose is sought to be attained, only
then does a falsehood harm the speaker.” Yayati replied, “A king must be a role model to his subjects and if it is
proven that he lied, destruction follows. I cannot afford to lie, even when I am confronted with the greatest loss.”
Sharmishtha said, “O king! It is held that one’s husband and one’s friend’s husband are closely related. A friend’s
marriage is equal to one’s own. I have chosen my friend’s husband as mine.” Yayati replied, “The vow I have taken is that the gift should match the one who asks. You are asking my favour. Tell me what I should do?”
Sharmishtha said, “O king! Save me from sin and protect my dharma.154 If I conceive a child through you, I will
perform the most righteous act in the world. O king! It is decreed that three people can never own—a wife, a slave
and a son. Whatever they obtain belongs to the one who owns them. O king! I am Devayani’s slave and that descendant of the Bhrigu lineage is yours. She and I are equally yours. Love me as I love you.” Having been thus addressed, the king was persuaded.
‘He paid honour to Sharmishtha and protected her dharma. He united with Sharmishtha and satisﬁed their desires. Then they lovingly bade farewell and returned to where they had come from. As a consequence of the union
with that best of kings, Sharmishtha, with the sweet smile and beautiful eyebrows, conceived her ﬁrst child. O
king! In due time, the one with eyes like blue lotuses gave birth to a son. He was like the son of a god, with eyes
that had the complexion of blue lotuses.’

78

Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the sweet-smiling Devayani heard of this birth
of a son, she unhappily began to think about Sharmishtha. Devayani went to Sharmishtha and said, “O one with
the beautiful eyebrows! What sin have you committed out of desire?” Sharmishtha replied, “A rishi arrived. He
was devoted to dharma and learned in the Vedas. In accordance with dharma, I asked for a boon and he gave it to
me. O one with the sweet smile! I did not fall prey to sin so as to satiate my desire. I tell you truthfully that I obtained this son through the rishi.” Devayani said, “O timid one! If that is the case, it is all right. I wish to know the
name, lineage and birth of that Brahmana.” Sharmishtha replied, “O one with the beautiful smile! He was as radiant in energy as the sun. On seeing him, I was powerless to ask these questions.” Devayani said, “O Sharmishtha!
If all this is true and you have indeed obtained this son from such a superior and great Brahmana, I have no reason
to be angry.” They conversed and laughed happily with each other. Believing literally what she had been told,
Bhrigu’s descendant155 went home.
‘O king! Yayati had two sons through Devayani—Yadu and Turvasu. Those two were like Shakra156 and Vishnu. Through that rajarshi, Vrishaparva’s daughter Sharmishtha gave birth to three sons—Druhyu, Anu and Puru.
‘O king! One day, the sweet-smiling Devayani went with Yayati to a great forest. She saw three divine looking
children playing there, without any care in the world. Devayani was surprised and asked, “O king! Whose children
are these handsome ones? They look like sons of the gods. They look exactly like you in form and radiance.” Having asked the king, she asked the boys, “O sons! What is the name of your lineage? Which Brahmana is your father? Tell me truthfully. I wish to hear it all.” The children pointed at the supreme king with their ﬁngers and said
that Sharmishtha was their mother. Having said this, they came up to the king. But with Devayani there, the king
dared not greet them. The boys then wept in sorrow and went to their mother, Sharmishtha. On witnessing the love
the boys displayed towards the king, the queen understood and asked Sharmishtha, “You are owned by me. How
have you dared to do that which brings displeasure to me? You have reverted to the dharma of the asuras. Do you
have no fear?” Sharmishtha replied, “O one with the beautiful smile! What I told you about the rishi is true. My
acts were in accordance with dharma and propriety. Therefore, why should I be afraid of you? O beautiful one!
You chose the king as your husband. So did I. According to dharma, a friend’s husband is one’s own husband. You
are the daughter of a Brahmana. Therefore, as my superior, you deserve my honour and respect. But don’t you
know that this rajarshi is deserving of greater honour?” On hearing these words, Devayani said, “O king! You have
caused me displeasure. I will not live here any longer.” Having said this, the dusky one quickly arose, with tears in
her eyes. In a miserable state, she went to her father Kavya.
‘Extremely alarmed, the king followed her, trying to pacify her wrath. But she did not return. Her eyes were red
with anger. She did not speak a word to the king. With eyes full of tears, she soon reached Kavya Ushanas. On seeing her father, she paid him homage and stood before him. Yayati followed soon after and also paid homage to
Bhrigu’s descendant. Devayani said, “Evil has won over dharma. The inferior have ascended and the superior
brought down. I have been overtaken by Sharmishtha, Vrishaparva’s daughter. This king, Yayati, has fathered three
sons through that wretched woman. But I have got only two sons. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! This king is
famous for his knowledge of dharma. O Kavya! Nevertheless, I tell you that he has crossed the threshold.” Shukra
said, “O great king! You know dharma well. Yet, you have committed sin for the sake of pleasure. Therefore, invincible old age will soon oppress you.” Yayati replied, “O illustrious one! The daughter of the lord of the danavas
begged me to make her season bear fruit. It was with that thought, and no other, that I did what I thought was right.
Those who know the brahman say that a man who is asked by a woman for the fruition of her season must grant
her wish. Otherwise, he commits the sin of killing an embryo. A man who refuses when a desiring woman privately solicits him, is called a killer of an embryo by the learned. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! It is for these
reasons, concerned about committing a sin, that I went to Sharmishtha.” Shukra said, “O king! You are dependent
on me. You should have awaited my instructions. O son of Nahusha! By committing a falsehood, you have become
a thief in the eyes of dharma.” Being thus cursed by the angry Ushanas, Yayati, son of Nahusha, was instantly deprived of his earlier youth and old age overcame him.

‘Yayati said, “O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! I am not yet satiated with Devayani’s youth. O Brahmana!
Therefore, show me mercy and let old age not overcome me now.” Shukra replied, “I never utter a falsehood. O
ruler of the earth! You have been instantly attacked by old age. But if you wish, you can transfer this old age to another.” Yayati said, “O Brahmana! Then agree to this. A son of mine who will grant me his youth will enjoy my
kingdom, my merit and my fame.” Shukra replied, “O son of Nahusha! If you think of me, you will be able to
transfer your old age to whomsoever you wish. No evil will befall you from that. The son who will give you his
youth will become the king. He will have a long life and numerous offspring and will attain fame.”’
79

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having been attacked by old age, Yayati returned to his capital. He summoned his eldest and
best son Yadu and said, “O son! Old age, wrinkles and grey hair have overcome me, because of a curse imposed by
Kavya Ushanas. But I am not yet satiated with youth. O Yadu! Take upon yourself this guilt and the consequent
old age. I can then enjoy pleasures with your youth. When 1000 years have passed, I shall return your youth to you
and take over the guilt and the consequent old age.” Yadu replied, “O king! White hair and beard, cheerlessness,
ﬂabbiness, wrinkles on the body, ugliness, weakness, thinness, incapacity to work, defeat by the young and forsaking by those who depend on you—I do not wish for this old age.” Yayati said, “O son! You were born from my
heart, but you will not give your youth to me. Therefore, your offspring will have no share in the kingdom. O Turvasu! O son! Take upon yourself this guilt and the consequent old age. I wish to enjoy pleasures with your youth.
When 1000 years have passed, I shall return your youth to you and take over the guilt and the consequent old age.”
Turvasu replied, “O father! I do not desire old age. It destroys all desire, pleasure, strength, beauty, intelligence and
even life.” Yayati said, “You were born from my heart, but will not give your youth to me. O Turvasu! Therefore,
your lineage will become extinct. O foolish one! You will be a king over subjects whose conduct and practices will
be impure. Women of superior birth will marry men of inferior birth. They will live on meat and lust after and cohabit with their preceptors’ wives and animals. The evil ones will follow the conduct of animals and behave like
mlecchas.” Thus did Yayati curse Turvasu, his son.
‘Yayati then spoke to Sharmishtha’s son Druhyu. “O Druhyu! For 1000 years, take over the old age that destroys
beauty and complexion. Give me your youth. When 1000 years have passed, I will return your youth to you and
take back the guilt and the consequent old age.” Druhyu replied, “One who is old cannot enjoy elephants, chariots,
horses or women. Speech fails him. Therefore, I do not desire this old age.” Yayati said, “You were born from my
heart, but will not give your youth to me. O Druhyu! Therefore, the most cherished of your desires will not come
true. You and your lineage will not be kings, but will have the title of ‘Bhoja’157 in a land where the only means
of transportation will be rafts, boats and swimming. O Anu! Accept my guilt and the consequent old age. I will
have your youth for 1000 years.” Anu replied, “Those who are old eat like children, drooling and unclean at all
times of the day. They cannot pour offerings into the sacriﬁcial ﬁre at the right time. I do not wish for such an old
age.” Yayati said, “You were born from my heart, but will not give your youth to me. Since you have described so
many faults associated with old age, old age will overcome you. Your offspring will be destroyed as soon as they
attain youth. You yourself will not be able to perform any sacriﬁces before the ﬁre.”
‘Yayati said, “O Puru! You are my youngest and most beloved son. You will be the best among them. O son!
Old age, wrinkles and grey hair have overcome me, because of a curse imposed by Kavya Ushanas. But I am not
yet satiated with youth. O Puru! Accept my guilt and the consequent old age. I will enjoy pleasures for some time
with your youth. After 1000 years have passed, I will return your youth to you and accept back the guilt and the
consequent old age.” Having been thus addressed by his father, Puru replied, “O great king! I will do what you
command me to do. O king! I will take upon myself the guilt and the consequent old age. Accept my youth and enjoy pleasures as you wish. I will live as you say, attacked by old age and deprived of youth and beauty. I will give
you my youth.” Yayati said, “O Puru! O son! I am extremely pleased with you. Since I am pleased, I will grant you
this. Your offspring will rule the kingdom, be prosperous and accomplish all their desires.”’
80

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having received Puru’s youth, Yayati, Nahusha’s son and the best of kings, was delighted
and indulged in pleasures—as he desired, as he could sustain, at whichever time he wished, and as it gave him happiness. O lord of kings! But he did nothing that was against dharma. He pleased the gods with sacriﬁces, the ancestors with shraddha ceremonies, the poor through charity, the Brahmanas by fulﬁlling their desires, the guests
through food and drink, the Vaishyas with protection, the Shudras with kindness and the dasyus with suppression.
Yayati pleased all his subjects by ruling according to dharma, like Indra himself. The king was as valorous as a
lion. He was young and enjoyed all the pleasures and unlimited happiness, but without transgressing dharma. The
king was extremely happy at these grand pleasures. However, the ruler of men was also despondent when he remembered that 1000 years would soon end. Knowing the measurement of time, the valorous one counted kalas and
kashthas.
‘When the entire duration was complete, he called his son Puru and said, “O son! O vanquisher of foes! With
your youth, I have enjoyed pleasures—as I desired, as I could sustain and at whichever time I wished. O Puru! O
fortunate one! I am extremely pleased with you. Take back your youth now. Also take the kingdom, because you
are the son who has brought pleasure to me.” Nahusha’s son, King Yayati, then took back his old age and his son
Puru received back his youth.
‘The king wished to instate his youngest son, Puru, as the king. But the four varnas, led by the Brahmanas, said,
“O lord! How can you instate Puru in the kingdom, overlooking your eldest son Yadu, who is Sharmishtha’s son
and Shukra’s grandson? Yadu is your eldest son. Turvasu comes after him. After him, there is Sharmishtha’s son
Druhyu and then Anu and then Puru. How is it proper to pass over the elders and instate the youngest as the king?
In accordance with dharma, which you uphold, we wish to bring this to your attention.” Yayati replied, “Listen to
my words, everyone from the four varnas, led by the Brahmanas, as to why the kingdom cannot be given to my eldest son. My commands were disobeyed by my eldest son Yadu. It is the opinion of the learned that a son who acts
counter to the father’s wishes is no son at all. He is a son who follows the words of his mother and father for their
welfare. He is a son who acts like a son with his father and mother. Yadu has slighted me and so has Turvasu. I
have been extremely slighted by Druhyu and Anu. Puru is the only one who has specially followed my commands
and respected me. Though he is the youngest, he accepted my old age. Puru is like my true son; he did what I desired. Kavya Ushanas Shukra himself granted me the boon that a son who followed my instructions would become
the king and would rule over the earth. Therefore, I ask all of you to allow Puru to be instated as the king.” The
people said, “It is true that a son who has all the qualities and always seeks the welfare of his mother and father
and respects them deserves to be the lord, even if he is the youngest. Since Shukra has granted this boon, there is
nothing that we can say.” At these words from the citizens of the town and the country, Nahusha’s son then instated his son Puru as the king.
‘Giving the kingdom to Puru, he accepted the vows for departing to the forest and left his capital with the Brahmanas and the ascetics. Yadu’s sons are known as the Yadavas, Turvasu’s sons are known as the Yavanas,
Druhyu’s sons are known as the Bhojas and Anu’s sons as the mlecchas. Puru’s sons are known as the Pourava lineage. O king! You yourself have been born to rule this kingdom for 1000 years.’
81

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having instated his beloved son as the king, Nahusha’s son King Yayati was happy and became a sage in the forest. He lived in the forest with Brahmanas, rigid in his vows and living on roots and fruit.
After a life of self-control, he ascended to heaven. Having attained heaven, he lived there in bliss and happiness.
But after a long time, he was again thrown out by Shakra. I have heard that when he was hurled down from heaven, he remained suspended in the sky and did not reach the surface of the earth. It has been said that he later again
went to heaven, together with the kings Vasumana, Ashtaka, the valorous Pratardana and Shibi.’
Janamejaya asked, ‘Through what deeds did the lord of the earth again attain heaven? O Brahmana! Before all
these Brahmanas who are rishis, I wish to hear all the details. Yayati was like the king of the gods and lord of the
earth. He extended the Puru lineage. He was as resplendent as the sun. The great-souled one’s fame was extensive
and his deeds based on truth. I wish to hear his complete story, in heaven and here.’

Vaishampayana said, ‘I will recount for you the excellent account of Yayati’s exploits, in heaven and here. This
is sacred and destroys sins for all those who hear it. Having instated his youngest son Puru on the throne,
Nahusha’s son, King Yayati, happily retired to the forest. He cast aside to the farthest corners his other sons, with
Yadu at their head. The king lived in the forest for a long time, surviving on roots and fruit. He paid homage to the
gods and the ancestors, conquered his rage and controlled his senses. He poured offerings into the ﬁre, as prescribed for those who retire to the forest. The lord worshipped his guests by offering forest food and ghee. He sustained himself through gleanings of corn and remnants of food from others. In this way, the king passed a full
thousand years. For thirty autumns he lived on water alone, controlling his mind and speech. For one year he lived
on air, without sleeping. For another year, he performed austerities amid the ﬁve sacred ﬁres.158 For six months,
he stood immobile on one leg. The performer of sacred deeds then ascended heaven.’
82

Vaishampayana said, ‘When that lord of kings lived in heaven among the gods, the thirty gods, the saddhyas, the
maruts and the vasus paid him homage. The performer of sacred deeds often went from the world of the gods to
Brahma’s world. It has been said that the lord of the earth lived there for a very long time.
‘One day, Yayati, supreme among kings, went to Shakra and in the course of the conversation Shakra asked the
lord of the earth, “O king! What did you tell Puru when he accepted your old age and roamed the earth and when
you gave him the kingdom? Tell me truly.” Yayati replied, “I told him that he would be the king of the earth in the
central region, between the rivers Ganga and Yamuna. His brothers would rule over the other regions. I told him
that men who possess no anger are superior to those who have anger, men with forgiveness are superior to those
who do not forgive, that men are superior to animals and the learned to the ignorant. If abused, one should not
abuse back in turn. If not suppressed, anger burns one’s good deeds. One should not cause pain to others through
cruel words. One should not cause fear to those who are worse off. One should not utter words that hurt and cause
pain to others, taking one to hell. One who wounds another through the thorn of harsh, sharp and abrasive speech
is deserted by Lakshmi and bears evil in his mouth. A righteous man should always be worshipped in the front. A
righteous man should protect one’s back. One should always disregard the cruel words of wicked ones. Cruel
words issue from the mouth like arrows and cause hurt, night and day. When they descend, they strike the innermost parts and learned ones never release them on others. In the three worlds, there is nothing that paciﬁes as
much as compassion, friendship towards beings, charity and sweet words. Therefore, one should always use words
that pacify and never those that are harsh. One should honour those deserving of respect, always give, and never
ask.’
83

‘Indra said, “O king! O son of Nahusha! O Yayati! After accomplishing all your deeds, you left your home and departed for the forest. Tell me, who are you equal to in your austerities? I am asking you.”
‘Yayati replied, “O Vasava!159 I do not see anyone equal to me in austerities among gods, men, gandharvas and
maharshis.”
‘Indra said, “O king! Since you are disrespecting those who are your superiors, equals and inferiors, without
knowing their powers, these worlds will end for you now. Your merits will diminish and you will fall.”
‘Yayati replied, “O Shakra! O king of the gods! Since my disrespect for gods, rishis, gandharvas and men have
diminished me and made me lose these worlds, I wish that when I am deprived of the world of the gods, I should
fall among righteous men.”
‘Indra said, “O king! You will fall among those who are righteous. There you will again obtain great standing. O
Yayati! After knowing this, you will never again show disrespect for your superiors and your equals.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘At that, Yayati fell from the sacred worlds, frequented by the king of the gods. While he
was falling, rajarshi Ashtaka, the protector of true dharma, saw him. Ashtaka asked, “O youth! Who are you? You
are like Vasava in your form and blaze like the ﬁre with your own radiance. Why are you falling like the sun, the
chief among those in the sky and the dispeller of masses of dark clouds? On seeing you fall from the sun’s path, as
immeasurably radiant as the sun or the ﬁre, everyone is wondering at what is falling among us and is being de-

prived of consciousness. On seeing you traverse the path of the gods, equal in radiance to Surya, Indra and Vishnu,
we have all arisen and come together, to ask you the reason for your downfall. O one whose beauty causes envy!
Had you asked us ﬁrst who we were, we would not have committed the impudence of asking you ﬁrst. But we now
ask you, who are you and why have you come here? O one with Indra’s powers! Let your fear be dispelled. Let
your misery and delusion end. You are now in the presence of those who are righteous. Even Shakra, the killer of
Bala, will not dare to harm you here. O one who is equal to the king of the gods! Righteous ones always provide
standing to those who have been deprived of their happiness. Righteous ones are lords of the movable and the immovable. Righteous ones are assembled here and you are among them, those who are like you. Fire is the lord of
burning. Earth is the lord of sowing. The sun is the lord of light. Like that, a guest is the lord of the righteous.”’
84

‘Yayati said, “I am Yayati, Nahusha’s son and Puru’s father. Disrespect for all beings has dislodged me from the
world of the gods, the siddhas and the rishis. My merit diminished, I am falling. Since I am older than you in age, I
was not the ﬁrst to greet you. He who is senior in learning, austerities or birth is older and is worshipped by the
Brahmanas.”
‘Ashtaka replied, “O king! You say that he who is older in age deserves the respect of others and that is the reason you did not greet ﬁrst. But it is also said that the worship of Brahmanas is for him who is senior in learning and
austerities.”
‘Yayati said, “It is said that evil deeds destroy the merit of good deeds and vanity leads to the evil worlds. The
righteous never follow evil and act so as to increase their virtue. I myself had great riches.160 But all that is gone
now and I will not get it back, despite my best efforts. One who learns from this fate will be wise and righteous. In
the world of the living, men have different dispositions, but depending on destiny, their power and efforts may
amount to nothing. Knowing that destiny is supreme, the learned say that the wise are content with what they obtain. Happiness and misery are determined by destiny and are beyond one’s control and powers. Knowing that destiny is supreme, one should not be miserable or happy. The wise are always equable, without misery in grief and
exultation in happiness. Knowing that destiny is supreme, grief and exultation are pointless. O Ashtaka! I never
tremble in fear. Nor is my mind ever affected by anxiety. For I know that it will certainly be the way the creator
has determined for me. Insects,161 those born from eggs, vegetables, reptiles, worms, ﬁsh, stones, wood and
everything, when freed from action, are reunited with nature. I know that happiness and unhappiness are not eternal. O Ashtaka! Knowing this, why should I grieve? We never know what should be done to avoid misery. Therefore, I am not concerned and give up grief.”
‘Ashtaka replied, “O lord of kings! Tell me in detail the accurate accounts of the worlds that you enjoyed and
where you spent time. You speak of dharma like one who knows the subject.”
‘Yayati said, “I was a king, ruling over the entire earth as my kingdom. I acquired many great worlds and those
beyond them. I lived there for 1000 years and then ascended to a superior world. That beautiful world was the capital of Puruhuta.162 It had 1000 gates and extended for 1000 yojanas. I lived there for 1000 years and then ascended to a superior world. I attained that world, which was divine and without decay. It was the world of Prajapati,
one that is difﬁcult to attain. I lived there for 1000 years and then ascended to a superior world. That was the abode
of the god of the gods.163 I lived in that world, as I wished. The thirty gods have paid me homage. I have rivalled
the gods in power and glory. In Nandana, I could assume any form at will. For a million years I sported with apsaras, in mountains with ﬂowering trees and fragrant scents. I lived there in divine happiness for a large number of
years, beyond counting. Then a messenger of the gods, terrible in visage, shouted to me thrice in a deep voice,
‘Ruined, ruined, ruined’. O king!164 I remember that I fell from Nandana with my merits diminished. O lord of
men! I heard the voices of the gods in the sky, lamenting and mourning. ‘Yayati of sacred fame and sacred deeds
has had his merit diminished and is falling. What misfortune!’ When I was falling, I asked them, ‘Where are the
righteous ones among whom I shall fall?’ They pointed me to this sacriﬁcial ground that belongs to you. On seeing
it, I came here quickly. I smelt the fragrance of ghee wafting up from the sacriﬁcial ground. I saw the smoke rising
up and was reassured.”’

85

‘Ashtaka asked, “O one who is foremost among those of Krita Yuga!165 You could assume any form at will. You
spent a million years in the garden of Nandana. Why did you have to give it up and come to earth?”
‘Yayati replied, “Here, friends and relatives forsake a man who has lost his wealth. There, the gods and their
lord forsake one whose merit has been diminished.”
‘Ashtaka said, “I am curious to know how one’s merit is diminished there. My mind is confused on this. Please
also tell me which worlds are attained through which means. Please tell me. I know that you know the subject.”
‘Yayati replied, “O god among men! With great lamentations, those who speak of their own merits are hurled
down to the hell known as bhouma. Though actually lean, they grow and become food for vultures, dogs and jackals. Therefore, in this world, a man should avoid evil acts that are condemned. O king! I have now told you everything. Please tell me, what else should I say.”
‘Ashtaka said, “When life is destroyed through age and they are torn apart by vultures, peacocks166 and insects,
where do they live and how do they come to life again? I have not heard of a hell named bhouma.”
‘Yayati replied, “When they have ascended from their bodies, depending on their deeds, they are born again on
earth. They descend into the hell known as bhouma, and it is impossible to count the many number of years spent
there. Some fall in the sky for 60,000 years. Some others fall for 80,000 years. They then fall to bhouma and are
attacked by terrible rakshasas with sharp teeth.”
‘Ashtaka said, “When they fall thus to bhouma, why are they attacked by terrible rakshasas with sharp teeth?
How do they continue to exist? How do the dead enter the womb again?”
‘Yayati replied, “Just as raindrops cling to ﬂowers and fruit, they cling to the semen created by man. They then
enter a woman at the time of her season and become an embryo in the womb. In visible form, life enters trees,
herbs, water, air, the earth and the sky. Thus do the dead become embryos again, in the form of bipeds and
quadrupeds.”
‘Ashtaka said, “Does a seed enter the womb with the old form? Or does it get a new form? How is a human
womb entered? Tell me, because I still have doubts. How is the visible form of limbs, eyes, ears and senses acquired? Since I am asking you, tell me all this. O father! You know everything on the subject.”
‘Yayati replied, “When it is the season, the invisible form enters the womb through the sperm, like into a ﬂower
with its juices. Depending on the rights that have been acquired,167 the embryo develops with the passage of time.
When the limbs are developed and the six168 senses established, man is formed. With his ears, he gets to know
sound. With his eyes, he gets to see form. With his nose, he knows smell and with his tongue, taste. With touch, he
gets to feel and with his mind, he gets to know feelings. O Ashtaka! Know that this is how the great atman develops life in the body.”
‘Ashtaka said, “A man who is dead is burnt, buried in the ground or becomes dust. He is reduced to nothing after death. Later, how does he get to know himself again?”
‘Yayati replied, “O lion among kings! A man who dies is like one asleep. However, his good and evil acts are in
front of him. When the body is dead, he assumes some other form with a speed that is swifter than that of the wind.
Those who have performed good deeds go to a pure birth. Those who did evil go to an evil birth. O one with great
feelings! The evil become worms and insects. I will not speak about them. I have told you how the dead become
embryos again—bipeds, quadrupeds and those with six legs. I have told you everything in detail. What more do
you wish to ask?”
‘Ashtaka said, “O father! Is there anything that can be done to attain the superior worlds, through austerities and
the pursuit of learning, instead of returning to earth? How does one attain the world of supreme bliss? I am asking
you. Please tell me everything accurately.”
‘Yayati replied, “Austerities, gifts, tranquillity, self-control, humility and compassion towards all beings. The
learned say a man is deluded and loses everything through pride. A man of knowledge, who thinks himself to be
learned and uses his learning to debase the fame of others, never attains the eternal worlds. Nor does the brahman
yield any fruits to him. There are four acts that dispel all fear of danger, but cause fear if performed in the wrong
way, with pride—offerings before the ﬁre, vow of silence, studying and sacriﬁces. The learned should ﬁnd no pride

in homage. The learned should not grieve if insulted. The good always honour the good in this world. The evil
never possess the intelligence of the good. I have paid homage, I have performed sacriﬁces, I have studied and I
have observed vows. But I have done all this while discarding fear. The learned ones know the ancient one who is
the refuge and is worshipped from the mind. He is the one with a supreme and radiant form, for ﬁnding supreme
peace here and in the world hereafter.”’
86

‘Ashtaka asked, “How should a householder act so as to attain the gods? What about mendicants and those who
practise brahmacharya? What about the one who is devoted to the right path after retiring to the forest? Those who
know have many differing views on this.”
‘Yayati replied, “A successful brahmachari should not be asked to do his preceptor’s work and will study when
asked to do so. He will awake ﬁrst and go to bed after everyone else. He will be soft in speech, not stirred by pride,
devoted to studying and self-controlled. The ancient sacred texts say that when a householder obtains riches according to dharma, he must spend it on sacriﬁces and give alms and provide food to guests. He should not take
from others what has not been given him. A chief sage who has attained success must live on his own strength in
the forest. He must give to others and never cause them pain. He must be controlled in his food and deeds. The true
mendicant is one who does not depend on any craft for his living. He is always without a home, has control over
his senses and is always free from attachment. He does not live under a roof and travels with little and light belongings. He roams through many regions alone. When there is a night in this world when one has conquered desire and happiness, that is the night when a learned one should become an ascetic. A person who performs good
deeds in the forest frees ten generations that have come before and ten that come after him—counting himself, that
is twenty-one generations.”
‘Ashtaka asked, “How many kinds of sages are there and how many who observe vows of silence? Tell us. We
wish to hear all this from you.”
‘Yayati replied, “He is a true sage who lives in the forest and turns his back on the village. He is also one who
lives in the village and turns his back on the forest.”
‘Ashtaka asked, “How can one turn one’s back on the village while living in the forest, or turn one’s back on the
forest while living in the village?”
‘Yayati replied, “The sage who lives in the forest uses nothing from the village. Thus he turns his back on the
village while living in the forest. But a true sage who maintains no ﬁre and has no house or clan and keeps roaming, who wants nothing more than a loincloth as a garment and who is content with food that is enough to sustain
life, he lives in the village and turns his back to the forest. He has given up all desire and deeds169 and has his
senses under complete control. He is the one who attains success in this world as a sage. Who will not worship one
whose teeth are washed, nails are clipped, who is always bathed and without dirt and whose deeds are white,
though he may be dark in complexion?170 Lean from austerities and emaciated in blood, ﬂesh and bones, such a
sage not only conquers this world, but also the supreme one. The sage who observes a vow of silence and sits in
meditation, with indifference between opposites,171 he conquers this world and the supreme world. A sage who
eats like cattle and other animals,172 all his earlier worlds merge with the eternal at the time of universal destruction.”’
87

‘Ashtaka asked, “O king! Who among these two,173 though both exert like the sun and the moon, ﬁrst attains
union with the gods?”
‘Yayati replied, “He who has no home despite being a householder and has controlled his desires, and the mendicant who lives in the village but has no home, will reach ﬁrst. Both those who don’t attain old age and those who
do can deteriorate. Because even if austerities are performed, there will be more austerities. It is said that cruelty
ﬁnds no truth. O king! Even if one has no riches, but devotedly observes dharma without thinking of gains, one attains union with the eternal.”

‘Ashtaka said, “O king! You are young, handsome, garlanded and resplendent. Where have you come from and
where are you going? Whose messenger are you? O lord of the earth! Where is your place?”
‘Yayati replied, “Since I have lost my merits, I am falling into the hell known as bhouma. I have been cast out
from the sky and am entering the earth. I will go there after telling you that I must fall more. The Brahmanas and
the rulers of the worlds are asking me to hasten. O lord of men! I obtained a boon from Shakra that I would fall
among righteous men when I fell on the surface of the earth, at a place where the ones with all the good qualities
were assembled.”
‘Ashtaka said, “O king! Do not keep falling. I ask you if there is any world for me here, in the sky or in heaven.
I think you know the subject of dharma.”
‘Yayati replied, “O lion among kings! There are many worlds for you to enjoy in heaven, as many as the cattle
and horses on earth and animals in the forests and in the mountains. This you must know.”
‘Ashtaka said, “O lord of kings! I give you all the worlds that are mine in heaven, be they in the sky or in heaven. O one who beats back enemies! Take them and go there quickly. Do not keep falling.”
‘Yayati replied, “O chief among kings! The likes of me, who are not Brahmanas or those who know the brahman, do not accept gifts. O lord of men! Earlier, I have always given to Brahmanas myself, as one must. Let no
one who is not a Brahmana earn a living through begging, nor should the Brahmana wife of a valorous husband. If
I act the way I have never done before, what righteousness will come of that?”
‘Pratardana174 said, “O one with beauty that leads to envy! My name is Pratardana. I ask if there are any worlds
for me, in heaven or in the sky, for I think that you know the subject of dharma.”
‘Yayati replied, “O lord of men! There are many worlds for you, dripping with nectar mixed with ghee and full
of bliss. Even if you live in each for seven days, they will last you eternally.”
‘Pratardana said, “I give them all to you. Do not keep falling. Whatever worlds are for me, in the sky or in heaven, take them quickly and go there, shedding all your delusions.”
‘Yayati replied, “O king! No king who is equal in energy will crave for and accept the possessions obtained by
another king through yoga. Even if affected with the adversity of destiny, no wise king should act in a cruel way.
An intelligent king will tread the path of dharma and fame and bear dharma in mind. A person like me, learned and
knowledgeable about dharma, will not act in the mean way you have advised. If I do175 what others refuse to accept, how can that bring my welfare?” When King Yayati spoke these words, Vasumana, supreme among kings,
addressed him.’
88

‘Vasumana said, “O lord of men! I am Vasumana, the son of Roushadashvi, who is asking you. Is there any world
for me in heaven? O great-souled one! I think you know the subject of dharma.”
‘Yayati replied, “In the sky, on earth and in the directions and wherever the sun radiates its heat, eternal worlds
are waiting for you in heaven.”
‘Vasumana said, “I give them all to you. Do not keep falling. Let all my worlds be yours. O king! O wise one! If
it is improper for you to accept them as a gift, buy them with a piece of straw.”
‘Yayati replied, “From childhood, I have not taken anything in a wrong way. I do not remember any false sale. If
I do what others refuse to accept, how can that bring my welfare?”
‘Vasumana said, “O king! If it is improper to purchase them, take these worlds from me as a gift. O lord of men!
I will certainly never go there. Therefore, let these worlds be yours.”
‘Shibi said, “O father! I am Shibi, the son of Ushinara. I ask you if there are any worlds, in the sky or in heaven,
that are for me. I think you know the subject of dharma.”
‘Yayati replied, “O lord of men! In speech and in your heart, you have never refused anyone who asked you.
Therefore, eternal worlds await you in heaven, great, prosperous and radiant as lightning.”
‘Shibi said, “O king! Accept these worlds as yours. If you don’t wish to accept them as a gift, purchase them. I
will not accept them, now that I have given them to you. Go to those worlds.”
‘Yayati replied, “O Shibi! You are indeed the equal of Indra in inﬂuence. O lord of men! Your worlds are inﬁnite. But I derive no pleasure from worlds that are given to me. Therefore, I cannot accept what you have given to

me.”
‘Ashtaka said, “O king! You have not welcomed any of our worlds. But we have given them all to you. You will
now go to hell.”
‘Yayati replied, “You have given to one who is deserving of gifts. All of you are strict in your righteousness and
devoted to the truth. But I do not have the courage to do what I have not done earlier.”
‘Ashtaka said, “We see these ﬁve golden chariots before us. Who do they belong to? They are high and shining,
blazing like the ﬂames of ﬁre.”
‘Yayati replied, “These ﬁve golden chariots, high and shining and blazing like the ﬂames of ﬁre, will bear you.”
‘Ashtaka said, “O king! Climb into your chariot and ride valorously in the sky. We will follow you when our
time comes.”
‘Yayati replied, “All of us must go together. All of us have conquered heaven. Look, our path to the world of the
gods has become visible.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Lighting up the sky and earth with the glory of their righteousness, those supreme kings
then ascended their chariots and departed for heaven.
‘Ashtaka said, “I thought that I would be the ﬁrst one to leave. The great-souled Indra has always been my
friend. How is it that the vehicle of Shibi, son of Ushinara, has speedily outpaced us?”
‘Yayati replied, “Shibi, Ushinara’s son, has given up all his riches for the path of the gods. Therefore, he is the
best among us. Gifts, austerities, truthfulness, dharma, humility, riches, forgiveness, equanimity and forbearance—
King Shibi has always had them all, in incomparable measure. He is a learned king who has never been cruel. He
is also restrained by his modesty. It is for these reasons that his chariot now outpaces ours.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Driven by curiosity, Ashtaka again asked his maternal grandfather, who was equal to Indra, “O king! I am asking you. Please tell me truthfully. Where have you come from? Who do you belong to?
Whose son are you? In this world, what is it that you have performed that no one else, Brahmana or Kshatriya, can
perform?” Yayati replied, “I am Yayati, the son of Nahusha and Puru’s father. I was a universal emperor on earth.
You are my relatives. So I am revealing the secret to you. I am your maternal grandfather. Having conquered the
entire earth, I gave it to Brahmanas. I gave them also handsome horses with single hooves and the gods then obtained their rightful shares. I gave this entire earth away to Brahmanas, with all its means of transport—cattle,
gold, the best of riches and cows that numbered one hundred arbudas.176 The sky and the earth still exist because
of my righteousness and the ﬁre burns among mankind. Never have I uttered a word that is not true. The learned
always worship the truth. In all the worlds, I know that gods and sages are revered because they are devoted to the
truth. He who recounts the tale of our ascent to heaven to the chief among Brahmanas, who do not question it, will
himself attain the same worlds as us.” Thus, the great-souled king, who was the scourage of his enemies, was
saved by his grandsons. The performer of the most noble of deeds left the earth and went to heaven, ﬁlling the
earth with his exploits.’
89

Janamejaya said, ‘O illustrious one! I wish to hear about the kings who established dynasties in the lineage of
Puru. Tell me who they were, about their valour, their power and their courage. I have heard that in this lineage
there wasn’t a single king who lacked in valour or in good conduct. Nor was there one who lacked in offspring. O
one blessed with the power of austerities! I wish to hear detailed accounts of these kings who were learned and famous, and about their character.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘I will tell you what you have asked. The valorous ones of Puru’s lineage were like Shakra
in their energy. Through his wife Poushti, Puru had three maharathas as his sons—Pravira, Ishvara and Roudrashva. Pravira was the one who extended the lineage. Through Shuraseni, Pravira had the valorous Manasyu as his
son. This one, with eyes like blue lotuses, became the lord of the earth, right up to the extremities of the four directions. Through Souviri, Manasyu had three sons—Subhru, Samhanana and Vagmi. They were all brave maharathas. Through an apsara, Roudrashva had ten great archers as his sons. They were brave warriors, performed
many sacriﬁces and were famous and had many offspring. They were all learned in the science of weapons and
were all devoted to dharma. They were Richepu, Kakshepu, the valorous Krikanepu, Sthandilyepu, Vanepu, the

great warrior Sthalepu, the mighty Tejepu, the wise Satyepu, whose valour was like Indra’s, Dharmepu and the
tenth was Samtanepu, whose might was like that of a god. O son! These sons were born through Anadhrishti.177
They performed royal sacriﬁces and horse sacriﬁces. O king! Richepu had a wise son named King Matinara. Matinara himself had four sons whose valour was unbounded—Tamsu, Mahana, Atiratha and Druhyu, whose radiance
was unequalled. Among them, it was the greatly valorous Tamsu who extended the Puru lineage. He conquered the
entire earth and obtained great fame and splendour. Tamsu gave birth to a valorous son named Ilina, who was
supreme among conquerors and subjugated the entire earth. O king! Through Rathantari, Ilina gave birth to ﬁve
sons who were like the ﬁve elements178—Duhshanta, Shura, Bhima, Pravasu and Vasu.
‘O Janamejaya! The eldest Duhshanta became the king. From him, and through Shakuntala, was born a learned
son named Bharata who became the king. It was through him that the greatly famous Bharata dynasty started.
Through his three wives, Bharata had nine sons. But none of them was like him and the king was not satisﬁed with
any of them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bharata then performed a great sacriﬁce and obtained a son
named Bhumanyu through Bharadvaja. O best of the Bharata lineage! Puru’s descendant looked upon this son as
his own.179 Bhumanyu was instated as the heir apparent. The king himself had a son named Vitatha and Vitatha
became known as Bhumanyu’s son. Through Pushkarini, Bhumanyu had sons named Suhotra, Suhota, Suhavi, Sujayu and Richika. Suhotra, the eldest among them, became the king of the earth. He performed many royal and
horse sacriﬁces. Suhotra conquered the entire earth, right up to the boundaries of the ocean, with all its elephants,
cattle, horses and many gems. The earth seemed to be oppressed at the many burdens he placed on her, with masses of elephants, horses, chariots and human beings. Suhotra was a king who ruled over his subjects in accordance
with dharma. The earth was covered with hundreds and thousands of altars and sacriﬁcial stakes. People and crops
were plentiful and the earth was adorned with the presence of the gods. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Suhotra, the lord of the earth, gave birth to three sons through Aikshvaki—Ajamidha, Sumidha and Purumidha.
Ajamidha was the chief among them and he perpetuated the dynasty. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Through his three wives, he had six sons. Riksha was born from Dhumini, Duhshanta and Parameshthi were born
from Nili, and Jahnu, Jana and Rupina were born from Keshini. All the Panchalas were descended from Duhshanta
and Parameshthi. The Kushikas were descended from the inﬁnitely energetic Jahnu. It is said that Riksha was older
than Jana and Rupina and became the king.
‘O king! Riksha had a son named Samvarana and he extended your lineage. It has been heard that when Riksha’s son Samvarana ruled the earth as king, there was a great disaster that led to the destruction of subjects. The
kingdom was broken up through famine, plague, drought and disease. The armies of their enemies defeated the
Bharatas and sought to conquer the earth with fourfold armies.180 The Panchalas soon conquered the entire earth
and defeated them in battle with ten akshouhinis of soldiers. In great fear, King Samvarana ﬂed with his wife, sons,
advisers and friends. He then found shelter in the forests on the banks of the river Sindhu,181 where the river extends up to the mountains. Facing a difﬁcult situation, the Bharatas lived there for many years. They lived there for
1000 years.
‘One day, the illustrious rishi Vashishtha went there to the Bharatas and at his approach, they respectfully and
dutifully paid him homage. All the Bharatas then offered the radiant rishi welcoming gifts and honoured him. He
lived there for eight years and the king himself then requested him to be their priest, so that they might regain their
kingdom. Vashishtha agreed to this by saying “Om” to the Bharatas. We have heard that he instated the
Pourava182 as the emperor of all the Kshatriyas, like the tusk183 of the entire expansive earth. The descendant of
Bharata was established in his former supreme capital. With his great strength, he conquered the earth once more.
Samvarana, the descendant of Ajamidha, performed many great sacriﬁces in which a lot of alms were given.
Through Tapati, the daughter of Surya, Samvarana had a son named Kuru. Since Kuru was learned in the way of
dharma, all the subjects instated him as their king. It is after his name that Kurujangala184 has become so famous
in the world. The great ascetic made Kurukshetra a sacred place through his austerities there. We have heard that
Ashvavana, Abhishyanta, Chitraratha, Muni and the famous Janamejaya185 were his ﬁve sons, through the intelligent Vahini. Abhishyanta begot Parikshit,186 the powerful Shabalashva, Abhiraja, Viraja, the immensely strong

Shalmali, Uchchaishrava,187 Bhadrakara and Jitari as the eighth. Seven more immensely strong sons were born in
this lineage—Janamejaya and the others. They were learned and famous for the qualities of their deeds. Parikshit
had sons who were learned in dharma and artha—Kakshasena, Ugrasena, the immensely valorous Chitrasena, Indrasena, Sushena and Bhimasena. Janamejaya’s sons were famous on earth because they were very strong—Dhritarashtra who was born ﬁrst, Pandu, Bahlika, the immensely energetic Nishada, the powerful Jambunada, Kundodara, Padati and Vasati as the eighth. All of them were skilled in dharma and artha and were always engaged in the
welfare of all beings. Dhritarashtra became the king and his sons were Kundika, Hasti, Vitarka, Kratha, Kundala as
the ﬁfth, Havishrava, Indrabha and the invincible Sumanyu. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Pratipa had three
sons—Devapi, Shantanu and the maharatha Bahlika. Urged by a desire for dharma and welfare, Devapi became a
hermit. Shantanu and the maharatha Bahlika obtained the earth. Many other maharathas and supreme and righteous
kings were born in the Bharata lineage, equal to gods and rishis. In this way, many maharathas were born in
Manu’s lineage. They were the equals of the gods themselves. Their numbers extended Ila’s lineage.’
90

Janamejaya said, ‘O Brahmana! I have now heard from you the great origins of my ancestors. I have also heard
about the noble kings who were born in my lineage. But I am still not satisﬁed with this account that I love, because it is too brief. Therefore, narrate it to me in greater detail—the divine account from Prajapati Manu onwards.
Who will not ﬁnd pleasure in hearing of such a sacred lineage? There is abundant and established fame in the three
worlds about the qualities, righteousness, greatness, strength, inﬂuence, valour, energy and perseverance of these
men. I am not satisﬁed with what I have heard of this history, which is like the taste of amrita.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! Then listen to the complete and pure history of your lineage as I recite it, exactly
as I had heard it from Dvaipayana. From Daksha, Aditi. From Aditi, Vivasvat. From Vivasvat, Manu. From Manu,
Ila. From Ila, Pururava. From Pururava, Ayus. From Ayus, Nahusha. From Nahusha, Yayati. Yayati had two wives
—Vrishaparva’s daughter was Sharmishtha and Ushanasha’s daughter was Devayani. There is the account that Devayani gave birth to Yadu and Turvasu and Sharmishtha, Vrishaparva’s daughter, gave birth to Druhyu, Anu and
Puru. From Yadu, the Yadavas. From Puru, the Pouravas. Puru’s wife was Koushalya. Through her, he had a son
named Janamejaya. He performed three horse sacriﬁces and after performing the sacriﬁce known as vishvajita,188
retired to the forest. Yayati married Ananta, the daughter of Madhava. From this was born Prachinvata. He conquered the regions of the east, right up to where the sun rises and thus his name.189 Prachinvata married Ashmaki
and she gave birth to Samyati. Samyati married Drishadvat’s daughter Varangi and she gave birth to Ahampati.
Ahampati married Kritavirya’s daughter Bhanumati and she gave birth to Sarvabhouma. Sarvabhouma conquered
and carried off Sunanda, daughter of Kekaya, and she gave birth to Jayatsena. Jayatsena married Sushrava from the
Vidarbha region and she gave birth to Arachina. Arachina married Maryada, also from the Vidarbha region, and
she gave birth to Mahabhouma. Mahabhouma married Prasenjit’s daughter Suyajna and she gave birth to Ayutanayi. He was so named because he performed a sacriﬁce where one ayuta190 of human sacriﬁces were made.
Ayutanayi married Prithushrava’s daughter Bhasa and she gave birth to Akrodhana. Akrodhana married Karandu
from the Kalinga region and she gave birth to Devatithi. Devatithi married Maryada from the Videha region and
she gave birth to Richa. Richa married Sudeva from the Anga region and she gave birth to Riksha. Riksha married
Takshaka’s daughter Jvala and through her had a son named Matinara. Matinara performed a sacriﬁce on the banks
of the Sarasvati for twelve years. When the sacriﬁce was over, Sarasvati herself came to him and chose him as her
husband. Through her, he had a son named Tamsu. On this, there is a saying that Sarasvati gave birth to a son
named Tamsu from Matinara and through Kalindi, Tamsu gave birth to a son named Ilina.
‘Ilina had ﬁve sons through Rathantari; Duhshanta was the eldest. Duhshanta married Visvamitra’s daughter
Shakuntala and she gave birth to Bharata. On this, there are two shlokas.
The mother is only a leather bag.191 The son who is born from the father is the father himself. O Duhshanta!
Maintain your son and do not forsake Shakuntala.

O king of men! A son who has sperm rescues one from Yama’s abode.192 You are the father who has planted
this embryo. Shakuntala has spoken the truth.
Hence his name was Bharata. Bharata married Sarvasena’s daughter Sunanda, from the Kashi region. She gave
birth to Bhumanyu. Bhumanyu married Dasarha’s daughter Vijaya and she gave birth to Suhotra. Suhotra married
Suvarna of the Ikshvaku lineage and she gave birth to Hasti. He established this city of Hastinapura, which is why
it was named Hastinapura. Hasti married Yashodhara from the Trigarta region and she gave birth to Vikunthana.
Vikunthana married Sudeva from the Dasarha region and she gave birth to Ajamidha. Ajamidha had 2400 sons
through Kaikeyi, Nagi, Gandhari, Vimala and Riksha. Each became a king and established a dynasty. Among
them, Samvarana was the one who carried the lineage forward. Samvarana married Tapati, Vivasvat’s daughter,
and she gave birth to Kuru. Kuru married Subhagi from the Dasarha region and she gave birth to Viduratha. Viduratha married Sanpriya, daughter of Madhava and she gave birth to Arugvata. Arugvata married Amrita from the
Magadha region and she gave birth to Parikshit. Parikshit married Bahuda’s daughter Suyasa and she gave birth to
Bhimasena. Bhimasena married Sukumari of the Kekaya region and she gave birth to Paryashrava, also known as
Pratipa. Pratipa married Shibi’s daughter Sunanda and through her had sons named Devapi, Shantanu and Bahlika.
‘Devapi retired to the forest when he was still a child. Shantanu then became the king. There is a saying about
this. “Those who were touched with his hands felt extreme pleasure and became young again. Therefore, he was
known as Shantanu.”193 Thus, he was known as Shantanu. Shantanu married Bhagirathi Ganga and she gave birth
to Devavrata, who later came to be known as Bhishma. To do that which would bring pleasure to his father, Devavrata got him married to Satyavati. She became his mother and she was also known as Gandhakali. Before that,
while she was still a virgin, she had a son named Dvaipayana through Parashara. She bore two more sons to Shantanu, Vichitravirya and Chitrangada. But before reaching manhood, Chitrangada was killed by a gandharva and Vichitravirya then became the king. Vichitravirya married two daughers born to the king of Kashi through his wife
Kousalya—Ambika and Ambalika. However, Vichitravirya died childless. Then Satyavati began to worry that
Duhshanta’s lineage would become extinct. She thought of the rishi Dvaipayana and he appeared before her and
asked, “What is your command?” She told him, “Your brother Vichitravirya has gone to heaven childless. For his
sake, be the father of righteous children.” Dvaipayana agreed and was the father to three sons—Dhritarashtra, Pandu and Vidura. Of these, because of a boon granted by Dvaipayana, Dhritarashtra had 100 sons through his wife
Gandhari. Four of Dhritarashtra’s sons were chief—Duryodhana, Duhshasana, Vikarna and Chitrasena.
‘Pandu had two gems among women as his wives—Kunti and Madri. One day, Pandu went out for a hunt and
saw a rishi, in the form of a stag, uniting with a doe. He shot him with an arrow while he was still mounted on the
doe, in a state of lust, but without his desire having been satiated. Wounded by the arrow, he told Pandu, “You follow dharma and you know the pleasure that comes from satisfaction of desire. But you have killed me before my
desire was satiated. Therefore, you will also be united with the ﬁve elements194 in a similar state, before your desire is satiated.” Pandu paled on hearing this curse and from that time, stayed away from uniting with his wives. He
told them, “This is the result of my own folly. But I have heard that in the hereafter there are no worlds for those
who are childless.” Therefore, he asked Kunti to bear children for him and accordingly Kunti bore children.
Through Dharma, Yudhishthira. Through Marut, Bhima. Through Shakra, Arjuna. Pandu was pleased and said,
“Your co-wife doesn’t have children either. Let the right offspring also be fathered on her.” Kunti agreed and
Nakula and Sahadeva were then fathered on Madri through the Ashvins. One day, Pandu saw Madri dressed in her
ornaments and his desire was stirred. But he died as soon as he touched her. Then Madri ascended the funeral pyre
with him, requesting Kunti to affectionately rear the twins.
‘Later, ascetics took the ﬁve Pandavas and Kunti to Hastinapura and introduced them to Bhishma and Vidura.
An attempt was made to burn them in the house of lac, but this failed, because of Vidura’s counsel. After this,
Hidimba was killed and they went to a place named Ekachakra. In Ekachakra, they killed a rakshasa named Baka
and then went to the capital of Panchala. Thereafter, they obtained Droupadi as their wife and returned to their own
country, in good health. They had skilled sons—Yudhishthira had Prativindhya, Vrikodara195 had Sutasoma, Arjuna had Shrutakirti, Nakula had Shatanika and Sahadeva had Shrutakarmana. In a svayamvara,196 Yudhishthira ob-

tained Devika as his wife. She was the daughter of Govasana of the Shibi lineage and through her he had a son
named Youdheya. Through a viryashulka197 marriage, Bhima obtained as his wife Baladhara, the daughter of the
king of Kashi. Through her, he had a son named Sarvaga. Arjuna went to Dvaravati and obtained Vasudeva’s sister
Subhadra as his wife. Through her, he had a son named Abhimanyu. Nakula had Karenumati from the Chedi region as his wife and through her had a son named Niramitra. In a svayamvara, Sahadeva obtained Vijaya, daughter
of the king of Madra, as his wife and had a son named Suhotra. Before this, Bhima had a son named Ghatotkacha
through the rakshasa Hidimba. These are the eleven sons of the Pandavas.
‘Abhimanyu married Virata’s daughter Uttara. She gave birth to a stillborn child. On the command of Vasudeva,
supreme among men, Pritha198 accepted him in her arms. He said, “I will instill life into this embryo that is six
months old.” Having revived him, he said, “He was born in a lineage that was diminished.199 Therefore, he will
be known as Parikshit.” Parikshit married Madravati and she gave birth to Janamejaya.200 Through Vapushtama,
Janamejaya had two sons named Shatanika and Shanku. Shatanika had a son named Ashvamedhadatta, through a
wife from the Videha region. Thus the lineage of Puru and Pandu has been recounted. He who hears about Puru’s
lineage is freed from all sin.’
91

Vaishampayana said, ‘There was once a king named Mahabhisha. He was born in the Ikshvaku lineage and was a
lord of the earth. He was always truthful and truly valorous. He pleased the lord of the gods through 1000 horse
sacriﬁces and 100 vajapeya201 sacriﬁces and thus attained heaven.
‘One day, the gods went to pay homage to Brahma. Many rajarshis and King Mahabhisha were also present.
Ganga, the best of the rivers, also came to pay homage to the grandfather. Her garments, as white as moonlight,
were blown away by the wind and immediately the masses of gods lowered their faces. However, rajarshi Mahabhisha continued to stare unabashedly at the river. Because of this, Mahabhisha was cursed by the illustrious Brahma. “You will be born on earth and then you will again regain these worlds.” The king then thought about all the
kings and ascetics on earth and chose the immensely radiant Pratipa as his father. On seeing King Mahabhisha lose
his composure, the best of the rivers went away, thinking about him in her mind. Along her path, she saw the divine vasus. They were crestfallen and dark with despair at having been dislodged from heaven.
‘On seeing them in that state, the great river asked, “O residents of heaven! Why are your forms destroyed?
Why are you in despair?” The divine vasus replied, “O great river! We have been severely cursed by the greatsouled Vashishtha for a minor transgression. Not seen by us, that supreme of rishis was engaged in his twilight
rites and in our folly we crossed him. In his anger, he cursed us that we would be born in a womb. It is not possible
to negate what the brahman-knowing one has said. Therefore, become a woman on earth and bear the vasus as
your sons. We cannot enter the womb of an impure woman.” Having been thus addressed, Ganga agreed and
asked, “Which supreme man will be your father?” The vasus replied, “In the world of men, a son will be born to
Pratipa. He will be King Shantanu, devoted to dharma, and he will be our father.” Ganga said, “O unblemished
gods! I was thinking exactly the same. I will do that which brings pleasure to him and also satisfy your wishes.”
The vasus replied, “O revered one who dwells in the three worlds!202 You must hurl your sons into the water as
soon as they are born, so that we are quickly freed and don’t suffer for a long time.” Ganga said, “I will do what
you wish. But so that my union with him is not completely fruitless, let one son remain with him.” The vasus
replied, “Each one of us will offer one-eighth of our respective energies. From that, a son will be born to you and
will live according to your desires. But he will have no children on earth. Therefore, this valorous son of yours will
remain without a son.” Making this agreement with Ganga, the vasus happily went away to the place where they
dwelt.’
92

Vaishampayana said, ‘King Pratipa was always devoted to the welfare of all beings. He spent many years in meditation, on the banks of the Ganga. Then Ganga assumed the form of a woman who was beautiful and had all the
qualities. She arose from the waters in this desirable form. The rajarshi was studying.

‘This divine and intelligent one with a beautiful face came and sat on his right thigh, which was like a shala tree.
Pratipa, lord of the earth, asked the intelligent one, “O fortunate one! What can I do to bring you pleasure? What is
your desire?” The lady said, “O king! O best of the Kurus! I desire you. I offer myself. Accept me and love me in
return. Those who are wise always consider evil the act of refusing a woman who is full of desire.” Pratipa replied,
“O beautiful one! Out of desire, I can never go to another man’s wife or to one who is not equal to me in varna. O
fortunate one! Know that this is the vow I have taken for the sake of dharma.” The lady said, “I am never undesirable. I am never one with whom union is forbidden. I am never malignant. I am a divine lady and supreme in beauty. O king! Love me, as I wish to love you.” Pratipa replied, “I must refrain from doing what brings you pleasure. I
have taken a vow and if I break it, dharma will bring about my destruction. O beautiful lady! You have seated
yourself on my right thigh. O timid one! That is the seat earmarked for daughters and daughters-in-law. The left is
the seat for the woman one ﬁnds pleasure with. But you have rejected it. O beautiful one! Therefore, I cannot satisfy desire with you. O fortunate one! I accept you for my son. Be my daughter-in-law. The left thigh is for the wife,
but you have not accepted that.” The lady said, “O one who is learned in dharma! Let it be as you say. Let me be
united with your son. Out of my love for you, I will love the famous Bharata lineage. Your dynasty is the refuge of
all the kings on earth. Even if I take 100 years, I will not be able to recount the qualities of this dynasty, whose
fame and righteousness is supreme. But he must not know my high birth. Nor must he ever question what I do.
Living with your son in this way, I will make him happy and bring about his welfare. Because of his sons, his
righteous conduct and his merits, your son will attain heaven.” O king! Having said this, she disappeared.
‘The king waited for his son to be born and for the promise to be fulﬁlled. O descendant of the Kuru lineage!
Meanwhile, Pratipa, bull among the Kshatriyas, performed austerities with his wife, so as to obtain a son. Though
they were old, a son was born to them and this son was Mahabhisha. He was known as Shantanu, because he was
born when his father had controlled his senses.203 Remebering that the eternal worlds can only be conquered
through one’s own deeds, Shantanu, supreme of the Kuru lineage, devoted himself to sacred conduct. When his
son Shantanu became a youth, Pratipa told him, “O Shantanu! Earlier, a lady had approached me for your welfare.
O son! If that divine and beautiful lady comes to you in secret and desires you so as to obtain offspring, you must
not question her about who she is and who she belongs to. O unblemished one! You must not question any of her
acts. I tell you that you must love her as she loves you.” Having thus commanded his son and instated him on the
throne, King Pratipa departed for the forest.
‘King Shantanu was intelligent and became a famous archer on earth. He loved hunting and spent a lot of time
in the forest. Once, that best of kings killed many deer and buffaloes. Wandering alone along the banks of the Ganga, he came to a place frequented by the siddhas and the charanas. One day, the king saw there a supreme woman,
dazzling in her beauty like the lotus-seated Shri204 herself. Her body was faultless and her teeth were beautiful.
She was adorned with divine ornaments. She was alone and she wore sheer garments that were as beautiful as the
ﬁlaments of a lotus. The king was astounded at the beauty of her form and the hair on his body stood up in rapture.
The lord of men gazed at her with his eyes, but was not satisﬁed. On seeing the radiant king move around, she also
felt love and affection for him and the wanton one wasn’t satisﬁed. The king then addressed her in a gentle voice.
“O beautiful one! O one with the slender waist! Are you from the race of gods, demons, gandharvas, apsaras, yakshas or pannagas, or are you human? You seem to be born of the gods. Whoever you are, please be my wife.”
Hearing these soft words from the smiling king, that unblemished one remembered the promise she had made to
the vasus. She spoke to the king, gladdening his heart with her words. “O lord of the earth! I will be your queen
and will obey your words. O king! But you must not interfere in my acts, regardless of whether they please or displease you. You must never try to stop me or speak to me harshly. O king! As long as you act in the way I have
asked you to, I will be with you. But I will certainly leave you whenever you try to stop me or speak to me
harshly.” The best of the Bharata lineage agreed. At that, the lady was delighted to have obtained that supreme of
kings as her husband.”
‘Having obtained her, Shantanu was also delighted. He pleasured with her as he desired and remembering the
promise, refrained from asking her anything. The lord of the earth was extremely pleased with her conduct, beauty,
generosity, qualities and secret art of love. The divine Ganga, who courses the three worlds, assumed a beautiful
and radiant human form and lived happily as an obedient wife to Shantanu, that lion among kings. He was as radi-

ant as the king of the gods himself and his love waxed, as his fortune did. She pleased the king with her skilled
love making, intelligence, coquetry and demeanour and the king loved her as much as she did. The king was so addicted to desire and the qualities of his supreme wife that many years, seasons and months passed by without him
being aware. When the lord of men thus united with her when desire seized them, eight sons were borne by her,
each resembling a god. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As soon as each son was born, one after another, she
ﬂung them into the waters of the Ganga, saying, “This is for your own good.” This did not please King Shantanu.
But the lord of the earth did not dare to utter a word, for fear of losing her.
‘When the eighth son was born and she seemed to be smiling, the king, who desired a son, miserably told her,
“Do not kill him. Who are you? Who do you belong to? Why do you kill your sons? As a murderer of your sons,
you are committing a great sin. O evil one! Do not commit sin. Desist.” Ganga replied, “Since you desire a son, I
will not kill this son. You will become the supreme father of a son. But following our agreement, my stay here has
come to an end. I am Ganga, the daughter of Jahnu and worshipped by large numbers of maharshis. I have lived
with you so far to accomplish the wishes of the gods. These were the eight vasus, immensely fortunate and immensely energetic gods. As a result of a curse imposed by Vashishtha, they had to be born in human form. There
was no better father than you on earth and no human mother in this world who could equal me. Therefore, I assumed human form to become their mother. By becoming the father of the eight vasus, you have conquered the
eternal worlds. My agreement with the divine vasus was that I should free them from their human birth as soon as
each was born. I have thus freed them from the curse imposed by the great-souled Apava.205 Be fortunate. I must
leave now. Rear this son. He will be rigid in his vows. My promise to the vasus that I would live with you is over.
Let this son, born from me, be known as Gangadatta.’206
93

‘Shantanu said, “Who was Apava? What evil act was committed by the vasus that they were all cursed to be born
in human wombs? What has this son Gangadatta done that he must now live among men? The vasus are lords of
all the worlds. O Jahnavi!207 Why were they born among men? Tell me everything.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having been thus addressed, the divine goddess Jahnavi Ganga addressed her husband
King Shantanu, bull among men.
‘Ganga said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Varuna once had a son—the sage Vashishtha, later famous
as Apava. His holy hermitage was along the side of Meru, the king of the mountains. It was populated with deer
and birds and was always covered with ﬂowers. O best of the Bharata lineage! Varuna’s son, supreme among those
who perform sacred deeds, performed austerities in that forest, which had a plentiful supply of tasty roots, fruit and
water. Daksha had a proud daughter named Surabhi. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Through Kashyapa, that
goddess gave birth to a cow for the welfare of that entire world. This supreme cow was capable of fulﬁlling every
desire. Varuna’s righteous son obtained this cow for the sake of performing sacriﬁces and the cow lived in that forest, populated by sages. Fearlessly, she grazed in those sacred and lovely woods. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Once, all the divine vasus, with Prithu at their head, came to visit that forest, frequented by the gods and the
devarshis. With their wives, they roamed in the forest and made love in its lovely mountains and woods. O you
who are as valorous as Vasava208 himself! A slender-waisted wife of one of the vasus saw the supreme cow,
which belonged to the sage Vashishtha and was capable of fulﬁlling every desire, roaming in the forest. She was
amazed at its conduct, power and riches and showed it to Dyou,209 who had eyes like those of a bull.
‘“The cow was well fed and yielded plenty of milk. It had a beautiful tail and handsome face. It had all the qualities and was supreme in its conduct. O lord of kings! O descendant of the Puru lineage! So great were its qualities
that the vasu’s wife showed it to the vasu. O you who are like the king of elephants! O you who are like Indra in
valour! Dyou saw that cow, with its beauty and qualities. O king! He then told the goddess, ‘O goddess with the
dark eyes! O one with the beautiful hips! O one with slender waist! This supreme cow belongs to the rishi who is
Varuna’s son. He is the owner of this supreme forest. A person who drinks this cow’s tasty milk will live for
10,000 years with undiminished youth.’ O supreme among kings! When that slender-waisted goddess of unblemished form heard these words, she told her husband, whose energy was radiant. ‘I have a friend in this world of

men and she is the daughter of a king. Her name is Jinavati and she is young and beautiful. She is the daughter of
rajarshi Ushinara, who is truthful and intelligent. This daughter is famous in the world of men because of the
wealth of her beauty. O immensely fortunate one! I wish to obtain this cow and its calf for her. O best of the gods!
O one who increases good deeds! Please bring them quickly. O one who grants pride! On drinking the milk, my
friend will be the only one in the world of men to be freed from age and disease. O immensely fortunate one! O
unblemished one! Please do this for me. There is no other pleasure that would please me more.’ Hearing the words
of the goddess, Dyou wished to please her and stole the cow with the help of Prithu and his other brothers. O king!
Instructed by his lotus-eyed wife, Dyou did not think about the great ascetic powers of the rishi who owned her. He
failed to consider that the stealing of the cow would lead to his downfall.
‘“In the evening, Varuna’s son returned to the hermitage with the fruit he had collected. He did not see the cow
and her calf in that supreme wood. Then the one blessed with the power of austerities looked for her in the forest.
But though he searched, the sage could not ﬁnd her. Through his divine sight, he then found that she had been
stolen by the vasus. His anger arose and he cursed the vasus. ‘Because the vasus have stolen my cow which yields
sweet milk and has a handsome tail, there is no doubt that they will all be born as men.’ O bull among the Bharata
lineage! Thus did the illustrious Apava, supreme among sages, curse the vasus in his anger. Having cursed them,
the illustrious one returned to his austerities. O king! Thus, in his wrath, did the one blessed with the power of austerities curse the eight vasus. The rishi was immensely powerful and knew the nature of the brahman. As soon as
they knew that they had been cursed by the rishi, the gods went to the hermitage of the great-souled one. O bull
among kings! The vasus tried to pacify the rishi. O tiger among men! But they failed to obtain the grace of Apava,
who was learned in all dharma and was supreme among rishis. The righteous sage said, ‘O Dhara! You and the
other vasus have been cursed. But you will all be freed from your curse within a year. But Dyou is the one whose
act has led to your being cursed by me. Because of his own deeds, he will have to live in the world of men for a
long time. Though uttered in anger, my words cannot amount to a falsehood. However, the great-souled one210
will not have offspring in the world of men. He will be devoted to dharma and will be skilled in the usage of all
weapons. He will be engaged in doing that which brings his father pleasure and he will forsake pleasure with
women.’ Having addressed all the vasus in this way, the great rishi went away. And all the vasus then came to me
together.
‘“O king! They craved a boon from me. ‘O Ganga! As soon as each one of us is born, you should yourself throw
us into the water.’ O supreme among kings! I agreed and acted accordingly, in order to free them from a life in the
world of men, a consequence of the curse. O best of kings! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! Dyou
alone will have to live in the world of men for a long time, because of the rishi’s curse.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having completed the account, the goddess immediately vanished. Taking her son with
her, she went away to wherever she wished to go. That son of Shantanu came to be known under two names—Devavrata and Gangeya. He surpassed Shantanu in all his qualities. With sorrow in his heart, Shantanu then returned
to his own capital. I will now recount for you Shantanu’s many qualities and the great fortune of this famous king,
who was from the Bharata lineage and whose illustrious history is known as the Mahabharata.’
94

Vaishampayana said, ‘King Shantanu was intelligent and was honoured by the gods and the rajarshis. He was devoted to dharma and was famous in all the worlds for being righteous and truthful. Shantanu, bull among men, always displayed self-control, generosity, forgiveness, forbearance, resoluteness, supreme energy and great nobility.
The king had all these qualities and was also skilled in dharma and artha. He was the protector of the Bharata lineage and all righteous people. His neck was like a conch shell, his shoulders were broad and his strength was like
that of a mad elephant. For him, dharma was superior to kama and artha. O bull among men! On seeing that he was
devoted to dharma and supreme in the practice of all forms of dharma, all the kings instated him as the king of
kings. With that lord of the Bharata lineage as their protector, all the kings on earth were freed from sorrow, fear
and anxiety and awoke every morning from sweet dreams. When the world was ruled by kings led by Shantanu, all
the varnas followed rules that served the cause of the brahman. Brahmanas were served by Kshatriyas, Kshatriyas
were served by Vaishyas. Devoted to Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, Shudras served the Vaishyas. Shantanu lived in

Hastinapura, the beautiful capital of the Kurus. He ruled over the entire earth, right up to the boundaries of the
oceans. He was devoted to truth and learned in dharma, an equal of the king of the gods. He attained great fortune
through the dharma of generosity and austerities. He was free of anger and hatred. He was as pleasant as Soma.211
He was as energetic as the sun and his speed was like that of Vayu. He was like Yama in anger and like the earth in
his patience. O king! When Shantanu ruled the earth, no animals, boars and birds suffered pointless death. Brahmana dharma was always followed in Shantanu’s kingdom. He treated all beings equally, without desire and anger.
Sacriﬁces were performed for the worship of gods, rishis and the ancestors. But no being was deprived of its life,
other than in accordance with dharma. The king was like a father to those who were miserable, to those who were
without a protector and to animals. During the reign of that best of the Kuru lineage, the king of kings, words were
embedded in truth and the mind was embedded in generosity and dharma.
‘Having pleasured with women for thirty-six years, the king retired to the forest. Shantanu’s son, the vasu who
was born as Ganga’s son and was now named Devavrata, was like him in beauty, conduct, behaviour and learning.
He was skilled in the usage of all weapons. Compared to other kings, he was mighty in strength, mighty in power,
mighty in valour and mighty as a charioteer.
‘Once, when he had shot a deer, King Shantanu followed it along the banks of the river Ganga. He saw that the
waters of the Bhagirathi had become shallow. On seeing this, Shantanu, bull among men, was concerned and wondered, “Why does this best of rivers not ﬂow the way it used to do earlier?” While trying to determine the reason,
the great-souled one saw a large youth who was beautiful and handsome of face. He was like the god
Purandara212 himself. He had divine weapons and a bow. Using his sharp arrows, he had stemmed the ﬂow of the
river Ganga. On witnessing this wonderful and superhuman feat of checking the Ganga’s course with arrows, the
king was astounded. Shantanu had seen his son only once, at the time of birth. Therefore, despite being wise, he
did not have sufﬁcient recollection to recognize his own son. As soon as he saw his father, the youth created delusion through his powers and instantly disappeared.
‘When King Shantanu witnessed this, he suspected the youth to be his own son and addressed Ganga, “Show
him to me.” Ganga appeared in a supremely beautiful form and showed him the ornamented youth, holding him by
the right hand. Though he had known her before, Shantanu failed to recognize her, since she was adorned with ornaments and wore a garment that gathered no dust.
‘Ganga said, “O king! O tiger among men! This is the eighth son who you fathered on me. Take him home. He
has studied the Vedas and the Vedangas from Vashishtha himself. This valorous one is skilled in the usage of all
weapons and a supreme archer. In battle, he is like the king of the gods himself. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The gods always revere him and so do the asuras. He has all the knowledge of the Vedas that Ushanas213
possesses. This great-souled and strong-armed son of yours is also well versed in all the knowledge of the sacred
texts and their branches possessed by Angirasa’s son,214who is worshipped by the gods and the asuras. He also
has the knowledge about weapons possessed by the powerful and invincible rishi who is the son of Jamadagni.215
O king! Your son is a great archer and also has knowledge about dharma and artha, as practised by kings. O brave
one! I am myself giving you my brave son. Take him home.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having been thus addressed by Ganga, Shantanu accepted his son, who was as radiant as
the sun, and returned to his capital. When he reached his city, which was like Purandara’s216 city, the descendant
of the Puru lineage was happy and thought that all his desires had been fulﬁlled. He instated his great-souled son,
who had all the qualities, as the heir apparent. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The immensely famous son won,
through his conduct, the affection of everyone in the Puru lineage, his father and the kingdom. Thus the lord of the
earth, who was unlimited in valour, enjoyed himself with his son for four years.
‘One day, the lord of the earth went to a forest that was along the Yamuna River. While he was wandering
around, he inhaled an extremely sweet fragrance that came from an unknown direction. Searching for the cause, he
saw a lady from the ﬁsherman tribe who was as beautiful as a goddess. On seeing that dark-eyed lady, he asked,
“O timid one! Who are you and whose are you? What are you doing here?” She replied, “O great-souled one! I belong to the ﬁshermen tribe. Following the dharma prescribed for us, I ply a boat on the instructions of my father,
who is the king of the ﬁshermen.” Having seen her beauty and sweetness, equal to that of a goddess, and inhaled

her fragrance, King Shantanu desired the lady from the ﬁshermen tribe. He went to her father and asked him to
give her to him. The king of the ﬁshermen told the king, “From the day she was born, I have known that I will
have to give my beautiful daughter to someone. O lord of men! However, there was a desire in my heart and let me
tell you that now. O unblemished one! If you desire to take her as your wife in accordance with dharma, you must
truthfully make a pledge to me, because I know that you are true to your word. O king! If you make that pledge, I
will give my daughter to you, because I will never be able to ﬁnd a husband for her who is like you.” Shantanu
replied, “O ﬁsherman! It is only after hearing what you ask for, that I can say whether I can or cannot. If it is something that can be granted, I will do so, but not otherwise.” The ﬁsherman replied, “O lord of the earth! The son
who will be born from her will be instated king of the earth after you and no one else.” O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Though his body burnt with the sharp pains of desire, Shantanu was unwilling to grant this boon to the
ﬁsherman. The lord of the earth returned to Hastinapura, thinking about the daughter of the ﬁsherman and with his
heart burdened by sorrow.
‘One day, his son Devavrata came to Shantanu when he was thus meditating and thinking sorrowfully, and told
his father, “Everything is peaceful. All the kings obey you. Why are you then always sorrowful, as if in pain? O
king! Immersed in your own thoughts, you do not utter a word.” Having been thus addressed by his son, Shantanu
replied, “Wihout a doubt, I am always meditating, just as you say. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You are
the only son in this great lineage of ours. O son! I sorrow because of the impermanence of this mortal life. O son of
Ganga! If anything happens to you, this lineage of ours will cease to exist. There is no doubt that you are superior
to 100 great sons. Therefore, without reason, I do not wish to have another wife. I only wish that you are fortunate,
fulﬁl your desires and have sons so that our lineage survives. However, those who are learned in dharma say that
having one son is like having no son at all. Agnihotra,217 the three Vedas218 and sacriﬁces that involve a lot of
alms are together not worth one-sixteenth part of having a son. This is true of man and all beings. O immensely
wise one! On this, I have no doubts. That is what the eternal and supreme three219 and Puranas say. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! You are brave, never forgive and are always armed. O unblemished one! There is every
possibility of your being killed through weapons. If that happens, I worry about how I can possibly ﬁnd peace. O
son! Now I have completely told you the reason for my sorrow.” Having heard this complete reason, the immensely intelligent Devavrata began to think about this. He then went and asked an old adviser, who was always concerned about his father’s welfare. He asked him the reason for his father’s misery. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On being asked by the foremost among the Kurus, he told him truthfully about the boon that had been asked
for the lady.
‘Then Devavrata took many old Kshatriyas with him and went to see the king of the ﬁshermen. On his father’s
behalf, he himself asked for the daughter. The ﬁsherman received him and paid him homage, in accordance with
what was prescribed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When he was seated in the king’s assembly, he said, “O
bull among men! You are an adequate protector for Shantanu. You are his son and he is the best of fathers. How
can I say anything against your words? Even if the bride’s father is Shatakratu220 himself, he cannot but be pained
at having to reject such a honourable and desirable union of wombs. The famous Satyavati was born from the seed
of an arya who is equal in qualities to you. He has often told me about your father’s achievements. He has told me
that among all the kings, he is most suited to marry Satyavati. In earlier times, I have refused the famous devarshi
Asita, when that supreme of rishis came and asked for Satyavati. O bull among the Bharatas! However, as the
girl’s father, there is sometime I must say. There is one strong objection that I can see. O scourge of your enemies!
Whoever is your rival, gandharva or asura, will not live happily if you are angry. O king! This is the only fault with
the marriage and no other. O scourge of your enemies! O fortunate one! Know that this is all I have to say in the
matter of giving and taking.” O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having heard this, for the sake of his father and
in the hearing of the kings, Ganga’s son uttered the following words in reply. “O supreme among truthful ones!
Listen to the truthful vow I take today. The man has not been born, nor will ever be born, who will dare to utter
words like these. I will do what you have asked for. The son who will be born from her will be the king.” O bull
among the Bharata lineage! At these words, the ﬁsherman spoke again, desiring to accomplish the difﬁcult task of
obtaining the kingdom. “O lord! You are an adequate protector for the radiant Shantanu and also for the lady. Your

heart is in dharma and you are also lord of the act of granting.221 O equable one! However, there is something else
that needs to be said and done. Listen to me. O conqueror of enemies! This must be said for the welfare of daughters. O you who are devoted to truth and all dharma! The vow that you have taken, in the midst of all these kings,
for Satyavati’s sake is worthy of you. O mighty-armed one! I have no doubt that it will never be violated by you.
But I do have great doubts about the sons who will be born to you.” O king! Knowing what was on his mind, the
one who was devoted to truth and all dharma wished to do that which would bring pleasure to his father and made
a promise. “O king of ﬁshermen! O supreme among kings! Listen to these words of mine. In front of these lords of
the earth, hear what I have to say for my father’s sake. O lord of men! I have already relinquished my right to the
kingdom. I will not destroy the doubt that has arisen about my sons. O ﬁsherman! From today, I take the vow of
brahmacharya. Even if I die without a son, I will attain the eternal world of heaven.” When he heard these words,
the ﬁsherman’s body hair rose up in delight.
‘He told the one who had dharma in his heart222 that he was prepared to give. From the sky, apsaras, gods and
rishis rained down ﬂowers and said, “He is Bhishma.”223 For his father’s sake, he then told the famous one, “O
mother! Please ascend this chariot and let us go to our own home.” Having uttered these words, Bhishma made the
beautiful lady ascend the chariot and, arriving in Hastinapura, he told Shantanu all that had happened. Then all the
kings praised him for his difﬁcult feat and jointly and individually said, “He is Bhishma.” Witnessing the difﬁcult
feat accomplished by Bhishma, his father Shantanu was pleased and granted him the boon that he would only die
when he himself so willed.’
95

Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! After the marriage was over, King Shantanu instated the beautiful lady in his own
house. Then Satyavati bore Shantanu a wise and brave son named Chitrangada. He was superior to all men in valour. Then Satyavati again bore the powerful king another son. He was named Vichitravirya and he became a great
archer. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Before he could become an adult, the wise King Shantanu succumbed to
the law of destiny. Bhishma was always obedient to Satyavati. When Shantanu went to heaven, he instated Chitrangada, chastiser of enemies, on the throne. Through his valour, Chitrangada defeated all the kings. He could not
ﬁnd anyone equal to himself among men.
‘When he had defeated all gods, men and asuras, the powerful king of the gandharvas, who bore the same name
as him,224 came to him. On the ﬁelds of Kurukshetra, a great battle took place between these two powerful warriors, the king of the gandharvas and the king of the Kurus. On the banks of the river Hiranyavati, the battle went
on for three years. In that great duel, characterized by a shower of weapons, the gandharva used superior powers of
delusion225 to kill the supreme among the Kurus. Having killed Chitrangada, the best of the Kurus and one who
yielded wonderful bows and arrows, the gandharva went to heaven.
‘O king! When that tiger among men, the one with a lot of energy, was killed, Shantanu’s son Bhishma performed the funeral rites. Then the mighty-armed one instated Vichitravirya as the king of the Kuru kingdom,
though he was still a child and hadn’t attained youth. Vichitravirya always listened to Bhishma’s words and as a
king, ruled the kingdom of his father and grandfather. In accordance with dharma, the king paid homage to Shantanu’s son Bhishma, who was skilled in dharma and the sacred texts. In return, Bhishma also protected him.’
96

Vaishampayana said, ‘O, unblemished one! With Chitrangada killed when his brother was still a child, Bhishma
ruled over the kingdom. He was always obedient to Satyavati. When he saw that his brother had become an adult,
Bhishma, that supreme among intelligent ones, thought about marrying Vichitravirya off. O king! Bhishma heard
that the three daughters of the king of Kashi, all equal to apsaras, would be married through a svayamvara. With
his mother’s permission, the best of charioteers wore his armour and with a single chariot, set out for the city of
Varanasi.
‘There Shantanu’s son Bhishma saw the three ladies and the prosperous kings who had come from all directions.
O king! When the names of all the thousands of kings were being recounted, the lord Bhishma himself arrived

there. O king! Raising the ladies onto his chariot, Bhishma, supreme among warriors, addressed the kings in a
voice that was like thunder. “The learned have said that daughters may be given to virtuous men who have been
invited, with ornaments, depending on one’s power. Others can give after accepting riches,226 others after accepting a couple of cows. Some give their daughters after accepting a price. Others take them away by force. Some
women are taken involuntarily. Others are married with their consent. This is the eighth form of marriage, svayamvara, which learned ones remember and kings praise.227 However, those who know dharma have said that the
bride who is taken away by force is the best. O rulers of the earth! I am therefore taking these maidens away by
force. Use all your strength to try and defeat me, or be defeated instead. O lords of the earth! I am standing here,
resolved to do battle.” Challenging the kings and the king of Kashi in this way, the valorous Kourava raised the
maidens onto his chariot and inviting them to ﬁght, swiftly drove off with the maidens.
‘All the kings arose in great anger, slapping their arms and grinding their teeth. They quickly cast off their ornmaments and donned their armour, creating a great uproar. O Janamejaya! The radiant ornaments and armour resembled shooting stars. Their brows were contracted and their faces red with anger. The ornaments and armour
dangled, as the brave ones dashed towards the chariots the charioteers had brought, yoked with excellent horses.
Armed with all kinds of weapons, they ascended the chariots and went in pursuit of the Kourava, who was in a
solitary chariot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then the hair-raising battle between the one and the many
occurred. The kings hurled 10,000 arrows at him at the same time. However, before they could reach, Bhishma
sliced all of them off. Then all the kings surrounded him from all directions and rained arrows down on him, like a
mountain being showered with clouds of rain. But he stopped all the showers of arrows with his own and pierced
each of the kings with three arrows. Such was the charioteer’s skill in defending himself in battle, as compared to
that of other men, that his enemies applauded him. Having defeated all of them in battle, the one who was supreme
among those who were skilled in arms, the descendant of the Bharata lineage, left with maidens for the land of the
Bharatas.
‘Then, in the battle, the maharatha King Shalva, whose spirit was indomitable, struck Shantanu’s son Bhishma
from the back. He was like a bull elephant that was the leader of its herd, using its tusks to attack a rival from the
rear, when it was mounting a cow elephant in heat. The king told Bhishma, “Stay, stay.” The mighty-armed King
Shalva was driven by his anger. Bhishma, tiger among men and destroyer of enemy armies, was angered at these
words. Blazing like a ﬁre that was without smoke, he followed the dharma of Kshatriyas and without any signs of
fear, the maharatha turned his chariot towards Shalva. On seeing him turn, all the other kings wished to witness the
duel between Bhishma and Shalva. Like two powerful and raging bulls ﬁghting over a cow in heat, the two turned
on each other with great strength. King Shalva, best among men, covered Shantanu’s son Bhishma with hundreds
and thousands of swift arrows. On seeing that Shalva had ﬁrst covered Bhishma, the assembled kings were astounded and exclaimed, “Blessed, blessed.” All the kings saw his dexterity in battle and delightedly applauded
King Shalva. Hearing the shouts of the Kshatriyas, Shantanu’s son Bhishma, the conqueror of hostile cities, was
incensed and cried, “Stay, stay.” He angrily commanded his charioteer, “Drive up to that king. I will instantly kill
him, the way the king of birds228 kills a snake.” O lord of men! The Kourava then attached the varuna weapon to
his bow and used it to wound King Shalva’s four horses. O tiger among men! The Kourava used his weapons to
fend off all of King Shalva’s weapons and used a single arrow to kill his charioteer and with another weapon, he
killed the excellent horses. For the sake of the maidens, Shantanu’s son Bhishma defeated that supreme among
kings, but let him off with his life. O bull among the Bharatas! Thereupon, Shalva left for his own city. O conqueror of enemy cities! The kings who had come to witness the svayamvara also departed for their own kingdoms.
‘Bhishma, supreme among those who wielded arms, thus won the maidens and left for Hastinapura, where the
king of the Kouravas229 was. O king! Within a short time, the valorous one who killed innumerable men in battle
but was himself never hurt, passed many forests, rivers and mountains with trees in them. The great-souled son of
the one who goes into the ocean230 took care of the daughters of the king of Kashi like daughters-in-law, younger
sisters or daughters and brought them to the land of Kuru. Bhishma had brought the ones who had all the qualities
by force and gave them to his younger brother Vichitravirya. The one who was learned in dharma accomplished

this superhuman deed in accordance with dharma and began to make arrangements for his brother Vichitravirya’s
marriage, following the consultation with Satyavati.
‘When Bhishma was preparing for the wedding, the eldest daughter of the king of Kashi, one who was devoted
to the truth, came and told him, “I have earlier chosen the king of Soubha231 as my husband. Earlier, he has also
accepted me and this is my father’s desire too. At the svayamvara, I would have chosen Shalva as my husband.
You know dharma well. Now knowing this, decide what the course of dharma entails.” At these words of the maiden, spoken in an assembly of Brahmanas, the brave Bhishma began to think about what should be done. After consulting the Brahmanas, who were learned in the Vedas, the one who had knowledge about dharma, gave permission to Amba, the eldest daughter of the king of Kashi, to leave. In accordance with the prescribed rites, he then
gave the two others, Ambika and Ambalika, in marriage to his younger brother Vichitravirya.
‘Vichitravirya had dharma in his soul. But when he had accepted their hands, since he was proud of his beauty
and youth, desire took over his soul. They were tall. Their heads were covered with blue-black hair that was
curled. Their nails were red and pointed. Their breasts and hips were heavy. They felt they had obtained a husband
who was their equal in beauty and the fortunate ones worshipped Vichitravirya. He matched the Ashvins in beauty
and was the equal of the gods in his prowess. He was capable of stirring the hearts of all women. The lord of the
earth pleasured with his wives for seven years. Though young, he was then attacked by consumption. His friends
consulted physicians to try and ﬁnd a cure. But like the setting sun, the Kourava went to Yama’s abode. In accordance with Satyavati’s wishes, Bhishma, together with the priests and the chiefs among the Kurus, performed the
funeral rites for King Vichitravirya.’
97

Vaishampayana said, ‘Satyavati was miserable and unfortunate and grieved over her son. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! With her daughters-in-law, she performed the funeral rites for her son. Then the illustrious one
turned her mind to dharma and the preservation of the paternal and maternal lineages. The immensely fortunate
one told Ganga’s son, “The perpetuation of Shantanu’s dharma, the lineage and fame of the Kuru dynasty, the
deeds of progeny and the offering of oblations to ancestors is now vested in you. Just as the attainment of heaven
is certain when one performs good deeds, just as a long life is certain when it is based on truth, it is certain that
dharma cannot be separated from you. You know dharma and its parts. Dharma is established in you. You are
learned in all the sacred texts, the Vedas and the Vedangas. In preserving the customs and virtue of the family and
in deciding what should be done in times of distress, you are like Shukra or Angirasa’s son.232 O supreme among
those who hold up dharma! Therefore, I am depending on you. I will ask you to perform an act. When you have
heard it, please do it. O bull among men! My valorous son was your brother and you loved him a lot. He has ascended to heaven, though but a child. Your brother’s queens are the fortunate daughters of the king of Kashi and
they possess youth and beauty. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They yearn for sons. O immensely fortunate
one! Therefore, so that the lineage continues, beget offspring on them. At my request, perform this act of dharma.
Instate yourself on the throne and rule over the kingdom of the Bharatas. In accordance with dharma, take a wife
and do not immerse your ancestors in hell.” The conqueror of enemies was thus addressed by his mother and his
friends.
‘But the one who followed dharma replied in accordance with dharma. “O mother! What you have said is certainly sanctioned by supreme dharma. But for the sake of the kingdom, you know about the vow I have taken
about not having offspring. O Satyavati! You also know about the price that had to be paid for you and about the
occurrence thereafter. I will again repeat the truthful pledge that I then took. I can give up the three worlds. I can
also renounce the kingdom of the gods, or anything that is greater than both of these. But I can never go back on
the truth. The earth can give up its fragrances, the water can give up its juices, light can give up its diverse forms,
wind can give up its sense of touch, the sun can give up its radiance, the smoke-crested ﬂame can give up its heat,
the sky can give up its sounds, the moon can give up its cool rays, the slayer of Vritra233 can give up his valour,
the god of dharma can give up dharma, but I can never give up the truth.” Having been thus addressed by her son,
who was endowed with great energy, the mother Satyavati then told Bhishma, “I know that you are always estab-

lished in the truth and that truth is your strength. If you wish, you can create another three worlds with your own
energy. I know that the vow of truth you took was for my sake. But you know the calamity that has now arisen and
you know about dharma at such times. Also remember the duty to your ancestors. O one who is never defeated!
Act in a way that dharma is not destroyed and our lineage is not broken. Do what doesn’t make our friends grieve.”
Having been thus repeatedly addressed by his miserable mother, who was grieving for her son, in words that represented a deviation from dharma, Bhishma again said, “O queen! Look at dharma. Otherwise, you will bring all of
us to ruin. The norms of dharma never praise a deviation from the truth by Kshatriyas. O queen! In order to prevent Shantanu’s lineage from becoming extinct, I will tell you the eternal dharma of Kshatriyas. Hearing this, after
consulting priests and those wise ones who know about the dharma that should be followed in time of calamities,
determine what is best for the welfare of the world.”’
98

‘Bhishma said, “Jamadagni’s son Rama234 was angry when his father was killed and in his anger, the immensely
illustrious one killed the king of the Haihayas.235 He sliced off Arjuna’s 1000 arms. Then he again took up his
bow to conquer the world. Using his wonderful weapons, the great-souled descendant of Bhargava used his arrows
to exterminate Kshatriyas from the world twenty-one times. Then Kshatriya women everywhere had offspring
through Brahmanas who were self-controlled. The Vedas clearly say that a son so born belongs to the one who accepted the hand.236 With dharma in their minds, they united with the Brahmanas. The world has thus seen the
resurgence of the Kshatriyas.
‘“In earlier times, there was a famous and wise rishi named Utathya. His wife was named Mamata and he loved
her dearly. Utathya’s younger brother was the immensely energetic Brihaspati, the priest of the gods. He desired
Mamata and sought to unite with her. Mamata told her brother-in-law, who was most eloquent in speech, ‘I am
pregnant through your older brother. Therefore, desist. O illustrious Brihaspati! Utathya’s son is in my womb and
has studied the Vedas and the Vedangas there. Your semen is infallible and, therefore, this is not possible. Do not
desire me today.’ At these words, the immensely energetic Brihaspati could not suppress his desire, though he had
achieved self-control. The desiring one united with her, though she did not desire him in return. When he spilt his
semen, the embryo inside the womb said, ‘O father! There is no room inside for two of us. I was here ﬁrst and you
have unnecessarily wasted your semen.’ At this, the illustrious rishi Brihaspati was angry and cursed Utathya’s
son, who was in the womb. ‘You have spoken at a time that all beings crave for. Therefore, you will enter a long
period of darkness.’ From this curse was born the rishi Dirghatama.237 He was Brihaspati’s equal in great deeds
and great energy. To extend Utathya’s lineage, the famous rishi had sons like Goutama and others, all immensely
famous.
‘“But Goutama and the other sons were overcome by greed and delusion. They tied him to wood and threw him
into the waters of the Ganga. ‘This man238 is blind and old. Why should we support him?’ Thinking in this way,
the cruel ones returned home. O king! The rishi then ﬂoated along the river, blindly passing many kingdoms on the
raft. One day, a king named Bali, who was learned in all aspects of dharma, had come to the water and saw him
ﬂoating along in the current. O bull among men!239 The righteous Bali found his strength in truth. He knew who
he was and grasped him, so that he could obtain sons. He said, ‘O illustrious one! Honour me. I have to obtain sons
through my wife. Therefore, father sons who are knowledgeable in dharma and artha.’ Thus addressed, the energetic rishi agreed. The king then sent his wife Sudeshna to him. But knowing that he was old and blind, the queen
did not go to him. Instead, she demeaned him and sent her ignorant Shudra nurse. The righteous rishi then fathered
eleven sons on the Shudra woman, the ﬁrst of whom was named Kakshivat. When he saw Kakshivat and all the
other sons studying, the valorous king was delighted and told the rishi, ‘These are mine.’ ‘No,’ said the maharshi
and continued, ‘I have fathered Kakshivat and the others on a Shudra woman. Your queen Sudeshna discovered
that I was blind and old. In her folly, she insulted me and sent her Shudra nurse to me.’ Bali then paciﬁed that
supreme of rishis and again sent his wife Sudeshna to him. Dirghatama felt the queen’s limbs and told her, ‘You
will have a powerful son who will be devoted to the truth.’ Thus the rajarshi Anga was born from Sudeshna. In this

way, many Kshatriyas who were great archers were born from Brahmanas. They were supremely learned in dharma, valorous and had great strength. O mother! Having heard this, you should do as you desire.”’
99

‘Bhishma said, “O mother! Listen to me as I again tell you how the Bharata dynasty can be certainly extended
through sons. Let a Brahmana with all the qualities be invited. Let him father sons on Vichitravirya’s ﬁeld.”’240
Vaishampayana said, ‘Satyavati then spoke to Bhishma, in a smiling and bashful voice. “O mighty-armed descendant of the Bharata lineage! You have spoken the truth. Because I have conﬁdence in you, I will now say what
needs to be done to continue the lineage. Learned as you are about what dharma permits in times of distress, you
will not be able to reject it. You are the dharma of our dynasty, you are truth, and you are its supreme recourse.
Therefore, hear what I have to say and then act accordingly. My father was a righteous man and for the sake of
dharma, he maintained a boat. In the prime of my youth, I once plied that boat. The supreme rishi Parashara, greatest among those who know dharma, came to the boat because he wanted to cross the river Yamuna. When I was
taking him across the river, the best of sages felt desire for me. He approached me and paciﬁed me in gentle words.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I was scared of his curse and I was also frightened of my father. I could not
refuse him. Therefore, I obtained a boon from him, one that is difﬁcult to get. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
I was a young girl and he overcame me with his energy in the boat. But he enveloped the world with a dense fog.
Earlier, a foul smell of ﬁsh used to come from my body. But the sage removed that and gave me this divine fragrance. Then the sage told me that once I had delivered my son on an island in the river, I would once again become a virgin. Thus was born the great rishi famous as Dvaipayana, Parashara’s son. He is a great yogi and was
born to me while I was still a virgin. That illustrious rishi has used the power of his austerities to divide the Vedas
into four parts. He is known in all the worlds as Vyasa.241 Because he is dark, he is also known as Krishna. He is
always devoted to the truth, has destroyed his sins and is an ascetic who is free from all passion. Asked by me and
also asked by you, that immeasurably radiant one will surely agree to father excellent sons on your brother’s ﬁeld.
He has told me to think of him whenever a task has to be accomplished. O mighty-armed Bhishma! If you so desire, I will think of him now. O Bhishma! If you are willing, I am sure the great ascetic will father sons in Vichitravirya’s ﬁeld.” When the maharshi’s name was mentioned, Bhishma joined his hands and said, “He who knows
the three objectives of dharma, artha and kama and takes a decision after weighing how artha leads to more artha,
dharma leads to more dharma and kama leads to more kama, singly and jointly, he is truly wise. What you have
said is in line with dharma and is also for the welfare of our lineage. It is the best course and I approve.” O descendant of the Kuru lineage! When Bhishma approved, Kali242 thought of the sage Krishna Dvaipayana.
‘The wise one was then busy interpreting the Vedas. When he learnt that his mother was thinking about him, he
appeared at once. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! She welcomed her son in accordance with the proper rites.
Then she embraced him with her arms and bathed him with her tears, since the daughter of the ﬁshermen tribe had
seen her son after a long time. On seeing her weep, maharshi Vyasa, who was her eldest son, washed her face with
water and paid homage. He said, “I have come to accomplish the task you desire. You know the ways of dharma.
Therefore, tell me what you wish me to do and I will do what pleases you.” The priest then worshipped that
supreme among rishis and welcomed him with the prescribed mantras.
‘When he was seated, his mother asked him about his welfare. After making the usual inquiries, Satyavati
looked at his face and said, “O wise one! There is no doubt that sons are born from both the father and the mother.
There is no doubt that they are their father’s property as much as they are their mother’s. According to destiny, you
are my oldest son. O brahmarshi! In that way, Vichitravirya is my youngest. Therefore, just as Bhishma is Vichitravirya’s brother on the father’s side, you are his brother on the mother’s side. This is my view and I do not know
what yours is. Truth provides valour to Shantanu’s son and he is devoted to the truth. For the sake of that, he is
mentally unwilling to beget offspring or rule over the kingdom. O unblemished one! Out of respect for your brother, for the sake of preserving Shantanu’s lineage, to keep Bhishma’s request and mine, out of compassion for all
beings and to protect everyone, without any cruelty in your heart, do what I am asking you to do. Your younger
brother has left two wives who are as beautiful as goddesses. They are in the full bloom of youth and beauty and

desire to have sons, in accordance with dharma. O son! Therefore, beget sons who are worthy of carrying forward
our lineage on them. You alone are worthy.” Vyasa replied, “O Satyavati! You know dharma, in this world and the
next. Your mind is always ﬁxed on dharma and in furthering the cause of dharma. With dharma as the objective, I
will do what you are commanding me to do. This is an eternal practice. For my brother, I will produce sons who
are the likes of Mitra and Varuna. Let the queens observe the vow I indicate for one year. They will then be puriﬁed. No woman can unite with me without having observed a rigid vow.” Satyavati said, “Take steps so that the
queens can conceive immediately. The gods do not shower rain in a country that is without a king. O lord! How
can a country that has no king be protected? Therefore, let the conception take place and Bhishma will protect the
wombs.” Vyasa replied, “If I have to produce a son for my brother quickly and before the appointed time, they
must observe the supreme vow that they will have to tolerate my ugliness. If Kousalya243 can bear my smell, my
form, my attire and my body, she wil conceive an excellent son today.” Having uttered these words and pending
the time of union, the hermit disappeared.
‘The queen then went and met her daughters-in-law in private and told them what was in accordance with dharma and artha and for the sake of welfare. “O Kousalya! Listen to what I have to say. This is in accordance with
dharma. On account of my misfortune, the Bharata lineage is about to become extinct. On seeing my misery at the
extinction of his paternal lineage, the wise Bhishma has advised me about what should be done to preserve the dynasty and protect dharma. O daughter! But whether it can be done, depends on you. Accomplish it and revive the
lost lineage of the Bharatas. O one with the beautiful hips! Bear a son who is equal in radiance to the king of the
gods. He will bear the heavy burden of our lineage and this ancestral kingdom.” She somehow managed to obtain
the concurrence of that virtuous one to the proposal, since this was in accordance with dharma. Then she feasted
Brahmanas, devarshis and guests.’

100

Vaishampayana said, ‘At the time of her season, when her daughter-in-law had puriﬁed herself through a bath,
Satyavati led her to the bed and softly told her, “O Kousalya! Your brother-in-law will come to you in the middle
of the night and enter you. Wait for him and do not fall asleep.” Having heard her mother-in-law’s words, the beautiful one lay on the bed in her bedroom and began to think that it would be Bhishma or one of the other chiefs of
the Kuru lineage. The rishi who was devoted to the truth had ﬁrst been appointed for Ambika. He entered her bed
while the light from the lamps was still burning. On seeing Krishna’s dark visage, matted hair that was the colour
of copper, ﬁery eyes and tawny-brown beard, the queen closed her eyes. But in order to do what his mother desired, he united with her. However, because of fear, the daughter of the king of Kashi was unable to open her eyes.
When he emerged, the mother asked the son, “Will she give birth to a son with all the qualities?” Hearing his
mother’s words, the supremely intelligent and self-controlled Vyasa replied, following what was destined, “The
son will have the strength of 10,000 elephants. He will be learned and supreme among rajarshis. He will be immensely fortunate, immensely brave and immensely wise. He will have 100 powerful sons. But because of lack of
quality on the part of his mother, he will be blind.” Hearing these words, the mother told the son, “O one blessed
with the power of austerities! How can a blind one be worthy to be king of the Kuru dynasty? How can he protect
the lineage of your relatives and extend the lineage of his ancestors? Therefore, grant a second son to the Kuru lineage.” Having promised this, the powerful ascetic departed. In due course, Kousalya gave birth to a son who was
blind.
‘Once again, the queen spoke to the other daughter-in-law. As before, the unblemished Satya244 summoned the
rishi. In accordance with what he had promised, the maharshi went to Ambalika in the same way. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! On seeing him, she was distressed and turned pale. O king! On seeing her frightened, and pale
of complexion, Satyavati’s son Vyasa told her, “Since you turned pale on seeing my ugliness, you will have a son
who will be pale in complexion. O one with the beautiful face. His name will also be Pandu.”245 Having uttered
these words, the illustrious and supreme rishi emerged. On seeing him emerge, Satya spoke to her son and he again
told her that the son would be pale. On hearing this, the mother asked for another son and the maharshi agreed to
his mother’s request. When the time came, the queen gave birth to a son who was pale in complexion. But he was
handsome and radiant and bore all the auspicious marks. Later, this son gave birth to the ﬁve Pandavas, who were
great archers.
‘When the eldest daughter-in-law was again in season, she246 again asked her to go. But the one who was as
beautiful as a goddess, remembered the form and odour of the maharshi and out of fear did not do what the queen
asked her to do. With her ornaments, the daughter of the king of Kashi bedecked a maid servant, making her look
like a beautiful apsara and sent her to Krishna. When the rishi arrived, she arose and paid him her respects. Having
respectfully served him, she united with him with his permission. His desire satisﬁed, the rishi was greatly pleased
with her. Having spent all night with her and found pleasure, the maharshi arose to leave and told her, “O fortunate
one! You will no longer be a servant. The child in your womb will be devoted to dharma and in all the worlds, he
will be supreme among those who are intelligent.” This son of Krishna Dvaipayana was known by the name of
Vidura, the extremely wise brother of Dhritarashtra and Pandu. As a consequence of the curse imposed by the
great-souled Mandavya, Dharma himself was born as Vidura and he was learned in all principles and free from
anger and desire. Freed from the debt he had contracted because of dharma, when he met his mother, he again told
her that the woman had conceived. He then vanished. Thus sons were born in Vichitravirya’s ﬁeld through Dvaipayana. They were as radiant as children of the gods and extended the Kuru lineage.’
101

Janamejaya asked, ‘What did Dharma do to warrant a curse? Who was the brahmarshi because of whose curse he
was born in the womb of a Shudra woman?’
Vaishampayana said, ‘There was a Brahmana who was known by the name of Mandavya. He had perseverance
and was learned in dharma. He was devoted to the truth and established in austerities. This great ascetic used to

seat himself at the foot of a tree near the entrance to his hermitage. While observing a vow of silence, the great
yogi raised his hands up high and meditated. He passed a long time in these austerities.
‘One day, some robbers came to his hermitage with stolen property. O bull among the Bharata lineage! They
were pursued by many guards. O supreme of the Kuru lineage! The robbers hid their stolen property there. Before
the guards came, they also hid themselves in fear. No sooner had they done this, than the army of guards chasing
the robbers arrived and saw the rishi. O king! They asked the one blessed with the power of austerities, but he did
not move from his posture. “O supreme among Brahmanas! In what direction did the robbers go? O Brahmana!
Tell us, so that we can quickly pursue them.” O king! Having been thus addressed by the guards, the one blessed
with the power of austerities did not utter a single word in reply, good or bad. At that, the king’s ofﬁcers began to
search the hermitage and found the robbers and the stolen property hidden there. The guards then began to suspect
the hermit himself. Together with the robbers, they seized him and brought him before the king. Along with the
robbers, the king sentenced him to death. In their ignorance, the guards impaled the great ascetic on a stake. Having impaled the sage on the stake, the guards then returned to the king with the stolen property they had recovered.
‘The righteous Brahmana and rishi remained on the stake for a long time. But though he had no food, the rishi
did not die. O scorcher of enemies! The great-souled one continued to perform austerities on the tip of the stake
and summoned the supreme sages there. They were extremely aggrieved on ﬁnding him there and in the night returned in the form of vultures from every direction. Having shown themselves in their own forms, they then asked
that supreme of Brahmanas, “O Brahmana! We wish to know about the sin you have committed.” At that, the tiger
among sages told the ones who were blessed with the power of austerities, “Whom shall I blame? There is no one
but me who has committed a sin.” The king heard that he was a rishi and went there with all his advisers. He paciﬁed the supreme rishi who was impaled on the tip of the stake. “O supreme among rishis! I have caused you harm
through delusion and ignorance. I seek your blessings. Please do not be angry with me.” On hearing the king’s
words, the sage was paciﬁed. Having thus paciﬁed him, the king then had him lowered from the stake. When he
had lowered him, he tried to draw out the tip of the stake, but was unsuccessful. So he cut it off at the end. In that
stage, with the stake still inside him, the sage continued to practise austerities and attained worlds that were difﬁcult to obtain. Therefore, he was known as Animandavya247 in the world.
‘One day, the Brahmana, who was well-versed in dharma and knew the supreme truth, went to the abode of
Dharma. On seeing the illustrious Dharma seated, he asked him, “In my ignorance, what sin have I committed?
Why have I suffered from such punishment? Tell me the truth immediately and then witness the power of my austerities.” Dharma replied, “O one blessed with the power of austerities! You had once pierced an insect in its tail
with a blade of grass and you received the fruits of your action.” Animandavya said, “You have imposed a grave
punishment because of a small fault. O Dharma! Because of this, you will be born as a man in the womb of a Shudra woman. Today, I will lay down a law in this world for the fruits of one’s deeds. No sin will be committed by
anyone who is below the age of fourteen years.248 It will be sin only when committed above that age.” Because he
was cursed by that great-souled ascetic for that sin, Dharma was born as Vidura in the womb of a Shudra woman.
He was free from avarice and anger. He was skilled in the knowledge of dharma and artha. He was devoted to the
welfare of the Kurus, was far-sighted and equable.’
102

Vaishampayana said, ‘After the births of these three sons, Kurujangala, Kurukshetra and the Kurus grew in prosperity. The land produced abundant crops and the harvests were plenty. The clouds showered down rain at the right
time. The trees yielded many ﬂowers and fruit. The beasts of burden were happy and so were the animals and the
birds. The garlands were fragrant and the fruit was juicy. The cities were full of traders and artisans. The people
were brave, learned, honest and happy. There were no robbers and no one did anything that was against dharma. It
was as if in all the parts of the country, Krita Yuga249 had arrived. The people were devoted to rites of dharma,
charity and performance of sacriﬁces. With love and affection for each other, the subjects grew in prosperity. They
were devoid of pride, anger and avarice. They helped each other in becoming prosperous and dharma reigned
supreme. The great city250 was like the ocean. It was full of hundreds of palaces, with gates, arches and turrets

that looked like masses of clouds. It looked like Indra’s great capital. The people happily enjoyed themselves in
rivers, wooded groves, lakes, ponds, hills and beautiful woods. Rivalling the northern Kurus, the southern Kurus
walked with siddhas, rishis and charanas. No one was wretched.251 There was no woman who was a widow. The
Kurus increased the loveliness of the country manifold. They built wells, resting places, assemblies, tanks and residences for the Brahmanas. O king! Bhishma protected everything according to righteous conduct. The beautiful
country was dotted everywhere with sanctuaries and sacriﬁcial stakes. The country expanded by bringing in other
kingdoms into its fold. Upheld by Bhishma, the wheel of dharma rolled on in the kingdom.
‘All the inhabitants of the city and the country were always delighted on witnessing the accomplishments of the
great-souled princes and feasted. O king! In the houses of the chiefs of the Kurus and in those of the citizens, the
expressions “Let us give” and “Let us eat” were constantly heard.
‘Right from their birth, Bhishma reared Dhritarashtra, Pandu and the immensely intelligent Vidura as if they
were his own sons. They went through rites, they studied and observed vows. When they attained youth, they became skilled in labour, exercise, archery, horsemanship, ﬁghting with clubs, shields and swords, the science of elephants and the sacred texts of ethics. O lord! They studied history, the Puranas and many other branches of learning. They knew all the details of the Vedas, the Vedangas and their theory. The valorous Pandu excelled over all
other men in archery. O lord of the earth! Dhritarashtra was stronger than anyone else. O king! In the three worlds,
there was no one who was Vidura’s equal in his eternal devotion to dharma. For him, dharma was the supreme
goal. On seeing that Shantanu’s lineage had again been revived, a saying became common in the world and in all
the kingdoms. “Among mothers of heroes, the daughters of the king of Kashi; among all countries, Kurujangala;
among those who know everything about dharma, Bhishma; and among all cities, Gajasahrya.”252 However, because he was blind, Dhritarashtra did not obtain the kingdom. Nor by law, could Vidura.253 Therefore, Pandu became the lord of the earth.’
103

‘Bhishma said, “Our famous dynasty has all the qualities and virtue. Over all the other kings, it has now become
the supreme overlord on earth. Earlier, this dynasty was protected by many great-souled kings who knew dharma.
Never has our dynasty come close to destruction. Satyavati, the great-souled Krishna254 and I have ensured that
the likes of you are established, so that the threads of our lineage continue. O son!255 It is my duty, and especially
yours, to take measures so that this dynasty expands like the ocean. I have heard of the princess of the Yadavas, a
lineage that is equal to ours. There is also Subala’s daughter and the daughter of the king of Madra. They are all
from good lineages, beautiful and protected by their kin. Those bulls among the Kshatriyas are suitable for an alliance with us. O Vidura! O foremost among those who are wise! I think we should choose them for offspring and
the continuation of our lineage. What do you think?”
‘Vidura replied, “You are our father. You are our mother. You are our supreme preceptor. Therefore, you yourself decide and do what is good for our lineage.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘He256 heard from the Brahmanas that Subala’s daughter, the fortunate Gandhari, had obtained a boon by pleasing Hara, the god who robbed Bhaga of his eyes.257 She would have 100 sons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When he heard this, Bhishma, grandfather of the Kurus, sent a message to the king of
Gandhara. Because of the blindness, Subala hesitated. But taking into account the famous lineage and the conduct
and intelligence of the Kurus, he agreed to give his daughter Gandhari, who was devoted to dharma, to
Dhritarashtra.
‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! When Gandhari heard that Dhritarashtra was blind and that both
her father and mother had agreed to give her to him, the beautiful one who possessed many qualities picked up a
piece of cloth. As devotion to her husband, she tied up her eyes with this, deciding resolutely that she would never
experience more than what her husband could. Thereupon, Shakuni, the son of the king of Gandhara, brought his
sister to the Kouravas, with a lot of riches. The brave one gave his sister, accompanied by her possessions, and after being honoured by Bhishma, returned to his own city. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Gandhari of the

beautiful hips satisﬁed all the Kurus with her acts, behaviour, attentiveness and conduct. She was devoted to her
husband. She did not even mention other men in her speech.’
104

Vaishampayana said, ‘The chief of the Yadus was named Shura and he was Vasudeva’s father. His daughter was
named Pritha and her beauty was matchless on earth. Earlier, that valorous one had promised his ﬁrst-born child to
his father’s sister’s son, because this valorous one had no children. The ﬁrst-born happened to be a daughter. To do
a favour and an act of friendship to his friend, he gave her to the great-souled Kuntibhoja. In her father’s258 house,
she was appointed to honour the gods and guests. One day, she happened to tend to the Brahmana who was rigid in
his vows and who was known as Durvasa. He was fearsome and was learned in the secret mysteries of dharma.
Attending to his needs in every way, she pleased the self-controlled one. Through his foresight, he knew that she
would face the dharma that is indicated for times of distress259 and need magic. The sage gave her a mantra and
said, “Whichever gods you summon through the use of this mantra, will grant you sons through their grace.” Having been told this by the Brahmana, she was curious.
‘Though still a virgin, the illustrious one summoned the god Arka.260 She immediately saw the sun, who makes
the worlds come alive. On seeing that wonderful sight, the one with the unblemished form was astounded.
Tapana,261 who spreads light, placed an embryo in her womb. Through him, she gave birth to a warrior who was
supreme among those who knew the use of all weapons. He was born with natural armour, blessed with good fortune and handsome like a son of the gods. His natural armour and earrings lit up his face. This son was known in
all the worlds as Karna. After giving her, the supremely radiant one and the best among those who give, Tapana,
restored her virginity and returned to heaven.
‘So as to hide her misconduct and frightened of her relatives, Kunti262 hurled the son, who bore all the auspicious marks, into the water. Radha’s illustrious husband,263 who was the son of a suta, saved the child, and he and
his wife brought him up as their son. They gave the child a name. Since he was born with riches, he was given the
name of Vasushena. 264 He grew up to be powerful, skilled in the use of all weapons. The valorous one worshipped the sun until his back was burnt. During that time of worship and meditation, there was nothing that the
brave, truthful and great-souled one would not give to Brahmanas. Indra, who looks after the welfare of all creatures, came in the form of a Brahmana begging for alms and asked for the radiant natural armour and earrings.
Without a thought, and with blood streaming, Karna cut off the natural armour and the earrings and offered them
with joined hands. The amazed Shakra265 gave him a shakti266 and said, “Whoever you wish to kill among the
gods, the asuras, humans, gandharvas, uragas and rakshasas with this weapon, will certainly be killed.” Earlier, he
was known by the name of Vasushena. But after this deed, he became known by the name of Vaikartana
Karna.’267
105

Vaishampayana said, ‘Kuntibhoja’s daughter was beautiful and possessed all the qualities. She was always devoted
to dharma and great vows. Her father arranged for a svayamvara. She found the handsome Pandu among thousands
of powerful kings who had teeth like lions, shoulders like elephants and eyes like bulls. Blessed with unlimited
good fortune, Kuru’s descendant and Kuntibhoja’s daughter were married, like Maghavan with Poulomi.268
‘Thereafter, with Devavrata Bhishma, he269 went to the capital city of the Madra kingdom. Madri, the daughter
of the king of Madra, lived there. She was famous in the three worlds and among all the kings for her beauty,
which was unmatched on earth. For Pandu’s sake, he bought her with a great deal of riches. Bhishma got the greatsouled Pandu married off. O, tiger among men! The people of the world were astonished to see the intelligent Pandu, with a chest like a lion, shoulders like an elephant and eyes like a bull. Pandu had strength, courage and enterprise. After marrying, he decided to conquer the earth and vanquish many enemies.

‘Pandu, lion among men, went to the east and defeated the Dasharnas in battle, thereby spreading the fame of
the Kouravas. Then with his army, which had many ﬂags ﬂying and many elephants, horses, chariots and infantry,
he attacked Darva, the king of the Magadha kingdom, who was proud of his valour and had made enemies out of
all the kings. He was killed in Rajagriha and his treasury, transport and armies seized. Then Pandu went to Mithila
and conquered Videha in battle. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Then the fame of the Kurus spread to Kashi,
Suhma and Pundra. Through the strength of his own arms. Pandu, the scorcher of foes, burnt kings with the great
net of his ﬂaming arrows and his dazzling weapons. He was like a great ﬁre and defeated with his army the kings
and their armies. After conquering them, Pandu engaged them in the work of the Kurus. Having been thus vanquished by him, all the kings of the earth recognized him to be the only warrior on earth, like Purandara among the
gods. All the lords of the earth came and worshipped him with joined hands. They brought him gems and riches of
various kinds—precious stones, pearls, coral, a lot of gold and silver, the best cows, the best horses, the best chariots, elephants, donkeys, camels, buffaloes and some goats and sheep. The king of Nagapura270 accepted them all.
‘Then, to the delight of his own kingdom and city, Pandu returned to Gajasahrya271 with his vehicles. “The
fame of Shantanu, lion among kings, and of the intelligent Bharata had been destroyed. But those cries and deeds
have now been revived by Pandu. Those who had earlier robbed the land of the Kurus and the riches of the Kurus
have now been forced to pay tribute by Pandu, the lion of Nagapura.” With happiness and conﬁdence in their
hearts, these were the words of the kings, the advisers to the kings and the citizens of the town and the country.
With Bhishma at their head, they went out to receive him when he returned. Before they had gone very far, the residents of Nagapura delightedly saw the world full of many captives, myriad gems piled on many vehicles, elephants, horses, chariots, cows, camels and sheep. Following Bhishma, the Kouravas saw all this and could ﬁnd no
end to it. The one who had increased Kousalya’s272 joy paid homage at his father’s273 feet. He showed his respects to the citizens of the town and countryside. Bhishma shed tears of joy, now that he was reunited with his
son, who had successfully returned after subjugating other kingdoms. There was the great roar of hundreds of
trumpets and drums. As he entered Gajasahrya, he made the citizens everywhere very happy.’
106

Vaishampayana said, ‘On Dhritarashtra’s command, Pandu offered the riches he had won to Bhishma, Satyavati
and their mothers.274 Pandu also sent a part of the riches to Vidura. The one with dharma in his soul also pleased
his relatives by giving them riches. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then Satyavati, Bhishma and the illustrious Kousalya were given sparkling gems Pandu had won. His mother Kousalya275 embraced that bull among
men, unequalled in his energy, the way Poulomi embraces Jayanta.276 With the wealth won by that brave warrior,
Dhritarashtra performed great sacriﬁces equivalent to 100 horse sacriﬁces, in terms of the hundreds and thousands
of alms that were given.
‘O bull among the Bharata lineage! After some time, having won control over his senses, Pandu retired to the
forest with Kunti and Madri. He left his excellent palace and its beautiful beds. He permanently lived in the forest,
always hunting. He roamed on the southern slopes of the beautiful Himalaya Mountains and lived on mountain
plains, and in forests with gigantic shala trees. With Kunti and Madri, Pandu lived in the forest, like Purandara’s
handsome elephant277 between two cow elephants. As the descendant of the Bharata lineage roamed around with
his wives, with swords, arrows and bows and clad in wonderful armour, the king who was brave and skilled in the
use of all weapons seemed like a god to the forest-dwellers. On Dhritarashtra’s command, these men always gave
him every object of desire and pleasure in the forest.
‘The river’s son278 heard that King Devaka had a daughter born from a Shudra woman279 and that she was
young and beautiful. O bull among men! He asked for her hand, brought her and married her off to the immensely
wise Vidura. Through her, Vidura had many sons. They were humble, of good conduct and were equal to him in all
the qualities.’
107

Vaishampayana said, ‘O, Janamejaya! Thereupon, 100 sons were born to Dhritarashtra through Gandhari. Then beyond these 100, he had one more through a Vaishya. Pandu had ﬁve maharatha sons through Kunti and Madri.
They were born from the gods so that the lineage could continue.’
Janamejaya asked, ‘O best of the Brahmanas! How did Gandhari give birth to 100 sons and how long did it
take? How long did they live? How did Dhritarashtra have a son through a Vaishya, despite possessing a wife who
was equal to him and who was devoted to dharma and loved him? How were the ﬁve maharatha sons born from
the gods, after the great-souled Pandu was cursed? O one blessed with the power of austerities! Tell me all this as
it happened and in detail, because I can never be satisﬁed on hearing the accounts of my relatives.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘One day, Dvaipayana arrived, hungry and tired. Gandhari satisﬁed him and Vyasa gave
her a boon that she would have 100 sons who would be the equals of her husband. After some time, she conceived
through Dhritarashtra. Gandhari bore the embryo for two years without giving birth and was overcome with grief.
Then she heard that a son had been born to Kunti, as radiant as the morning sun. She felt the hardness of her stomach and began to worry, losing her patience. Unknown to Dhritarashtra, Gandhari violently struck her belly and
aborted herself, fainting with the pain. A hard mass of ﬂesh, like an iron ball, came out. This was what she had
borne in her womb for two years and prepared to throw it away. But learning of this, Dvaipayana quickly came to
her. That supreme among those who meditate saw that mass of ﬂesh and asked Subala’s daughter, “What have you
done?” She truthfully expressed her thoughts to the supreme rishi. “When I heard that Kunti had given birth to her
ﬁrst son, as radiant as the sun, I struck my belly in grief. Earlier, you granted me the boon that I would have a hundred sons. But instead of those 100 sons, this mass of ﬂesh has been born to me.” Vyasa replied, “O Subala’s
daughter! It will be as I have said and not otherwise. I have never uttered a falsehood in jest. Why should I do it
when I am in earnest? Quickly bring a hundred pots and ﬁll them up with ghee. Let cool water be sprinkled on this
mass of ﬂesh.” Being sprinkled with water, that mass of ﬂesh divided itself into a hundred parts. Each part of the
embryo was only the size of a thumb. O ruler of the earth! O king! As time passed, that mass of ﬂesh gradually became 101 separate parts.280 These parts of the embryo were then placed into the pots and these were concealed in
a secret spot and carefully guarded. The illustrious one then again told Subala’s daughter about how much time
should pass before the pots were broken open. After saying this and making the necessary arrangements, the illustrious and wise lord Vyasa went away to the mountainous Himalayas to perform his austerities.
‘In due course, King Duryodhana was born ﬁrst. But King Yudhishthira was the eldest, because he had been
born ﬁrst. As soon as his son was born, Dhritarashtra summoned Brahmanas, Bhishma and Vidura and said,
“Prince Yudhishthira is the eldest prince for the extension of our lineage. He will obtain the kingdom through his
own qualities and I have nothing to say on this. But will this one become the king after him? Tell me truthfully
what must certainly happen.” O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When he stopped speaking, carrion eaters, terrible carnivores and howling jackals began to scream from all the directions. O king! On witnessing these terrible
and ominous signs, all the Brahmanas and the immensely intelligent Vidura said, “It is clear that this son of yours
will bring about the destruction of this lineage. There is peace in abandoning him and great disaster in nurturing
him. O lord of the earth! Let ninety-nine sons remain with you and with the one you can bring about the welfare of
the world and the lineage. It is said that abandon one for the sake of the lineage. Abandon a lineage for the sake of
a village. Abandon a village for the sake of a country. Abandon the earth for the sake of the soul.” Thus spoke
Vidura and all the supreme Brahmanas. But because of affection towards his son, the king did not do this.
‘O king! Within a month, 100 sons were born to Dhritarashtra and a daughter, over and above the 100. When
Gandhari was afﬂicted with her expanding belly, the mighty-armed Dhritarashtra used to have a Vaishya maid in
attendance. O king! Within a year, a son was born to Dhritarashtra. O king! He was immensely famous and wise
and he was named Yuyutsu, of mixed lineage. Thus, 100 wise, brave and maharatha sons were born to Dhritarashtra and one daughter named Duhshala.’
108

Janamejaya said, ‘O, lord! Recount to me the names of Dhritarashtra’s sons, beginning with the eldest, in the order
of their birth.’

Vaishampayana said, ‘Duryodhana, Yuyutsu, Duhshasana, Duhsaha, Duhshala, Jalasandha, Sama, Saha, Vinda,
Anuvinda, Durdharsha, Subahu, Dushpradharshana, Durmarshana, Durmukha, Dushkarma, Karna, Vivimshati,
Vikarna, Sulochana, Chitra, Upachitra, Chitraksha, Charuchitra, Sharasana, Durmada, Dushpragaha, Vivitsu, Vikata, Urnanabha, Sunabha, Nanda, Upanandaka, Senapati, Sushena, Kundodara, Mahodara, Chitrabana, Chitravarma,
Suvarma, Durvimochana, Ayobahu, Mahabahu, Chitranga, Chitrakundala, Bhimavega, Bhimabala, Balaki, Balavardhana, Ugrayudha, Bhimakarma, Kanakayu, Dridhayudha, Dridhavarma, Dridhakshatra, Somakirti, Anudara,
Dridhasandha, Jarasandha, Satyasandha, Sadahsuvak, Ugrashrava, Ashvasena, Senani, Dushparajaya, Aparajita,
Panditaka, Vishalaksha, Duravara, Dridhahasta, Suhasta, Vatavega, Suvarcha, Adityaketu, Bahvashi, Nagadanta,
Ugrayayi, Kavachi, Nishangi, Pashi, Dandadhara, Dhanurgraha, Ugra, Bhimaratha, Vira, Virabahu, Alolupa, Abhaya, Roudrakarma, Dridharatha, Anadhrishya, Kundabhedi, Viravi, Dirghalochana, Dirghabahu, Mahabahu,
Vyudhoru, Kanakadhvaja, Kundashi and Viraja. O king! Over and above the hundred, Duhshala was the daughter. I
have recounted the names of the one hundred, in accordance with the order of their birth.
‘O king! Know that they were all brave and unrivalled charioteers. They were all skilled in battle, all knowledgeable in the Vedas and wise in the ways of ruling. They were skilled in the science of relationships and were
radiant in knowledge. O lord of the earth! When the time was right, Dhritarashtra considered the matter carefully
and married them to wives who were their equals. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With the permission of
Subala’s daughter, the king married Duhshala to Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu.’
109

Janamejaya said, ‘O you who are knowledgeable about the nature of the brahman! You have recounted to me the
excellent and superhuman story of the human origins of the sons of Dhritarashtra. O Brahmana! In accordance
with birth, you have also told me their names. Now I wish to hear about the Pandavas. They were great-souled and
the equal of the king of the gods in valour. You have earlier told me that they were the partial incarnations of the
gods themselves.281O Vaishampayana! I now wish to hear about their origins and their superhuman deeds. Please
tell me all.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘One day, in the great forest frequented by deer and predatory beasts, King Pandu saw a
stag that was the leader of its herd mating with a doe. With ﬁve swift and sharp arrows that were decorated with
golden feathers in their shafts, Pandu shot both the stag and the doe. O king! The stag was actually the immensely
energetic son of a rishi, blessed with the power of austerities. The energetic one was uniting with his wife in the
form of a deer. While still united with the doe, he fell down on the ground instantly and as he began to lose his
senses, lamented in a human voice.
‘The deer said, “Even evil men who are enslaved by lust and anger, are therefore deprived of reason and are always sinful, stay away from such cruel deeds. A man’s judgement does not swallow destiny. Destiny swallows
judgement. The wise never sanction anything that is forbidden by destiny. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
You were born in a dynasty that was always devoted to dharma. Overcome by lust and avarice, how have you lost
all your reason?” Pandu replied, “O deer! In dealing with deer, kings behave no differently from enemies; they kill
them. Therefore, you should not blame me in your delusion. Deer can be killed openly and through trickery. That
is the dharma of kings. Since you know that, why are you blaming me? When seated at a sacriﬁce, the rishi
Agastya went on a hunt. He offered each deer in that great forest to all the gods. This is the sanction of dharma.
Then why are you reproving me? According to Agastya’s actions, the likes of you are offerings at sacriﬁces.” The
deer said, “Earlier, they never unleashed arrows without considering preparedness.282 There is a time for this and
killing at such times is praised.” Pandu replied, “It is known that killing occurs, whether prepared or unprepared,
through different means—strength and sharp arrows. O deer! Why are you blaming me?”
‘The deer said, “O king! I do not blame you because you have killed a deer or because you have caused me injury. But instead of performing such a cruel act, you should have waited until my act of intercourse was complete.
This is a time that is for the welfare of all beings and desired by all beings. Which learned one will kill a deer engaged in intercourse in the forest? You have rendered futile my attempt to obtain offspring. O Kourava! O Pourava! This lineage has had rishis and is famous for its righteous acts. This act was unworthy of you. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! This greatly cruel act is condemned in all the worlds. It destroys attainment of heaven and

fame and is against dharma. You are acquainted about pleasures from uniting with women. You also know the sacred texts and norms of dharma. You are the equal of a god. You should not have committed such an act, which is
unworthy of reaching heaven. O best of kings! Your duty is to punish men who act cruelly, are engaged in evil acts
and have abandoned the three283 goals. O best of men! O king! What have I done that you killed me? I am a sage
in the form of a deer and live on roots and fruit. I always live peacefully in the forest. Since you have caused injury
to me, you will certainly be injured. Since you have been cruel to a helpless couple, when you are overcome
through the pangs of desire, death will overtake you. I am a sage named Kimdama, unparalleled in austerities.
Ashamed of men, I was engaged in intercourse with this deer. Assuming the form of a deer, I roamed with other
deer in this dense forest. The sin of killing a Brahmana will not vest on you, since you did that unknowingly. O
foolish one! But since you killed me in the form of a deer when I was overcome by desire, you will meet with the
same fate that has befallen me. Overcome by desire, when you unite with your loved one, at that very instant, you
will depart for the land of the dead. The woman with whom you unite in your last moments will also go to the land
of the king of the dead, inescapable for all beings. Out of devotion towards you, that best of intelligent ones will
follow you. You have now brought me into grief when I was in the midst of pleasure. Like that, you will be afﬂicted with misery when you have just found happiness.” Having said this, in great pain, the deer gave up its life. In an
instant, Pandu was also immersed in grief.’
110

Vaishampayana said, ‘After the deer’s death, the king and his wives lamented grievously, as if they had lost a
relative.
‘Pandu said, “Even if born in righteous families, deluded by the net of desire, men confront calamity because of
their deeds and when their intelligence is destroyed. I have heard that my own father was born from a man always
devoted to dharma. But he died when he was still young, because he lived a life addicted to desire. Through the
illustrious rishi Krishna Dvaipayana, self-controlled in speech, I was born in the ﬁeld of that lustful king. Despite
that, I have become evil-hearted and my lowly mind is spent on the evil chase of deer, deserted by the gods. I am
tied down by a great vice and I will now seek salvation. Following the undecaying example set by my father, I will
now follow a meritorious way of life. I will certainly tie myself to a life of extreme austerities. I will live alone,
spending each day under a single tree.284 I will shave off my head and become a hermit who begs for his food as
he roams the earth. I will cover myself with dust and be without a home and without refuge. The foot of a tree will
be my home. I will renounce everything that is loved or hated. I will neither grieve nor rejoice, and praise and
blame will be the same to me. I will not seek homage or greetings. I will be at peace and without possessions. I
will not mock anyone, nor will I furrow my brow at anyone. With a smiling face, I will always devote myself to
the welfare of all creatures. I will never transgress the four orders, movable and immovable, and will treat them all
equally, like my own children. Once every day, I will beg my food from two or ﬁve families and sustain myself. If
it is impossible to obtain food in this way, I will fast. I will eat only a little and will never be greedy. I will never
beg for more and never include more than seven.285 I will think of the cutting off of one arm with an axe and the
covering of the other with sandalwood the same way. I will not think of one as good and the other as evil, since
both are equal. I will not act so as to live, nor act so as to die. Life and death are the same and I will not welcome
one and hate the other. I will give up all the rituals for prosperity that those who are alive indulge in and times for
their observance. I will always give up everything that makes the senses work. I will cleanse myself of all sin and
even give up that done in the name of dharma. I will be free from all sin and all traps. I will not be under anyone’s
powers, but will follow the dharma of being as free as the wind. I will always sustain myself in this way and no
other. I will make my body walk the path of fearlessness and not deviate. I will not follow the miserable path of
dogs, followed by those without virility. I will follow my own righteous dharma and tread the lovely path of not
using one’s virility. He who is honoured and dishonoured and lusts for another life with hungry eyes, becomes full
of desire and treads the path of dogs.” When he had uttered these words, the king sorrowfully sighed.
‘He looked at Kunti and Madri and said, “Tell Kousalya, kshatta286 Vidura, the king and all his relatives, the
lady Satyavati, Bhishma, the royal priests, great-souled soma-drinking and rigid-vowed Brahmanas and old citi-

zens who live here under my protection that Pandu will leave for the forest.” Hearing these words of their husband,
who had made up his mind on leaving for the forest, both Kunti and Madri addressed him in these words. “O bull
of the Bharata lineage! We are your wives under dharma. There are other stages of life287 that you can observe
with us and still perform great austerities. There is no doubt that even then, you will attain heaven. We will also
control our senses, devote ourselves to our husband’s world, give up all happiness and desire and perform great
austerities. O lord of the earth! O immensely wise one! If you forsake us, there is no doubt that we will give up our
lives today.” Pandu replied, “If this decision of yours is in conformity with dharma, I will follow the undecaying
path shown by my father with both of you. I will give up the pleasant life of villages and perform great austerities.
I will eat roots and fruit, wear the bark of trees and roam in the great forest. I will bathe in the morning and
evening and make offerings to the ﬁre. I will make my body thin by eating less. I will wear skins and my hair will
be matted. I will expose myself to hot and cold winds, hunger, thirst and exhaustion. Through difﬁcult austerities, I
will reduce my body. I will seek solitude and live on fruits, be they ripe or unripe. I will worship the ancestors and
the gods with food found in the forest, water and words. The sight of a man living for vanaprastha has never affected superior residents. How can it affect those who are inferior?288 Until my body perishes, I will perform the
severest penances laid down in the sacred texts for those who live in forests.” Having said this to his wives, the
king, a descendant of the Kuru lineage, gave the jewel from his crown, necklace, earrings, bracelets and valuable
garments and ornaments belonging to his wives to the Brahmanas.
‘Pandu then again said, “Go to Nagapura289 and say that Pandu has left for the forest. He has given up riches,
desire, happiness and the supreme joy of sex. The descendant of the Kuru lineage has left with his wives.” Hearing
these words of the lion of the Bharata lineage, the servants and attendants sorrowed and lamented. They bewailed
in loud and pitiable voices. They shed hot tears and took their leave of the lord of the earth. Then they left for
Hastinapura with his message. On hearing the details of all that had happened in the great forest, Dhritarashtra,
best among kings, mourned for Pandu.
‘Living on roots and fruit, the Kourava prince Pandu went with his wives to the mountain named Nagasabha. He
went to Chaitraratha and crossed the Varishena. Then he crossed the Himalayas and went to Gandhamadana. Protected by the great beings,290 the siddhas and the supreme rishis, the king lived for some time on the mountains
and for some time on the plains. He then went to the lake Indradyumna and crossed Hansakuta. Then the ascetic
king arrived at Shatashringa.’291
111

Vaishampayana said, ‘There the valorous one engaged in the best of austerities and soon became a favourite of the
siddhas and the charanas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He was devoted to service, had no ego, was disciplined and was in control of his senses. Through his own power, he went to heaven. To some, he was a brother. To
some others, he was a friend. Other rishis protected him like a son. O bull among the Bharata lineage! After a long
time, Pandu attained such great heights of pure austerity that he became a brahmarshi. With his wives, he wished
to cross the Shatashringa and reach heaven. With his wives, he was about to start on a northward direction.
‘The ascetics told him, “As we went northwards, climbing the king of the mountains, we have seen inaccessible
regions on the mountain, the playgrounds of the gods, gandharvas and apsaras, Kubera’s garden, laid out on plain
and uneven ground, the sloping banks of great rivers and impenetrable caverns in mountains. There are regions
that are always covered with snow and without trees, animals and birds. Some large tracts are inaccessible. No bird
can cross them, not to speak of animals. The only thing that can go there is air, siddhas and supreme rishis. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! How can these princesses cross that king of the mountains? Do not make them sink in
that misery and do not go there.” Pandu replied, “O illustrious ones! It is said that one without a son has no door to
heaven. I have no son and I tell you that I am in great sorrow. According to dharma, men are born on this earth
with four debts—to ancestors, gods, rishis and men. The man who does not discharge them at the right time has no
worlds. This has been established by those who know dharma. The gods are pleased through sacriﬁces, the sages
through studying and austerities, the ancestors through sons and shraddhas and men through kindness. According
to dharma, I have discharged my debts towards rishis, gods and other men. O ones blessed with the power of aus-

terities! I have not yet been freed from the debt towards my ancestors and I am troubled. It is certain that when my
body perishes, so will the ancestors. The best of men are born so as to give birth to offspring. I was begotten by the
great-souled one292 in my father’s ﬁeld. Like that, should I have offspring in my father’s ﬁeld?” The ascetics
replied, “O king! O one who is devoted to dharma! We know that there are offspring for you, learned, beautiful,
unblemished, and like the gods themselves. We have seen this through our divine sight. O tiger among men!
Through your acts, accomplish what the gods have destined for you. The thinking and intelligent man always obtains fruit that are not spoilt. O son! The fruit can be seen. Exert yourself. When you have obtained offspring with
all the qualities, you will ﬁnd happiness.” Having heard these words of the ascetics, Pandu was worried. He remembered that his own procreative powers had been lost thanks to the deer’s curse.
‘He told the famous Kunti, his lawful wife, “A union to obtain offspring is supported. O Kunti! The sacred texts
say that the worlds are established by offspring. The learned ones who know eternal dharma say this. Offerings,
gifts, austerities, self-control—it is said that none of these free a childless man from his sins. O one with the sweet
smiles! Knowing this, since I am without offspring, I think and can see that I will never attain the bright worlds. O
timid one! Since I was addicted to cruelty and viciousness, through the deer’s curse, I lost my powers of procreation before my desire was satisﬁed. O Pritha! The religious texts speak of six kinds of sons who are both heirs and
relatives and six kinds of sons who are neither heirs, nor relatives. Listen—the son born from one’s own self, the
son presented, the son purchased, the son born from one’s widow, the son born through one’s wife before marriage
and the son born through a loose wife.293 The others are the son gifted, the son bought, the son who is obtained
artiﬁcially, the son who comes on his own, the son who comes with marriage, the son who is born of unknown semen and the son who is born from an inferior womb.294 One should try to obtain sons from the ﬁrst downwards
and so on. One always desires to obtain a son from a better man. O Pritha! The self-created Manu has said that the
righteous who have no offspring can ensure the fruits of dharma outside their own semen. O famous one! Since I
am myself incapable of procreation, I will ask you to obtain sons through my equals or betters. O Kunti! Listen to
the story of Sharadandayani, the wife of a warrior. She was instructed by her superiors to obtain a son. O Kunti!
When her season came, she bathed. In the night, she went to a place where four roads met and welcomed an accomplished Brahmana. For the sake of obtaining a son, she poured oblations into the ﬁre. After performing this
rite, she lived with him and three maharatha sons were thus born, Durjaya being the eldest. O fortunate one! On
my instructions, you should also quickly obtain a son through a Brahmana who is superior to me in austerities.”’
112

Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! Having been thus addressed, Kunti told Pandu, bull among the Kurus, lord of the
earth and her husband, “O one who is learned in the law! O one with eyes like those of a blue lotus! You should
not speak in this way to me. I am your wife under the law and am always devoted to you. O mighty-armed one! O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! According to dharma, you should yourself father valourous sons on me. O tiger
among men! I will go to heaven with you. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! You should unite with me to obtain
offspring. Not even in my thoughts will I go to any other man but you. Which man on earth is superior to you? O
one with large eyes! O one with dharma in your heart! Listen to this story from the Puranas. I heard this and I am
now recounting it for you.”
‘Kunti said, “In ancient times, it is said that there was a king by the name of Vyushitashva. He extended the Puru
lineage and was extremely righteous. The gods with Indra and the devarshis came to a sacriﬁce that this mightyarmed and righteous one performed. At the sacriﬁce of the great-souled rajarshi Vyushitashva, Indra was intoxicated with soma juice and the Brahmanas with their fees. O king! Thereafter, Vyushitashva was radiant beyond everything on earth, beyond all living beings and even beyond the sun, after dew has fallen. O supreme among kings!
The king conquered all the kings of the east, the north, the middle and the south. At this great horse sacriﬁce, the
powerful Vyushitashva, with the strength of ten elephants, became the king of all other kings. Those who know the
Puranas sing a verse. ‘Vyushitashva has conquered the entire earth till the boundaries of the ocean. He protects all
the varnas, just as a father protects his own sons.’ He performed many great sacriﬁces and gave riches to the Brah-

manas. Collecting jewels, he later performed great sacriﬁces. Extracting a lot of soma juice, he performed the sacriﬁce known as somasanstha.
‘“O lord of men! His beloved wife was named Bhadra, the daughter of Kakshivat. Because of her beauty, she
was unparalleled on earth. It has been heard that they desired each other a lot and addicted by desire for her, he became a victim of consumption. After some time, he went away like the setting sun. When that king of men died,
his wife was afﬂicted with grief. O tiger among men! O lord of men! It has been heard that she lamented. ‘O,
supreme among those who know dharma! A woman without sons lives a life of misery, if she lives without her
husband. O bull among the Kshatriyas! Without her husband, it is better for a woman to be dead. Please take me
with you. I wish to go where you are going. Without you, I will not be able to bear life for an instant. O king!
Show your grace to me and take me quickly away. O king! I will always follow you like a faithful shadow and will
always be obedient towards you. O tiger among men! I will always do that which is pleasurable for you. O king! O
one with the eyes of a lotus! From now, a disease that dries up the heart will overcome me, since I will be separated from you. O king! I am unfortunate. In earlier bodies, I must have separated companions or separated a couple
that was united. O king! That evil act from an earlier body has now come upon me and I am suffering this pain as a
result. O king! From today, I will lie on a bed of kusha grass. I will give up all happiness and think only of seeing
you. O tiger among men! Show yourself to me and make me happy. O lord of men! I am overcome with grief, miserable, unprotected and lamenting.’ Embracing the corpse, she lamented again and again. Then an invisible voice
addressed her. ‘O Bhadra! O sweet-smiling one! Arise and leave. I will give you a boon. I will father offspring on
you. O one with the beautiful hips! After you have bathed after your season, on the eighth or fourteenth lunar day,
I will lie with you on your own bed.’ At these words, Queen Bhadra, who was devoted to her husband and wished
to obtain sons, did as she had been asked to do. O lord of men! O supreme among those of the Bharata lineage!
The queen gave birth to sons through the corpse—the three Shalvas and the four Madras. O bull of the Bharata lineage! You too will be able to have sons on me, through the powers of yoga your mind possesses.”’
113

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having been thus addressed, the king who knew dharma and was always devoted to dharma,
addressed the queen again in these supreme words. “O Kunti! O fortunate one! What you have said is true. In ancient times, Vyushitashva did act this way. But he was like a god. Let me tell you what the ancient and great-souled
rishis, learned in dharma, have laid down as dharma. O one with the beautiful eyes! In ancient times, women went
around uncovered. They roamed around where they wished and were independent. O one with the beautiful hips!
O fortunate one! From the time when they became maidens, they were not faithful to their husbands. This was not
regarded as against dharma, because that was the dharma of those ancient times. Without desire and anger, this ancient dharma is still followed by those of inferior birth.295 The practice of this ancient dharma is sanctioned by the
maharshis. O one with thighs like that of a plantain tree! This is still practised in the northern Kuru region. This
eternal dharma is favourable to women. O one with the beautiful smiles! The present practice of the world was
only laid down later. Listen when I tell you completely when it was established and by whom.”
‘Pandu said, “We have heard that there was a maharshi named Uddalaka. He had a hermit son named Shvetaketu. We have heard that he laid down this rule for humans, in a ﬁt of anger. O one with eyes like lotus petals! I will
tell you why. In ancient times, in the presence of Shvetaketu’s father, a Brahmana came and grasped his mother’s
hand and said, ‘Let us go.’ At this, the rishi’s son was angry and indignant when he saw his mother being taken
away, as if forcibly. On seeing him angry, Shvetaketu’s father said, ‘O son! Do not be angry. This is the eternal
practice. Women of all varnas are uncovered on earth. All beings are established in their own varnas, like cattle.’
Shvetaketu, the rishi’s son, did not accept this dharma. He established the present rule for men and women on
earth. O immensely fortunate one! This is for humans, not for animals. We have heard that since then this rule has
been established. ‘From that day onwards, a woman who is not faithful to her husband will commit a sin that is
equal to that of foeticide and be miserable. He who seduces a virgin, one who follows brahmacharya, or a wife
who is devoted to her husband will also commit a sin on earth. A wife who is appointed by her husband to conceive a son, but refuses to do so, will also commit the same sin. O, timid one! In ancient times, thus did Uddalaka’s
son Shvetaketu forcibly establish the present practice of dharma. O one with thighs like that of a plantain tree! We

have also heard that Sudasa’s son appointed his wife Madayanti to obtain a son and she went to the rishi
Vashishtha. O beautiful one! Through him, she obtained a son named Ashmaka. Kalmashapada’s296 wife did this
act so as to please her husband. O lotus-eyed one! You are acquainted with the story of our birth. O timid one! We
were begotten through Krishna Dvaipayana, so that the lineage of the Kurus might be extended. O unblemished
one! On seeing all these reasons, you must do what I am asking you to do and this is dharma. O princess! Those
who are learned in dharma say that at the time of her season, a wife who is strict in her vows must seek her husband. This is dharma. However, at other times, the woman is free to choose. Righteous ones who know dharma say
that this was the ancient practice. O princess! But those who know dharma have also said that it is the duty of a
wife to do what her husband instructs, be it in favour of dharma or against dharma. O one with an unblemished
form! This is especially the case if one is hungry for sons, but is unable to procreate on one’s own. I am like that,
longing to set my eyes on a son. O beautiful one! I am joining my hands, like lotus leaves with red ﬁngers, and
raising them above my head. Be propitiated. O one with the beautiful hair! Because of my instructions, give birth
to sons who have all the qualities, through Brahmanas who are ascetics. O one with broad hips! Through your act,
I will tread the path of those who have sons.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Pandu, the conqueror of enemy cities, thus addressed Kunti, the one with the beautiful
hips. She loved to please her husband and said, “When I was a child in my father’s house, I was appointed to look
after the guests. There I satisﬁed, with all attentiveness, a fearsome Brahmana rigid in his vows. He had his senses
under control and was learned about the secret nuances of dharma. He is known as Durvasa. Pleased with my service, the illustrious one gave me a boon and taught me a mantra. Any god that I summon through this mantra will
come to me and be subservient to me, whether he desires it or not. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is
what he told me in my father’s house. O king! The words uttered by a Brahmana are never false and the time has
come. If you permit, I can summon a god. O rajarshi! O lord! Through that mantra, we can have offspring. O
supreme among those who know the truth! Which god shall I summon? Know that I am waiting for your command, so as to act.” Pandu replied, “O beautiful one! O one with the beautiful hips! You must act today itself, in
the proper way. Summon Dharma, because he is the one who partakes of what is sacred. That which is not dharma
is never united with that which is dharma. O one with the beautiful hips! The worlds will now think that what we
have done is dharma. There is no doubt that one who is devoted to dharma will be born into the Kuru lineage.
Since he will be given by Dharma, there will never be anything that is not dharma in his mind. O sweet-smiling
one! Therefore, always set dharma before you and summon him. Worship Dharma through your offerings and rituals.” At these words of her husband, the most beautiful of woman agreed. With his permission, she circumambulated him.’
114

Vaishampayana said, ‘O Janamejaya! Kunti summoned the undecaying Dharma for conception, after Gandhari had
been with child for a year. The queen swiftly made offerings to Dharma and followed the rites that had earlier been
given to her by Durvasa. Through his powers of yoga, Dharma assumed form and she united with him. Consequently, the one with the beautiful hips obtained a son who was the best of all living beings. This was a sacred
tithi,297 widely worshipped. It was the eighth hour of the day and the sun was in the middle of the sky. It was the
auspicious moment known as aindra, when the moon was in conjunction with Abhijit.298 When it was time, Kunti
gave birth to a famous son. As soon as he was born, an invisible voice was heard. “There is no doubt that he will
be supreme among those who uphold dharma. Pandu’s ﬁrst-born son will be famous by the name of Yudhishthira.
He will also be a famous king, renowned in the three worlds—endowed with fame, radiance and adherence to
vows.” Having obtained this virtuous son, Pandu again said, “It is said that the best thing for Kshatriyas is strength.
Therefore, ask for a son who has great strength.” Having been thus addressed by her husband, she invoked
Vayu299 for a son. Through him, she obtained the mighty-armed Bhima, whose strength was terrifying. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As soon as this immensely strong one was born, an invisible voice was heard. “This
son will be the strongest among all those who are strong.” An extraordinary event occurred as soon as
Vrikodara300 was born. Falling down from his mother’s lap, he shattered a mountain into fragments with his body.

Kunti was asleep and suddenly awoke, frightened by a tiger and forgetting that Vrikodara was asleep in her lap.
The son, whose body was as hard as vajra, fell on the mountain. As he fell, he shattered the mountain into a hundred pieces with his body. On witnessing the mountain break in this way, Pandu was astounded. O supreme among
those of the Bharata lineage! O lord of the earth! Duryodhana was born on the very same day that Bhima was born.
‘When Vrikodara was born, Pandu again began to think. “How can I obtain a supreme son who will be the best
in all the worlds? This world depends on destiny and on human action. But as decreed, destiny is only obtained
over a period of time. We have heard that Indra is the king and the best of the gods. He has immeasurable strength
and endeavour and he is valorous and unlimited in radiance. By pleasing him with austerities, I can obtain a son
who is immensely strong. The son that he will give me will be the best. I shall therefore perform the greatest of
austerities in mind, deeds and speech.” Thereupon, after consulting with maharshis, the immensely energetic Pandu of the Kuru lineage instructed Kunti to observe a sacred vow for one year. The mighty-armed himself stood on
one leg for a year, performing severe austerities and immersed in supreme meditation. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Wishing to propitiate the god who is the lord of the thirty gods, the one with dharma in his heart worshipped the sun. Indra responded after a long time. “I will give you a son who will be famous in the three worlds.
He will ensure the welfare of gods, Brahmanas and relatives. I will give you a son who will destroy all his enemies.” After the great-souled Vasava301 had spoken to the king of the Kuru lineage, the one with dharma in his
heart spoke to Kunti, remembering the words of the king of the gods. “O one with the beautiful hips! O sweetsmiling one! Devoted to morality, great-souled, radiant as the sun, invincible, action-oriented, extremely wonderful
to look at and endowed with Kshatriya energy—this is the son we will receive through the grace of the king of the
gods. Summon him.” At these words, the famous one summoned Shakra.302
‘The lord of the gods arrived and Arjuna was born from him. As soon as the son was born, an invisible voice
was heard in the sky, with a thundering and deep roar. “O Kunti! He will be like Kartavirya and Shibi in prowess,
invincible like Indra. He will spread your fame everywhere. As Vishnu increased Aditi’s happiness, like Vishnu,
Arjuna will increase your happiness. He will bring under his sway the countries of Madra, Kuru, Kekaya, Chedi,
Kashi and Karusha and establish the prosperity of the Kurus. Through the valour of his arms, Havyavahana303
will be supremely satisﬁed with the fat of all beings in Khandava. With his brothers, this immensely strong warrior
will vanquish all small chiefs and perform three sacriﬁces. O Kunti! In valour, he will be the equal of Vishnu and
Jamadagni’s son Rama.304 He will be the greatest among those endowed with valour and he will be invincible. He
will acquire all kinds of divine weapons. He will be a bull among men and he will regain the lost fortune.” When
Kunti was in her delivery room, these were the wonderful words that were heard from the sky and Kunti heard
them. The ascetics who lived on Shatashringa also heard these loud words and were supremely delighted. The devarshis, Indra and the other gods and the sound of drums being played raised an enormous clamour in the sky.
Amidst this thunderous roar, the entire place was covered with a shower of ﬂowers.
‘All the classes of gods assembled to pay their respects to Partha305—the offspring of Kadru and Vinata, the
gandharvas, the apsaras, the lords of all beings and all the seven maharshis, Bharadvaja, Kashyapa, Goutama,
Vishvamitra, Jamadagni, Vashishtha and the illustrious Atri, who arose when the sun was destroyed. Marichi, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Prajapati and all the gandharvas and apsaras also came. Wearing divine garlands and
garments, adorned in every ornament, the apsaras danced and sang Bibhatsu’s306 praise. With the handsome Tumburu, the other gandharvas began to sing—Bhimasena, Ugrasena, Urnayu, Anagha, Gopati, Dhritarashtra,
Suryavarcha, Yugapa, Trinapa, Karshni, Nandi, Chitraratha, Shalishira, Parjanya, Kali and Narada, the sixteenth
one; and Sat, Brihat, Brihaka, the immensely famous Karala, Brahmachari, Bahuguna, the famous Suparna, Vishvavasu, Bhumanyu, Suchandra the tenth and the famous Haha and Huhu, whose songs are sweet. O bull among
men! These were the divine gandharvas who sang. The apsaras were delighted and were adorned in every ornament. Those illustrious long-eyed ones danced—Anuna, Anavadya, Priyamukhya, Gunavara, Adrika, Shachi,
Mishrakeshi, Alambusha, Marichi, Shuchika, Lakshana, Kshema, Devi, Rambha, Manorama, Asita, Subahu,
Supriya, Suvapu, Pundarika, Sugandha, Suratha, Pramathini, Kamya and Sharadvati. All of them danced in groups.
Menaka, Sahajanya, Parnika, Punjikasthala, Kratusthala, Ghritachi, Vishvachi, Purvachitti, the one who is famous
as Umlocha and Pramlocha—these ten and Urvashi as the eleventh were long-eyed apsaras who sang. The adityas,

radiant like the ﬂames of ﬁre, were assembled in the sky to increase the glory of the great Pandava—Dhata, Aryama, Mitra, Varuna, Amsha, Bhaga, Indra, Vivasvat, Pusha, Tvashta, Parjanya and Vishnu. O lord of the earth. The
illustrious rudras were there—Mrigavyadha, Sharva, the immensely famous Nirriti, Aja Ekapada, Ahirbudhnya,
Pinaki the destroyer of enemies, Dahana, Ishvara, Kapali, Sthanu and the illustrious Bhaga. The Ashvins, the eight
vasus, the immensely powerful maruts, the vishvadevas and the saddhyas were also assembled there. The serpents
Karkotaka, Shesha and Vasuki, Kacchapa, Apakunda and the mighty serpent Takshaka were there, with great energy, great anger and great strength. Many other serpents also assembled there. There were also Vinata’s sons—Tarkshya, Arishtanemi, Garuda, Asitadhvaja, Aruna and Aruni. When they saw this great wonder, the supreme hermits
were astounded. Their affection towards Pandu’s sons increased even more.
‘But the immensely famous Pandu was again greedy for more sons. He summoned the beautiful Kunti yet again.
However, she said, “A fourth son has not been heard of, even in times of calamity. After that, a woman is called
promiscuous. After the ﬁfth, she is called a courtesan. You are learned in the ways of dharma. You are wise. Because of the desire for offspring, why are you transgressing the law and speaking as if you have lost your reason?”’
115

Vaishampayana said, ‘After Kunti’s sons were born and Dhritarashtra’s sons, the daughter of the king of Madra
privately spoke to Pandu. “O scorcher of enemies! I am not distressed, even though you ﬁnd no qualities in me. O
unblemished one! Though I am superior,307 I have always been regarded as inferior. O king! O descendant of the
Kuru lineage! I have not grieved on learning that Gandhari has given birth to 100 sons. But I do have a great unhappiness. We are not equal in that neither of us has sons. However, it is my destiny that my husband has obtained
sons through Kunti alone. If the princess Kunti can arrange it so that I too have sons, she will do me a favour and
this will be for your welfare too. Since she is my co-wife, I ﬁnd it awkward to speak to Kuntibhoja’s daughter. But
if you are pleased with me, please ask her yourself.” Pandu replied, “O Madri! I have always thought about this
matter in my own mind. But I hesitated to speak to you, because I didn’t know whether you would like it or not.
Now that I know what you desire, I will act on it. I am certain that she will not refuse when I speak to her.” Thereupon, Pandu spoke to Kunti in private.
‘Pandu said, “O fortunate one! Please give me offspring for the lineage and the worlds. Do that which pleases
me. Ensure that I, my ancestors and my successors always have funeral cakes. For the sake of giving me pleasure,
you will have to perform a supreme act that brings welfare. Do this extremely difﬁcult act for the sake of your
fame. Even though Indra has obtained sovereignty, he still performs sacriﬁces, so that he can obtain fame. O beautiful one! There are Brahmanas who know the mantras and have obtained ascetic powers that are difﬁcult to obtain.
For the sake of fame, they too go to preceptors. All rajarshis and all Brahmanas who are blessed with the power of
austerities perform the most difﬁcult of deeds for the sake of fame. O unblemished one! Obtain supreme fame and
save Madri with a boat. Bestow children on her.” Having been thus addressed, she spoke to Madri. “Think of some
god once and through him you will certainly obtain a son who will be like him.” After thinking about this for some
time, Madri thought about the two Ashvins in her mind. They came and she obtained twin sons—Nakula and Sahadeva. Their beauty was unmatched on earth.
‘When the twins were born, the invisible voice spoke again. “These beautiful, brave and righteous sons will
have qualities that will surpass all men. They will be radiant in energy, handsome and prosperous.” O lord of the
earth! The inhabitants of the Shatashringa mountains performed the rites of birth and affectionately named them.
The eldest of Kunti’s sons was named Yudhishthira. The one in the middle was named Bhimasena. And the third
one was named Arjuna. Affectionately, the Brahmanas named the ﬁrst of Madri’s sons Nakula. And the one born
later was named Sahadeva. These supreme ones of the Kuru lineage were born one year apart.
‘For Madri’s sake, Pandu once again spoke to Kunti in private. But Pritha replied, “O king! I gave her the secret
to be used once. But she obtained two and I was deceived. I am worried that she will get the better of me.308 This
is the evil way of women. Fool that I was, I did not know that by summoning two gods at one time, the fruits could
also be doubled. Therefore, do not command me again. This is a boon that I ask from you.” Thus, ﬁve sons were
born to Pandu through the gods. They were immensely powerful, performed great deeds and extended the Kuru
lineage. They bore all the auspicious marks and were as handsome as the moon. They were as proud as lions, their

gait was as powerful as lions and they were great archers. Their necks were like those of lions, they were the lords
of men and they grew up with the valour of the gods. They grew up in the sacred Himalaya Mountains. On seeing
them grow, the maharshis who were assembled there were astounded. These ﬁve, and the other hundred, extended
the Kuru lineage. They grew up in a short while, like lotuses in a pond.’
116

Vaishampayana said, ‘Pandu saw his ﬁve handsome sons grow up in that great forest on the mountain, protected by
the strength of his arms. One day, it was the season of spring, when the forests are in full bloom and all beings are
drunk and maddened. The king was roaming through the forest with his wives. Pandu saw the forest, with trees
like palasha, tilaka, chuta,309champaka, paribhadraka and many other trees that were laden with ﬂowers and
fruit. The ponds were beautiful with many different kinds of lotuses.
‘On seeing this, his heart turned to thoughts of love. Like a god, he was wandering around happily. Madri followed him, clad in a beautiful and semi-transparent garment. On seeing her youth through that garment, desire
stirred in him, like a dense forest ﬁre. The king stared at the one with eyes like that of a blue lotus, like his own. He
could not control his desire and desire overpowered him. In that private place, the king forcibly seized her. The
queen struggled and resisted, to the best of her strength. But his heart was taken over by desire. He did not remember the curse. Following the dharma of intercourse, he forcibly entered Madri. Under the control of love, the descendant of the Kuru lineage acted so as to end his own life. He had no fear of the curse and penetrated his beloved
forcibly. With desire in his heart, his intelligence was deluded by destiny itself. Since he was prey to his senses, his
consciousness was destroyed. Pandu, the descendant of the Kuru lineage and supremely devoted to dharma, succumbed to the law of time when united with his wife.
‘Embracing the senseless king in her arms, the miserable Madri began to repeatedly and loudly lament. Kunti
and the Pandavas, who were her sons and Madri’s sons, all came to the place where the king was lying. O king!
Madri called out to Kunti. “Come here alone and leave the children there.” Hearing these words, she asked the
children to stay away. Coming closer, she screamed, “I am dead.” On seeing both Pandu and Madri lying on the
ground, Kunti’s body was overcome with grief and she lamented miserably. “This hero always protected me by
controlling himself.310 You knew about the hermit’s curse. Why did you transgress it? O Madri! You should have
protected this king. Instead, why did you tempt him in this lonely place? Knowing and thinking about the curse, he
was always miserable. How did he ﬁnd pleasure when he was alone with you? O daughter of Bahlika! You are
more fortunate than I. You have seen the lord of the earth’s face when he was happy.” Madri replied, “It was I who
got tempted. I tried to resist him repeatedly, but could not stay away. It was as if he was intent on making his destiny true.” Kunti said, “By law, I am the eldest of the two wives. The fruits of dharma accrue to me. O Madri! O
beautiful one! Therefore, do not try to restrain me from what must be done. I will accompany my husband who has
gone to the land of the dead. Arise and let him go. Take care of the children.” Madri replied, “I am still embracing
my husband and have not let him escape. Nor has my desire yet been satisﬁed. O elder one! Please give me permission. The best of the Bharata lineage came to me for the sake of desire. With his desire unsatisﬁed, how can I
let him go to Yama’s abode? O revered one! If I live, it is certain that I will not be able to treat your children and
mine in the same way and that sin will touch me. O Kunti! But you will be able to bring up my children as your
own. The king has gone to the land of the dead because of his desire for me. Therefore, my body should be burnt
with the king’s body. O revered one! Do what is pleasurable to me and burn them together. Watch over the children
and think kindly of me. I cannot think of anything else I need to say.” Having said this, the illustrious daughter of
the king of Madra, wife by law to that bull among men, climbed onto the ﬁre of that funeral pyre.’
117

Vaishampayana said, ‘The maharshis who were the equals of the gods performed Pandu’s last rites. Then the ascetics assembled and consulted each other. “For the welfare of the kingdom and the country, the great-souled great
ascetic came here, to live among ascetics and practise austerities. King Pandu has gone to heaven and has left his
sons, who have just been born, and his wife as a treasure we must look after.” Having consulted with each other,

those who are engaged in the welfare of all beings decided to go to the city of Nagasahrya,311 with Pandu’s sons
in front of them. Those generous and accomplished ones decided on the journey, so as to give the Pandavas to
Bhishma and Dhritarashtra. As soon as they decided, the ascetics set out at that very moment, with Pandu’s sons
and wife and the two bodies.312
‘Earlier, she had always been used to a life of comfort. Now, out of affection for her sons, she thought that the
long road was actually short. Within a short time, she reached Kurujangala and the illustrious one came to the
chief313 gate of the city. The citizens of Nagapura314 were astounded on learning that thousands of charanas and
sages had come to their city. It was the moment of sunrise. After paying their respects to dharma, the inhabitants of
the city and their wives came out to see the ascetics. Masses of women, Kshatriyas, vehicles and Brahmanas with
their wives emerged, and large masses of Vaishyas and Shudras too. Their minds were all on dharma and there was
no cause for disturbance. Shantanu’s son Bhishma, Somadatta’s son Bahlika, the rajarshi with the sight of
wisdom,315 the kshatta Vidura himself, and surrounded by maids, the queen Satyavati, the illustrious Kousalya
and Gandhari, emerged through the royal gate. Dhritarashtra’s 100 sons, with Duryodhana at the forefront, also
came out, adorned in myriad ornaments. On seeing the masses of maharshis, the Kouravas and their priests bowed
their heads in homage and sat down below them. The citizens of the town and the country also bowed their heads
down to the ground and sat down below them. On seeing that the crowd was completely quiet, Bhishma offered
the kingdom and the country to the maharshis.
‘At this, with the concurrence of the other maharshis, the eldest maharshi, with matted hair and a deerskin as his
garment, spoke: “King Pandu of the Kuru lineage gave up a life of desire and pleasure and left for Shatashringa.
He lived the life of a brahmachari there. But to accomplish the purposes of the gods, this son Yudhishthira was
born there from Dharma himself. Then that great-souled king was given another son named Bhima by
Matarishva316 and he is immensely powerful, best among those who are strong. Puruhuta317 gave Kunti this son.
Truth is his strength and his exploits will shadow those of all other great archers. These two sons of Madri are
great archers and supreme among those of the Kuru lineage. They were born from the Ashvins and are tigers
among men. The illustrious Pandu always lived a life of dharma in the forest and in this way he revived his ancestral lineage. As he witnessed the birth, growth and study of the Vedas of his sons, Pandu always derived great pleasure. He never deviated from the righteous path. Having left these sons, Pandu has departed for the land of the ancestors seventeen days ago. On seeing him on the funeral pyre and about to be consumed by the face of the ﬁre,
Madri entered the ﬁre and gave up her own life. She has followed to the world of her husband. Now perform those
rites that should be performed for them. These are the two bodies and here are the supreme sons. Let these
scorchers of enemies and their mother be respectfully received with rites of welcome. After the performance of the
funeral rites, let Pandu, the upholder of the Kuru lineage, extremely famous and knowledgeable in all aspects of
dharma, gain the right to ancestral offerings.” Having thus addressed the Kurus, all the charanas, guhyakas, rishis
and siddhas vanished in an instant before the eyes of the Kurus, like a city of the gandharvas, leading to great
amazement.’
118

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Vidura! Perform all the royal funeral rites for Pandu, that lion among kings, and also specially for Madri. For the sake of Pandu and Madri, give away animals, garments, jewels and all kinds of riches to
any that ask for them and as much as they want. Perform her rites the way Kunti would. Let her body be covered
well, so that the sun and the wind cannot see it. Let there be no lamentations for the unblemished Pandu. He was a
king to be praised. And ﬁve brave sons have been born to him, like the sons of the gods.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Vidura, with Bhishma, did as he had been asked. He
performed Pandu’s funeral rites in an extremely pure spot. Without any waste of time, the royal priests left the city,
carrying with them a fragrant and ﬂaming ﬁre for Pandu. He was laid on a bier and covered with the best of scents
and garlands and covered from all sides with cloth. This bier was also adorned with garlands, garments and great
riches. Advisers, relatives and friends arrived. The lion among men was placed on a supremely decorated hearse,
to be drawn by men. With the well-covered Madri, the hearse was then pulled by men. A white umbrella was held

above the hearse and whisks made of yak tails were waved. With every musical instrument being played, it was a
majestic scene. At the time of Pandu’s funeral ceremony, hundreds of men distributed jewels among the crowd.
Large white and pale umbrellas and beautiful garments were brought for the Kourava. The sacriﬁcial priests wore
white and poured offerings into the blazing and strong ﬁre that went ahead. Thousands of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas,
Vaishyas and Shudras followed the king, lamenting in grief: “O king! O protector! Where are you going, leaving
us unprotected and immersing us in eternal grief?” Bhishma, Vidura and Pandu’s sons wept.
‘At last they came to a beautiful, sacred and wooded region on the banks of the Ganga. On the plain, Pandu’s
hearse, truthful lion among men whose deeds were untainted, and that of his wife were laid down. The bodies were
then scented with all kinds of perfumes, sanctiﬁed with pure fragrances, consecrated with the best of oils and
bathed. Water was sprinkled from a hundred golden pots. White sandalwood paste was smeared, mixed with black
aloe and the juice of coconuts. They were then draped in white cotton garments. Dressed in these garments, that
bull among men, tiger among men, seemed to be alive, as if sleeping on an expensive bed. When the other funeral
rites were over, the sacriﬁcal priests gave their consent. The ornamented bodies of the king and Madri were covered in ghee. Fragrances like sandalwood, tunga, padmaka and many other scents were applied and a ﬁre was lit.
On seeing the two bodies in ﬂames, Kousalya lamented in her son’s name and fell down on the ground, unconscious. Seeing her fall down in this way, the citizens of the town and the country also wept in grief, out of the affection they bore for the king. Along with men, all the other beings also cried out, even those of inferior births.
Shantanu’s son Bhishma wept in great sorrow, as did the immensely wise Vidura. All the other Kurus were also
extremely miserable and unhappy. Then Bhishma, Vidura, the king, the relatives and the women of the Kuru lineage offered the water. O king! When the water ceremony was over, all the ordinary people sorrowed and consoled
the Pandavas, who were overcome with grief.
‘O king! With their relatives, the Pandavas slept on the ground. The Brahmanas and the citizens also slept on the
ground. The Pandavas and the city, young and old, grieved for twelve nights, unhappy and miserable.’
119

Vaishampayana said, ‘Later, the kshatta, the king, Bhishma and the relatives performed Pandu’s shraddha, offering
the immortal cake. The Kurus and the chief Brahmanas were offered a feast in their thousands. A large number of
gems and the best of villages were given to the chief Brahmanas. When the period of uncleanliness was over, the
Pandavas, bulls among the Bharata lineage, were taken by the citizens to the city of Varanasahrya.318 All the citizens of the town and the country still lamented for that bull of the Bharata lineage, as if they had lost a relative.
When the shraddha ceremony was over, Vyasa saw that the people were still immersed in grief. He spoke to his
mother, who was also immersed in grief. “Happy times are over. Terrible times lie ahead. The earth has lost her
youth and every day is more sinful than the preceding one. A terrible time is coming—full of many delusions,
thick with many vices and with the rituals of dharma destroyed. Give everything up and go and live in a hermitage.
You will not be able to witness the destruction of your sons and lineage.” She agreed to this. She entered her
daughter-in-law’s quarters and said, “O Ambika! O fortunate one! I hear that as a result of the evil acts committed
by your son, this Bharata lineage, along with all its relatives and grandsons, will be destroyed. I will take
Kousalya,319 who is still grieving from the death of her son, and leave for the forest. Come if you want.” O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Ambika consented. Taking Bhishma’s permission, Satyavati, the one who was
rigid in her vows, went off to the forest with both her daughters-in-law. O supreme among those of the Bharata lineage! There the queens performed terrible austerities. O king! They gave up their bodies and went on their journey.
‘After observing all the rites prescribed in the Vedas, the Pandavas then began to grow up in their father’s house,
enjoying a life of pleasure. When they played childish games in their father’s house with Dhritarashtra’s sons, they
excelled over them—in running fast, in hitting targets, in eating and in raising dust. Bhimasena defeated all of
Dhritarashtra’s sons. Playfully, he grabbed them by the hair above their ears. He caught them by the heads when
they fought with the Pandavas. Alone and with the least effort, Vrikodara oppressed those 101 sons, who possessed
great energy. The strongest of the strong would kick them with his feet. He would throw them down on the ground
and break their thighs, heads and shoulders. When playing in the water, he would sometimes catch ten of them in
his arms and hold them down in the water, letting them go only when they were about to drown. When they

climbed a tree to gather fruit, Bhima would kick the tree with his feet and make it shake. Shaken by the force, the
tree would whirl around and swiftly fall down on the ground with its fruit, frightening the princes. In ﬁghts, speed
and martial exercises, the princes were never able to get the better of Vrikodara in any competition. Thus, in any
competition, Dhritarashtra’s sons began to hate Vrikodara, even though he bore no ill will towards them, since he
was only a child.
‘Bhimasena’s great strength became well known. On learning this, Dhritarashtra’s powerful son320 revealed the
evil side of his nature. He was wicked and inclined towards evil. Out of delusion and greed for riches, an evil
thought occurred to him. “Kunti’s son Vrikodara, the second of the Pandavas, is the best in strength. I must ﬁnd
some trick so as to kill him. Then I will overpower his younger brother and his elder brother Yudhishthira. I will tie
them up and reign as the sovereign of the earth.” Having made his mind up about this evil act, Duryodhana was
always on the lookout for a chance to get at the great-souled Bhima.
‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! For the sake of water sports, he had a wonderful and large sports house
constructed, with cotton and wool. It was full of every object of desire. It was at a place known as Pramanakoti and
slightly above the waterline. When the games were over, they would dress themselves in fresh garments, wear ornaments and quickly eat. When day was over, the valorous Kuru princes would be exhausted from their games and
would rest in that sports house. The powerful Bhima always prevailed over the other princes in water sports. But
on one occasion, he was tired at there having been an excess of exercise. He wished to sleep in Pramanakoti and
climbed up the bank and found a spot. He was clad in a white garment. He was tired and he was under the inﬂuence of drink. O king! The Pandava was tired and slept like one who was dead. Then Duryodhana quietly tied him
up with thongs made of creepers. He rolled him down from the land into the swift and deep waters. Regaining his
consciousness, Kounteya321 tore apart all the bonds. Bhima, supreme among those who wield arms, arose from
the water. On another occasion when Bhima was again sleeping, he322 brought many snakes—sharp in teeth, immensely poisonous, angry and virulent. He made them bite him323 in all the soft spots of his body. But even when
they bit him in the soft spots, they could not bring him down. They could not penetrate his skin, because the broadchested one was too tough. When Bhima woke up, he killed all the snakes. He and his companions324 became
very careful from that time onwards. He also had poison mixed in Bhimasena’s food. This was freshly made
kalakuta poison, so virulent that it made the hair on the body stand up. On this occasion, the Vaishya’s son325
alerted Pritha’s sons, so as to ensure their welfare. But though Vrikodara ate this, it had no effect on him. Though
the poison was extremely virulent and was meant to kill Bhima, Bhima digested and tolerated it.
‘Then Duryodhana, Karna and Subala’s son Shakuni tried many other means to kill the Pandavas. However, the
Pandavas, scorchers of their enemies, got to know about all of these. As advised by Vidura, they never revealed all
this.’
120

Janamejaya said, ‘O, great Brahmana! Please tell me about Kripa. How was he born from a clump of reeds? How
did he get his weapons?’326
Vaishampayana said, “Maharshi Goutama had a son named Sharadvat. O king! This son was so named because
he was born armed with arrows.327 O destroyer of enemies! His intelligence was not attracted to the study of the
Vedas. Instead, his intelligence was more attracted to the study of Dhanur Veda.328 Just as those who know the
brahman acquire all their knowledge of the Vedas through austerities, he acquired all his weapons through austerities. Goutama’s son worried the king of the gods because of his austerities and because of his expertise in Dhanur
Veda. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! The lord of the gods summoned a daughter of the gods named Janapadi
and told her, “Create impediments in his austerities.” She went to Sharadvat’s beautiful hermitage. The young
woman began to tempt Goutama’s son, who had a bow and arrows in his hand. The apsara was only clad in a single piece of cloth. On seeing her wandering around in the forest alone, with a form that was unparalleled in the
worlds, Goutama’s son’s eyes became wide open. The bow and arrows slipped down from his hands onto the
ground. On seeing her, his body went numb. But he still possessed his knowledge and the power of his austerities.

The immensely wise one used his patience to resist temptation. O king! However, a sudden fever overcame him
and though he did not notice it, his semen issued forth. The sage left the hermitage and the apsara. His semen fell
on a clump of reeds and having fallen there, divided itself into two. From this, a pair of twins was born to Goutama’s son Sharadvat.
‘King Shantanu had gone on a hunt and one of his soldiers happened to notice the twins. He saw a bow and arrows around them and also a black deerskin. He therefore deduced that they were the sons of a Brahmana who was
learned in DhanurVeda. He showed the twins and the arrows to the king. Out of compassion, the king adopted the
twins. He took them home, saying that they were like his children. He performed the usual rites and began to rear
them. Goutama’s son, who had left, became an expert in Dhanur Veda. Because the children had been reared out of
compassion, the lord of the earth decided to name them accordingly.329 Through the power of his austerities,
Goutama’s son got to know where they were, though no one knew the secret. He went there and told everything,
including his lineage. He taught him330 the four parts of Dhanur Veda331 and the usage of many different kinds
of weapons, including all the secrets associated with them. He soon became a great teacher. All the maharathas
learnt Dhanur Veda from him. This included Dhritarashtra’s sons, the immensely powerful Pandavas, the Vrishnis
and other kings who assembled from many countries.’
121

Vaishampayana said, ‘Bhishma wanted his grandsons to do especially well and wished to instil discipline. He
therefore asked around for a preceptor who would be learned in archery and would be valorous. A man of little intelligence, who wasn’t illustrious, wasn’t an expert in all weapons and didn’t have divine prowess, would never
have been able to discipline the immensely powerful Kurus.
‘In ancient times, maharshi Bharadvaja was once getting ready to pour oblations into the ﬁre. The rishi saw the
apsara Ghritachi herself, bathing.332 The wind blew her garment away. At that, his semen issued out and the wise
one placed it in a vessel.333 The wise Drona was then born from that pot. He studied all the Vedas and the Vedangas. The powerful Bharadvaja, supreme among those who know dharma, taught the knowledge of the agneya
weapon to the illustrious Agniveshya. O supreme among those of the Bharata lineage! The sage who was born
from the ﬁre334 gave knowledge of the great weapon agneya to Bharadvaja’s son.
‘Bharadvaja had a friend and he was a king named Prishata. A son named Drupada was born to him. Prishata’s
son, that bull among Kshatriyas, always used to go to Drona’s hermitage to play and study with him. When Prishata died, Drupada became the king, a mighty-armed lord of men over northern Panchala. The illustrious Bharadvaja
also ascended to heaven. Obeying the instructions of his father and driven by the desire to obtain a son, the immensely famous Drona took Sharadvat’s daughter Kripi for a wife. This descendant of Goutama was always engaged in agnihotra, the pursuit of dharma and self-control. She obtained a son named Ashvatthama. As soon as he
was born, he neighed like the horse Ucchaihshrava. On hearing this, an invisible voice said from the sky, “Since
this boy neighed like a horse and his voice carried over a long distance, he will be known as Ashvatthama.”335
Bharadvaja’s son was extremely pleased with his son. He continued to live there and became extremely skilled in
Dhanur Veda.
‘The great-souled son336 of Jamadagni was a conqueror of enemies. O king! He337 heard that he was giving
away all his wealth to Brahmanas. Bharadvaja’s son spoke to him when Rama338 was already leaving for the forest. He said, “I have come in search of riches. Know that I am Drona, a bull among Brahmanas.” Rama replied, “O
one blessed with the power of austerities! Nothing is left of the gold or other riches that I possessed. I have given it
all away to Brahmanas. I have given to Kashyapa, the goddess earth, right up to the boundaries of the ocean, with
all her settlements and garlands of cities. Now I only have this body with me, weapons and many precious
weapons. O Drona! Tell me quickly what you want. I will give it to you.” Drona said, “O descendant of the Bhrigu
lineage! Give me all your arms and weapons of destruction, especially the knowledge of releasing them and withdrawing them.” Agreeing to this, the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage gave him all his weapons, especially all the

mysteries of Dhanur Veda. Having received this, that supreme among Brahmanas became accomplished in the use
of weapons and happily went to see his beloved friend Drupada.’
122

Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! Bharadvaja’s powerful son went to Prishata’s son and said, “Recognize me.” Drupada replied, “O Brahmana! Your wisdom is lacking and inferior, if you suddenly begin to address me as your friend.
O one with a dull mind! No great king can ever be a friend with men like you. You have no prosperity, nor do you
have riches. Time decays everything, including friendship. It is true that we were friends once, but that was based
on a relationship of equality. No friendship can be found in the world that does not age; desire and anger both destroy it. Do not therefore talk about a friendship that has died out. O best of Brahmanas! Find a fresh friendship. I
was friends with you because it served my purpose. The poor cannot be a friend to the rich. The fool cannot be a
friend to the learned. The weak cannot a friend of the strong. Who wants an old friendship? Those of similar
wealth and similar lineage can have marriages and friendship together, not one who is rich with one who is poor.
One who is learned in the Vedas339 cannot be a friend to one who is not learned. One with chariots cannot be a
friend to one who has no chariots. A king cannot be a friend to one who is not a king. Who wants this old friendship?” Thus addressed by Drupada, Bharadvaja’s powerful son was full of wrath and reﬂected for a while. The
wise one thought about a course of action for Panchala340 and made his way to Gajasahrya341, the chief city of
the Kurus.
‘One day, all the Kuru princes came out of Gajasahrya together. The brave ones wandered around, playing with
a wooden ball.342 While they were playing, the ball fell into a well. With all their efforts, they couldn’t ﬁnd a way
to recover the ball. The valorous Drona saw that the princes were unsuccessful in their attempts. He laughed at
them a little and then softly told them, “Shame on your Kshatriya prowess! Shame on your knowledge of weapons!
You have been born in the Bharata lineage and yet you cannot recover a ball. Here is a handful of reeds343 that I
have invested with the mantra of my weapons. Look at their power, unmatched by that of anything else. I will
pierce the ball with one of these reeds and that reed with another one and that one with another. With the chain of
reeds, I will bring the ball up into my hands.” On seeing this, the eyes of the princes widened with wonder. They
saw him pull up the ball and spoke to the one who had pulled the ball up. “O Brahmana! We pay homage to you.
No one else has the knowledge to do that. Who are you? We wish to know your lineage. What can we do for you?”
Drona replied, “Go to Bhishma and tell him of my appearance and qualities. He has great intelligence and will
know what should be done.” The princes agreed. They went to Bhishma, the grandfather, and told him exactly
what the Brahmana had said and done. On hearing this from the princes, Bhishma immediately recognized Drona.
He thought that this would be the right preceptor. He went to him in person and paid him the highest of respects.
Bhishma, the greatest of those who wielded arms, then skilfully asked Drona about the reason why he had come
there and he told him the entire reason.
‘Drona said, “Desiring to learn the science of Dhanur Veda, I earlier went to maharshi Agniveshya. I lived there
for a long time, as a humble brahmachari with matted hair, desiring to learn Dhanur Veda. The powerful Yajnasena, son of the king of Panchala, hardworking and dedicated, also studied with me under that teacher. There he became my friend and was always willing to do what brought me happiness. I also loved his company. O descendant
of the Kuru lineage! We studied together from the time we were boys. He would come to me and do things that
were pleasurable for me. O Bhishma! He used to say things that brought me pleasure: ‘I am the favourite son of
my great-souled father. O friend! When I am instated by the king of Panchala in the kingdom, it will be yours to
enjoy. I swear truthfully on this. My pleasures, riches and happiness will all be yours.’ This is the way he spoke to
me then. Having become skilled in use of weapons, I set out in search of riches. When I heard that he had been instated, I remembered those words. Happily, I went to see my old friend in his kingdom. O lord! Remembering
those words, I went to my old friend Drupada and told him, ‘O tiger among men! Recognize me as your friend.’
But he laughed at me, as if I was a person who was unimportant. He said, ‘O Brahmana! Your wisdom is lacking
and inferior. O Brahmana! Why have you suddenly come to me, claiming to be my friend? O one with a dull mind!
No great king can ever be a friend with men like you. You have no prosperity, nor do you have riches. The poor

cannot be a friend to the rich. The fool cannot be a friend to the learned. The weak cannot a friend of the strong.
The king cannot be a friend to one who is not a king. Who wants an old friendship?’ O Bhishma! I was ﬂooded
with anger at Drupada’s words and I made my way to the land of the Kurus, in search of disciples who might have
the right qualities.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Bhishma and Pandu’s sons accepted him as a preceptor. O king! With all kinds of riches,
he handed over his grandsons as disciples to Drona, in accordance with the prescribed manner. Delighted, that
great archer accepted the Kouravas as his disciples. Having accepted them, Drona called all of them together and
told them privately, when they were seated at his feet, “O unblemished ones! There is a special task in my heart.
You must promise me that you will give it to me when you have become skilled in the use of arms.” O lord! When
they heard him, the Kouravas remained silent. But Arjuna, the scorcher of enemies, gave him a complete promise
and he then inhaled the scent of Arjuna’s forehead repeatedly, embracing him delightedly and shedding tears of
joy.
‘Then the valorous Drona taught Pandu’s sons the use of many weapons, human and divine. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! Other princes also came to Drona, supreme among Brahmanas, to learn the use of arms—the Vrishnis, the Andhakas, kings from many countries and Radheya,344 the son of the suta. They made Drona their preceptor. The suta’s son was envious of Partha and always competed with him. With Duryodhana’s support, he
showed his contempt for the Pandavas.’
123

Vaishampayana said, ‘Arjuna took a great deal of care in worshipping his preceptor and showed the greatest devotion in learning the art of weapons. He became a great favourite of Drona’s. Drona summoned the cook and told
him secretly, “Never give Arjuna any food when it is dark.” One day, when Arjuna was eating, a wind arose and
blew out the lamp and its light. Arjuna continued to eat in the dark, his hand moving to his mouth from force of
habit. The Pandava then began to practise in the night. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona heard the
twang of his bowstring and came to him and embraced him. He said, “I promise you that I will do my utmost to
ensure that you are the best archer in this world and there is no one equal to you.” Then Drona taught Arjuna the
art of ﬁghting from horses, elephants, chariots and on the ground. Drona taught the Pandava how to ﬁght in narrow
conﬁnes345 with clubs, swords, spears, javelins and lances. On witnessing his skills, thousands of kings and
princes assembled to learn the science of Dhanur Veda.
‘O king! Ekalavya was the son of Hiranyadhanu, the king of the nishadas. He came to Drona. However, since he
was the son of a nishada,346 Drona, who was learned in dharma, thought about it and refused to accept him as a
student of archery, out of consideration for the others. That conqueror of enemies touched Drona’s feet with his
head. He went to the forest and used clay to make Drona’s image. He began to worship and treat this as his preceptor, devoting his mind to learning archery in accordance with the proper disciplines. As a consequence of his exceptional faith and supreme devotion, he acquired great dexterity in ﬁxing an arrow to the string of the bow, aiming and then releasing it. One day, with Drona’s permission, all the Kurus and the Pandavas, conquerors of their
enemies, went out on their chariots for a hunt. O king! A servant followed the Pandavas, carrying the required objects with him and he had a dog with him. They wandered around in the forest, their hearts set on what they wished
to do. The dog also wandered off in the forest, got lost and came upon the nishada. On seeing the dark nishada in
the forest, his body covered with dirt and clad in a dark deerskin, the dog began to bark. When it kept on barking,
he displayed great dexterity. In one instant, he shot seven arrows into its mouth. The dog dashed back to the Pandavas, its mouth full of arrows. On seeing this, the brave Pandavas were extremely surprised. At this supreme and
dextrous feat of shooting blind,347they praised the person who had done this, but were also ashamed of their own
skills. O king! The Pandavas went out to search for the forest-dweller who had done this and found him, tirelessly
shooting arrows. They did not know him and his appearance wasn’t handsome. They asked him, “Who are you and
whose son are you?” Ekalavya replied, “Know me to be the son of Hiranyadhanu, the king of the nishadas. I am
Drona’s student and I am trying to become skilled in Dhanur Veda.” The Pandavas ascertained the details of everything that had happened.

‘On return, they told Drona the entire story. O king! Kounteya Arjuna kept thinking about Ekalavya. He went to
Drona and affectionately told him, “In your affection, you embraced me and told me that no pupil of yours would
ever be my equal. How is it that you have another valorous pupil in this world, the son of the nishada king, who is
better than everyone else?” Thereupon, Drona thought for a moment and arrived at a decision. He took
Savyasachi348 with him and went to the nishada. He found Ekalavya, his body covered with ﬁlth. His hair was
matted and he was attired in rags. However, with a bow in his hand, he was ceaselessly shooting arrows. On seeing
Drona approach, Ekalavya went up to him. He prostrated himself on the ground and touched his feet with his head.
After worshipping Drona in the prescribed way, the nishada’s son told him that he was his student and stood before
him with joined hands. At this, Drona told Ekalavya, “If you are my student, give me my fee.” On hearing this,
Ekalavya happily asked, “O illustrious one! What can I give you? Command me. O you who know the brahman!
There is nothing that cannot be given to the preceptor.” Drona said, “Give me your right thumb as a fee.” On hearing Drona’s terrible words, Ekalavya kept his promise. Always devoted to the truth, he cheerfully cut off his own
right thumb, with happiness on his face and peace in his heart, and gave it to Drona. O lord of men! After that,
when he pulled the bowstring with his other ﬁngers, the nishada found that he was no longer as swift as earlier.
Arjuna was pleased and his fever went away. Drona’s words, that no one would be able to surpass Arjuna, came
true.
‘Among all the Kurus who were Drona’s students, two became particularly skilled in ﬁghting with clubs—Duryodhana and Bhima. Ashvatthama excelled in the use of all secret weapons. The twins were better than all other
men in the use of the sword. Yudhishthira was supreme in ﬁghting with chariots. However, Dhananjaya349 was the
best in ﬁghting with every weapon. The Pandava was famous on earth, right up to the frontiers of the ocean, for his
intelligence, perseverance, strength and enterprise in all weapons. He was thus the foremost among all warriors.
Arjuna was special, not just in his knowledge of weapons, but also in his devotion to his preceptor, though the instructions were the same for everyone. Alone among all the princes, Arjuna became an atiratha.350 O lord of
men! Dhritarashtra’s evil-souled sons could not stand Bhimasena’s great strength and Arjuna’s great skill and hated
them.
‘O bull among men! When they became skilled in all knowledge, in a desire to examine their skill with
weapons, Drona assembled them together. He got an artisan to construct an artiﬁcial bird and placed it on top of a
tree. The princes could hardly see it and it was to be used as a target. Drona said, “Quickly pick up your bows, all
of you. Fix arrows to the string of the bow, stand here and aim at that bird in the tree. O sons! When I give you permission, one after another, slice off the bird’s head.” The greatest of Angirasa’s descendants ﬁrst addressed Yudhishthira. “O invincible one! Aim with your arrow and let it go, as soon as I have asked you to.” Yudhishthira ﬁrst
picked up a bow that made a loud noise. Then, as instructed by his preceptor, he stood, aiming at the bird. The descendant of the Kuru lineage stood there, with his bow stretched. O, bull among the Kuru lineage! After a short
time, Drona asked, “O prince! Can you see that bird on the top of the tree?” “I can see it,” Yudhishthira replied to
his preceptor. After some time, Drona again asked, “Can you see the tree? Can you see me? Can you see your
brothers?” In reply to each question, Kounteya351 answered, one after the other: “I can see the large tree. I can see
you. I can see the bird.” Drona was displeased at these words and reproachfully told him, “This is not for you. You
will not be able to hit the target.” Then the immensely illustrious one placed Duryodhana in the same position and
Dhritarashtra’s other sons, one after another, so as to test them. Bhima and the other students and the kings who
had come from other countries were also asked. All of them said that they could see everything and were scolded.
‘Smilingly, Drona then summoned Dhananjaya. “This target is for you to shoot down. Listen. As soon as I ask
you to, you must shoot. O son! Stand here for a moment, with your bow taut.” Thus addressed, Savyasachi drew
his bow into a semicircle, aimed at the target and stood there, as his preceptor had instructed. After a while, Drona
asked him in the same way. “O Arjuna! Do you see the bird seated there? Do you see the tree? Do you see me?”
Arjuna replied, “I can only see the bird. I cannot see the tree. Nor can I see you.” Pleased, the invincible Drona
waited again for a moment. Then he again addressed the Pandava, bull among warriors. “If you can see the bird,
describe it to me.” Arjuna replied, “I can only see the bird’s head. I cannot see its body.” At Arjuna’s words, Drona
was delighted and his hair stood up. He told Partha, “Shoot,” and he let the arrow go. The Pandava sliced off the

head of the bird on the tree with his sharp arrow and brought it down on the ground. When Phalguna352 succeeded
in this task, Drona embraced him and deduced that Drupada and his relatives had already been vanquished in
battle.
‘O bull among the Bharata lineage! A few days later, the best of those of the Angirasa lineage went with his students to the Ganga to bathe. When Drona entered the water, a powerful crocodile grabbed him by the thigh, as if
sent by destiny itself. Though quite capable of saving himself, Drona told his students, “Kill the crocodile and
quickly save me.” Even before he had ﬁnished speaking, Bibhatsu353 let loose ﬁve sharp arrows that killed the
crocodile under the water. The others were still standing around, looking confused. On seeing the Pandava’s swiftness in action, Drona was extremely pleased and decided that he was the best of his students. The crocodile was
chopped into many pieces through Partha’s arrows. It let go of the great-souled one’s thigh and returned to the ﬁve
elements. Bharadvaja’s son told the great-souled maharatha, “O mighty-armed one! Receive this invincible and
supreme weapon, named brahmashira, with the knowledge of releasing it and withdrawing it. You must never use
it against human beings. If it is used against an enemy whose energy is inferior, it will burn up the entire universe.
O son! It is said that there is nothing superior to this weapon in the three worlds. Therefore, preserve it carefully
and listen to my words. O brave one! If a superhuman enemy ever ﬁghts with you, use this weapon to kill him in
battle.” With joined hands, Bibhatsu promised that he would do as he had been asked and received the supreme
weapon. His preceptor again told him, “No man in the world will be a greater archer than you.”’

Section Eight
Jatugriha-daha Parva
This parva has 373 shlokas and ﬁfteen chapters.
Chapter 124: 33 shlokas
Chapter 125: 32 shlokas
Chapter 126: 39 shlokas
Chapter 127: 24 shlokas
Chapter 128: 18 shlokas
Chapter 129: 18 shlokas
Chapter 130: 20 shlokas
Chapter 131: 18 shlokas
Chapter 132: 19 shlokas
Chapter 133: 30 shlokas
Chapter 134: 28 shlokas
Chapter 135: 21 shlokas
Chapter 136: 19 shlokas
Chapter 137: 23 shlokas
Chapter 138: 31 shlokas
Jatu is lac and griha is house. This parva is about the burning down of the house of lac.
124

Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the sons of Dhritarashtra and Pandu had
become masters in the use of arms, Drona spoke to King Dhritarashtra, lord of men, in the presence of Kripa, Somadatta, Bahlika, the wise son of Ganga,1 Vyasa and Vidura, “O king! O supreme among the Kurus! The princes
have now completed their learning. O king! With your permission, let them now display what they have learned.”
The great king replied with gladness in his heart, “O best of the Brahmanas! O Bharadvaja!2 You have accomplished a great task. You should yourself order me about how to arrange the display, the time and the place and
about the rules to be followed. Today, I grieve for my blindness and envy men who possess eyesight. They will
now be able to witness the prowess of my sons with weapons. O kshatta!3 O one who is devoted to dharma! Follow the instructions of this teacher and preceptor. I can’t think of anything that will be more agreeable to me.”
Thereupon, Vidura excused himself from the king’s presence and went out.
‘The immensely wise son of Bharadvaja measured out a ﬂat stretch of land that was devoid of trees and bushes,
but had wells and springs. O king! On that plot of ground, on a day when the nakshatras were auspicious, that
supreme of eloquent warriors made offerings and the reasons for that were announced in the city. A large arena
was constructed in accordance with the principles of the shastras, and equipped with diverse weapons. O bull
among men! Artisans constructed a giant viewing stand for the king and another for the women. The citizens built
many platforms. The wealthy ones constructed large and high palanquins.
‘When the day arrived, the king, accompanied by his advisers, came with Bhishma and the foremost of preceptors, Kripa, leading the way. They arrived at the divine royal viewing stand, constructed out of gold leaf, decorated
with lattices of pearl-work and adorned with lapis lazuli.4 O king who conquers all! Gandhari, the immensely fortunate Kunti and other ladies of the royal household arrived, dressed in beautiful garments and with their atten-

dants. They joyfully ascended the viewing stand, like goddesses ascending Mount Meru. Brahmanas, Kshatriyas
and others of the four varnas hurriedly left the city and arrived there, wishing to witness the skills of the princes in
the use of arms. With the sound of the music that was being played and the curiosity of the assembly, the crowd
was like a giant ocean rippling with waves. Then the preceptor entered the arena with his son. He was dressed in
white garments and wore a white sacred thread. His hair and beard were white. He wore a white garland and was
anointed with white paste. It was as if the moon and Mars had entered a sky that was bereft of rain clouds. At the
appropriate time, that supreme of warriors5 rendered offerings and instructed Brahmanas who knew the rites to recite mantras. Once the auspicious and pleasant musical instruments were quiet, men entered the arena, carrying diverse weapons and equipment.
‘Then the mighty bulls of the Bharata lineage6 tightened their lower garments and entered, equipped with bows,
quivers and ﬁnger protectors. With Yudhishthira leading the way, those princes, in order of their age, began to display great valour and wonderful skills in the use of weapons. Some7 lowered their heads, concerned that arrows
might fall on them. Other men who were not concerned looked on, in wonder and amazement. They pierced targets
with arrows that had their names engraved on them. They rode ﬂeet-footed horses skilfully. On witnessing the
strength of the princes in the use of bows and arrows, they were amazed and thought they were in a city of the
gandharvas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Hundreds and thousands of men, their eyes dilated with wonder,
cheered them on. After repeatedly demonstrating their skill in the use of bows and arrows, chariots, ﬁghting on elephants, ﬁghting on horses and duels, those strong ones then picked up swords and shields and began to circle one
another on the ground, exhibiting the various modes of attacking with a sword. They saw the agility, beauty, symmetry, balance, ﬁrmness of grasp and mastery in use of sword and shield.
‘Then, in great spirits, Suyodhana8 and Vrikodara entered, with clubs in their hands, like two single-peaked
mountains. Those mighty-armed warriors tightened their lower garments and roared, like two mad elephants trumpeting and contending.9 Those immensely strong ones circled each other with unblemished clubs, like mad elephants. Vidura described the feats of the princes to Dhritarashtra and the mother of the Pandavas10 described them
to Gandhari.’
125

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the Kuru prince11 and Bhima, supreme among strong ones, descended into the arena,
the spectators divided into two factions, each partial towards its own favourite. Some cried, “Look at the valorous
Kuru prince.” Others cried, “Look at the valorous Bhima.” A great roar arose from the cheers of the spectators. On
seeing that the place had become like a turbulent ocean, the wise son of Bharadvaja spoke to his beloved son Ashvatthama. Drona said, “Stop those two great warriors, both skilled. Let this crowd not become angered over Bhima
and Duryodhana.” Restrained by their preceptor’s son, those two raised their clubs, like violent oceans lashed by
tempests at the time of the world’s destruction.
‘Then Drona entered the arena and stopped the musical instruments in a voice that was as deep as the thunder of
the clouds. “Now behold Partha, who is dearer to me than my own son. He is skilled in the use of all weapons. He
is Indra’s son himself and is like Indra’s younger brother.” With his entrance blessed by his preceptor, the youthful
Phalguni12 appeared. He wore a ﬁnger protector and arm guard,13his quiver was full of arrows and he had a bow
in his hand. He wore golden armour and he looked like an evening cloud reﬂecting the rays of the setting sun, radiant as a rainbow with lightning ﬂashes. At this, a loud roar of joy arose everywhere in the arena. Musical instruments and conch shells sounded. “This is the middle Pandava, Kunti’s illustrious son.” “This is the great Indra’s
son, the protector of the Kurus.” “This is the supreme one among those who are skilled in the use of weapons.”
“This is the supreme one among those who tread the path of dharma.” “This is the foremost one in good conduct.”
“This is the treasury in knowledge of good conduct.” Hearing these loud and incomparable words from the spectators, Kunti’s tears mingled with milk from her breasts and made them damp.
‘Dhritarashtra’s ears were ﬁlled with the great roar and that best of men happily asked Vidura, “O kshatta! What
is this great uproar like the sound of a stormy sea, which suddenly arises in this arena and resonates in the sky?”

Vidura replied, “O great king! Pandu and Pritha’s son, Phalguni, clad in his armour, has entered. Hence, this uproar.” Dhritarashtra said, “O one with great intelligence! I am indeed fortunate and favoured that I am protected by
the ﬂames of these three Pandavas, obtained from Pritha’s kindling.” When the arena had become somewhat quiet,
Bibhatsu14 began to exhibit the lightness in use of weapons he had learned from his preceptor.
‘He created ﬁre with an agneya weapon. He created water with a varuna weapon. He created winds with a
vayavya weapon. He created rain with a parjanya weapon. He entered the ground with a bhoumya weapon. He created mountains with a parvata weapon. He made everything disappear with an antardhana weapon. In an instant,
he appeared tall, then short. In an instant, he was yoked to his chariot. In another, he was in the middle of his chariot. And in another instant, he was on the ground again. Trained well, the preceptor’s favourite used various types
of arrows to shoot various targets, some fragile, some ﬁne and still others thick. When an iron boar was moved, he
shot ﬁve continuous arrows into its mouth, as if they were but one arrow. A cow’s hollow horn was swayed on a
rope and the immensely valorous hero shot twenty-one arrows into it. In this way, he exhibited his great dexterity
in the use of the sword, the bow, the club and other weapons.
‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The tournament was almost over. The musical instruments were quiet.
The spectators had thinned. At that time, there was heard at the gate the sound of arms being slapped, signalling
power and strength, like the crash of thunder. “Are the mountains being splintered?” “Is the earth breaking up?”
“Is the sky echoing with the roar of clouds ﬁlled with rain?” O ruler of the earth! The spectators in the arena
thought in this way and turned their eyes towards the gate. Surrounded by the ﬁve brothers, Pritha’s sons, Drona
looked like the moon surrounded by ﬁve stars. With Ashvatthama, Duryodhana, the slayer of enemies, stood up
quickly, surrounded by his 100 haughty brothers. He had a club in his hand and his 100 brothers circled him, with
weapons raised, looking like Purandara15 of ancient times, surrounded by the gods at the time of doing battle and
destroying the danavas.’
126

Vaishampayana said, ‘The spectators, eyes wide with wonder, made way and Karna, the conqueror of enemy cities,
entered the large arena. He was clad in his natural coat of armour. His face was radiant with his earrings. His bow
was in his hand and his sword was tied.16 He entered like a walking mountain. That destroyer of enemy armies
was great in fame and wide of eyes. Karna was born from Pritha when she was a virgin, from a portion of the sun
whose rays are sharp. His strength, valour and prowess were like that of a lion, a bull, or a king of elephants. In radiance, beauty and splendour, he was like the sun, the moon and the ﬁre. He was tall, like a golden palm tree. He
was a youth who could slay lions. Born from the sun, he was handsome and possessed countless qualities. The
mighty-armed one looked all around the arena. Perfunctorily, he bowed to Drona and Kripa. Everyone in that assembly remained stationary and gazed at him steadfastly. They were ﬁlled with great curiosity and asked each other who he was.
‘Supreme among those who are eloquent, the sun’s son addressed his unrecognized brother, the son of Paka’s
punisher,17 in a voice that was as deep as the roar of the clouds. “O Partha! Before the eyes of these people, I will
perform feats that will surpass everything that you have done. Don’t be too amazed at what you have done.” O
supreme among those who are eloquent! No sooner had he uttered these words, than the spectators quickly stood
up all at once, as if raised up by a single machine. O tiger among men! Duryodhana was greatly delighted. Bibhatsu was suddenly ﬁlled with anger and a sense of disgrace.
‘With Drona’s permission, Karna, always eager to do battle and immensely strong, exhibited all that Partha had
displayed before. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Duryodhana and his brothers delightedly embraced Karna
and said, “O mighty-armed hero! Welcome. Good fortune has brought you here. You know how to humble pride. I
and the Kuru kingdom await your pleasure.” Karna replied, “You have said it and that alone is enough. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I only desire your friendship. And I desire to have a duel with Partha.” Duryodhana
replied, “O scourge of enemies! Enjoy all the pleasures with me. Do that which pleases your friends. Place your
feet on the heads of all your enemies.” At that, Partha considered that he had been insulted. He told Karna, who
stood in the midst of the brothers like a mountain, “O Karna! When I have ﬁnished killing you, you will attain the

worlds set aside for unwelcome intruders and uninvited speakers.” Karna replied, “O Phalguni! This arena is
meant for everyone and not for you alone. Dharma is that of strength and they are kings who are superior in valour.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Altercations are nothing but the resort of the weak. Why use it? Speak with
arrows, until my arrow carries off your head in your preceptor’s presence.” Partha, the conqueror of enemy cities,
was embraced by his brothers. With Drona’s permission, he advanced to ﬁght. Thereupon, Karna was embraced by
Duryodhana and his brothers. He picked up his bow and arrows and stood ready for battle.
‘The sky was covered with thundering clouds, with lightning ﬂashes in them. Indra’s radiant and coloured bow
appeared.18 The clouds seemed to laugh because of white cranes ﬂying. Seeing that Harihaya19 was fondly looking down on the arena, the sun dispersed clouds that were above his son. Phalguni was invisible under the shadow
of the clouds. But Karna was clearly visible, because the sun had dispersed the clouds. Dhritarashtra’s sons stood
next to Karna. Bharadvaja’s son,20 Kripa and Bhishma stood next to Partha. The assembly was divided into two
parties, including the women. Since she knew the truth, Kuntibhoja’s daughter21 fainted. Vidura, learned in all aspects of dharma, revived the unconscious Kunti by sprinkling water scented with sandalwood over her. When she
revived, she was struck with grief at the sight of her two sons clad in armour. But there was nothing she could do.
‘When the two were ready and had raised their bows, Sharadvata Kripa, well versed in all aspects of dharma and
skilled in the rules of duels, said, “This son of Pandu is Kunti’s youngest son. He is a Kuru and will ﬁght a duel
with you. O mighty-armed hero! You should also tell us your mother, father and lineage and the royal dynasty of
which you are the ornament. On knowing this, Partha will ﬁght with you. Or he may not ﬁght.”22 At these words,
Karna’s face was ﬂushed with shame. It looked as if a lotus had been faded and torn by showers of rain. Duryodhana said, “O preceptor! It is stated in the sacred texts that there are three ways to become a king—through noble
birth, through valour and through leading an army. If Phalguni is unwilling to ﬁght with someone who is not a
king, I install him23 as king in the land of Anga.” At that instant, the immensely powerful and fortunate maharatha
Karna was instated in the kingdom of Anga, with roasted grains of rice, ﬂowers, golden water pots and ritual
chanting by those who knew the mantras. He was seated on a golden seat, an umbrella was held above him and
whisks24 were waved at his side.
‘When the cries of “Victory” had died down, the bull among kings told the Kourava,25 “What can I give you
that is comparable to your gift of this kingdom? O king! O tiger among kings! Tell me and I will do your bidding.”
Suyodhana26 replied, “I wish for your eternal friendship.” Having been thus addressed, Karna said, “So shall it
be.” Thereupon, they embraced each other in joy and were immensely happy.’
127

Vaishampayana said, ‘At that moment, Adhiratha entered the arena, swaying on his feet and supporting himself on
a staff. He was trembling and perspiring and his upper garments were in disarray. On seeing him, Karna discarded
his bow. Out of regard for his father, he bowed down his head, still wet with water from the coronation. The charioteer quickly covered his feet with the end of his garment and addressed Karna, who had been crowned with success, as his son. Trembling with affection, he kissed him on the head and wet with his tears the head that was already damp with water from the instatement as the king of Anga. When Pandava Bhimasena saw him, he deduced
that he27 was a charioteer’s son and jeeringly said, “O son of a charioteer! You don’t have the right to be killed by
Partha in battle. You had better take up a whip, more beﬁtting of your lineage. O worst of men! You have no right
to enjoy the kingdom of Anga, just as a dog has no right to eat the cake that is offered at a sacriﬁcial ﬁre.” At these
words, Karna’s lips quivered a little. He looked up at the sun in the sky and sighed.
‘The immensely strong Duryodhana arose angrily from among his brothers, like a mad elephant arises from a
pond of lotuses. He told Bhimasena, of the terrible deeds, who stood there, “O Vrikodara! You should not speak
these words. Strength is the most important virtue of Kshatriyas and even the most inferior of Kshatriyas deserves
to be fought with. The sources of warriors and rivers are both the same; they are always unknown. The ﬁre that
covers the entire world arises from water. The vajra that destroyed danavas was made from Dadhichi’s bones. It is
said that the birth of the illustrious god Guha28 is a complete mystery. Some say he is the son of Agni, or of the

Krittikas,29 or Rudra’s son, or Ganga’s. It is said that those who have been born Brahmanas have become Kshatriyas. Our preceptor was born in a water pot, Kripa in a clump of reeds. And we also know how all of you were
born. Can a deer give birth to this tiger, equal to the sun, with natural armour and earrings and possessing all the
auspicious marks? This lord of men deserves to be king, not only of Anga but of the entire world, through the valour of his arms and my obedience to him. If there is any man to whom my action seems condemnable, let him ascend his chariot, or on foot bend his bow.” At this, a loud uproar arose in the arena, intermingled with cheers of
applause. At that time, the sun went down.
‘King Duryodhana grasped Karna’s hand and led him out of the arena, lit with the ﬂames of myriad torches. O
lord of the earth! With Drona, Kripa and Bhishma, the Pandavas also returned to their own homes. Everyone went
to their respective houses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As they went away, some hailed Arjuna, some
Karna and some Duryodhana. Kunti was also delighted out of affection for her son, because she recognized him
from the various auspicious marks on his body, and he had become the king of Anga. O king! Having obtained
Karna, Duryodhana quickly banished his fears arising out of Arjuna’s skills. Skilled in use of arms, that warrior30
also gratiﬁed Suyodhana with sweet words. At that time, Yudhishthira also thought that there was no archer equal
to Karna on earth.’
128

Vaishampayana said, ‘O ruler of the earth! One day, Drona the preceptor assembled his pupils together and asked
all of them for his fee.31 “Capture Drupada, the king of Panchala, in a raid and bring him here to me. O fortunate
ones! That will be my greatest dakshina.” Agreeing, all of them armed themselves with weapons and quickly
climbed into their chariots and set out, accompanied by Drona, in order to pay the preceptor’s fee. Those bulls
among men destroyed Panchala and went to the capital of the immensely powerful Drupada and attacked it. O bull
of the Bharata lineage! Thus capturing Yajnasena Drupada and his advisers in battle, they brought him to Drona.
‘Seeing him32 humiliated and robbed of his riches and under his complete control, Drona remembered his earlier enmity with Drupada and said, “I have laid waste your kingdom and your capital. Now that you have received
your life at an enemy’s hand, do you wish to revive our old friendship?” Having said this, he smiled a little, arrived
at a decision and continued, “O king! Do not fear for your life. We Brahmanas always forgive. O bull among the
Kshatriyas! From the days when we were boys and played in the hermitage, my love and affection for you have
increased. O bull among men! I ask for your friendship once again. O king! As a boon, I am granting you half of
your kingdom. O Yajnasena! How can one who is not a king be a friend to one who is a king? Therefore, I am retaining half of your kingdom. You will be the king of the region that is to the south of the Bhagirathi and I will be
the king on the northern side. O Panchala! If you so desire, from now on, know me as your friend.” Drupada
replied, “O Brahmana! O great-souled and brave one! This is not surprising. I am pleased to be your friend and I
wish to give you pleasure eternally.” O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At these words, Drona set him free. He
honoured him with a happy heart and returned half his kingdom.
‘Heartbroken, Drupada lived in a capital named Kampilya, in the region known as Makandi, on the banks of the
Ganga, with its towns and countryside. He ruled over the southern part of Panchala, up to the banks of the river
Charmanvati. Thinking about his enmity with Drona, he could ﬁnd no peace. He did not see any way of vanquishing Drona with Kshatriya power and he knew himself to be inferior to the strength of Brahmana power. Therefore,
he bore his grievance, waiting for the birth of a son. O king! Drona lived in Ahichhatra, which had towns and a
countryside, and was won in battle by Partha and handed over to him.’
129

Vaishampayana said, ‘On seeing that Bhimasena had become extremely strong and Dhananjaya extremely skilled,
the evil Duryodhana was tormented. Then, Vaikartana Karna and Subala’s son, Shakuni, tried to kill the Pandavas
through various means. However, the Pandavas, slayers of enemies, discovered all of them. But because of Vidura’s advice, they refrained from revealing these plots.

‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the sons of Pandu were blessed with all the qualities, the
citizens began to speak about their qualities in squares and assemblies. “Lord of men, Dhritarashtra, though possessing the sight of wisdom, could not inherit the kingdom then because he was blind. How can he be king now?
Shantanu’s son, Bhishma, is rigid in his vows and is devoted to the truth. Having given up the kingdom earlier, he
will never accept it now. The eldest Pandava is young, but has the conduct of the old, is truthful and compassionate
and has knowledge of the Vedas. With due ceremonies, it is up to us to crown him. Since he follows the path of
dharma, he will certainly worship Shantanu’s son Bhishma and Dhritarashtra and his sons and give them objects
for sustenance.” The evil Duryodhana heard these words of affection for Yudhisthira and burnt in grief. Burning
thus, the evil-souled one could not condone such talk.
‘Inﬂamed with jealousy, he went to Dhritarashtra. Finding his father alone, he paid homage to him, and burnt by
the partiality of the citizens, said, “O father! I have heard words of ill omen uttered by the citizens. Ignoring you
and Bhishma, they desire that the Pandava should be their king. Bhishma will agree to this, because he does not
wish to rule the kingdom. It seems that the citizens wish to impose a great injury on us. Earlier, Pandu obtained
this kingdom from his father because of his own qualities. Though you possessed every quality required to inherit
the kingdom, you did not get it because of your defect. If Pandu’s son now receives it after Pandu, his son will certainly receive it thereafter and his son and so on. We and our sons will be excluded from the royal succession. O
lord of the earth! In future, we will be ignored by the worlds. We will always be dependent on others for our rice
cakes and will always live in hell. O king! Therefore, quickly ﬁnd a way so that this does not happen. O king! If
you had obtained the kingdom earlier, you would have become established and we would have certainly succeeded
to it, regardless of how unwilling the people are.”’
130

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having heard these words from his son, Dhritarashta thought for a while and then spoke to
his son. Dhritarashtra said, “Pandu was always devoted to dharma. He always behaved respectfully towards his relatives, and especially towards me. I never knew him to care for food and other objects of pleasure. He was rigid in
his vows and gave me everything, including the kingdom. Pandu’s son is as devoted to dharma as he was. He has
all the qualities, is famous in the worlds and is extremely respected by the citizens. How can we forcibly exile him,
especially since he has allies, from the kingdom of his father and grandfather? Pandu always took care of his advisers and his soldiers, especially their sons and grandsons. O son! Earlier, Pandu always took good care of the citizens of the city. For Yudhisthira’s sake, why should they not kill us and our relatives?” Duryodhana replied, “O
father! I have thought about that danger also and have weighed it against the evil that will befall us. We must placate the people by offering them wealth and honour. They will then certainly side with us. O lord of the earth! The
advisers and the treasury are now under our control. Therefore, use some gentle means to remove the Pandavas to
the city of Varanavata. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When I am ﬁrmly installed as king, Kunti and
her sons can always return.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Duryodhana! The same thought has arisen in my mind too. But I could not reveal it because it was evil. Bhishma or Drona or kshatta33 or Goutama34 will never approve the banishment of Kunti’s
sons. O son! In their eyes, we and the Pandavas are equals. Those wise and virtuous men will not tolerate any differentiation. O son! Why should we not deserve death35 from the descendants of the Kuru lineage, those greatsouled ones and even inhabitants of the entire world?”
‘Duryodhana said, “Bhishma will always be neutral. Drona’s son36 is on my side. There is no doubt that Drona
will be on the side that his son is on. There is no doubt that Sharadvat’s son, Kripa, will be on the side where those
three37 can be. He will never forsake Drona and his sister’s son.38 Though he secretly sides with others,39 kshatta’s survival is linked to us. Even if he opposes us for the sake of the Pandavas, he will be able to do no harm.
Without any fear, banish Pandu’s sons and their mother to Varanavata. Do it today and evil will not result. Through
this act, take away the terrible spike that is in my heart and the ﬁre that burns me with grief and robs me of my
sleep.”’

131

Vaishampayana said, ‘Then King Duryodhana and his brothers slowly began to win people over to their side by
bestowing honour and riches on them. One day, on Dhritarashtra’s instructions, some skilled ministers began to describe the beautiful city of Varanavata. “Pashupati’s40 festival will be held in the beautiful city of Varanavata. A
large number of people have assembled there. That marvellous place will be adorned with all the gems.” On Dhritarashtra’s bidding, these were the words they uttered. O king! When they heard these stories about the beautiful
city of Varanavata, Pandu’s sons wished to go there.
‘When the king realized that the Pandavas were curious, Ambika’s son41 told the Pandavas, “My men always
and repeatedly describe to me the city of Varanavata, the most charming in the world. O sons! If you wish to witness the festival in the city of Varanavata, go there with your attendants and soldiers and enjoy yourselves like the
gods. Give jewels to all the Brahmanas and the singers. Enjoy yourselves like radiant gods who possess all they
desire. Spend as much time as you want there and when you have enjoyed yourselves completely, happily return to
Hastinapura.” Realizing that this was Dhritarashtra’s own wish and he himself had no allies, Yudhisthira agreed.
‘Addressing Shantanu’s son, Bhishma, the immensely wise Vidura, Drona, the Bahlika Somadatta, the
Kouravas, Kripa, the preceptor’s son42 and the illustrious Gandhari, Yudhisthira said, softly and meekly, “On
Dhritarashtra’s command, we are going with our friends to the lovely and populated city of Varanavata. Bless us
with happy hearts, so that those sacred blessings ensure our prosperity and protect us from sin.” Having heard
these words of Pandu’s son, all the Kouravas blessed the Pandavas with happy hearts. “O sons of Pandu! Let all
the beings along your journey bring you fortune. Let not the slightest touch of evil touch you.” Then, after having
received blessings and after having performed all the rites for obtaining the kingdom, the Pandavas left for
Varanavata.’
132

Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the king43 addressed Pandu’s great-souled sons,
the evil-hearted Duryodhana was extremely happy.
‘O bull among the Bharatas! He privately summoned Purochana, grasped the adviser by the right hand and told
him these words. “O Purochana! This world, with all its riches, is mine. But with me, it is also yours. You should
protect it. I have no other ally who is as trustworthy. I have to consult with you. O father!44 Keep these consultations45 and destroy my enemies cleverly. Skilfully accomplish what I ask you to do. Dhritarashtra has sent the
Pandavas to Varanavata. On Dhritarashtra’s command, they will sport themselves in the festival there. Ensure that
you reach Varanavata today on a cart drawn by swift asses. On reaching there, build an excellent house with four
halls on the outskirts of the city—large and full of riches and near the store where weapons are kept. Use hemp,
resin and other inﬂammable materials that can be obtained in the construction. Mix the clay with ghee, oil from
seeds and a large quantity of lac and plaster the walls with this. Also place carefully in the house hemp, cane, ghee,
lac, wood and wooden tools, but in such a way that the Pandavas or other men are not suspicious on scrutiny and
do not deduce that the house has been constructed with inﬂammable materials. After constructing the house in this
way, reverently pay homage to the Pandavas and get them to live there, with Kunti and her attendants. For the sons
of Pandu, place beautiful conveyances, seats and beds there, so as to satisfy my father. Do it in such a way that no
one in the city of Varanavata gets to know, until our time arrives. Knowing that they are asleep in their beds, completely assured and without suspecting danger from anywhere, set ﬁre to it, beginning at the gate. When they have
burnt to death in that house, people will not blame us for the death of the Pandavas.” Purochana promised the
Kourava46 that he would do this and left for Varanavata in a cart drawn by asses.
‘O king! He was always obedient to Duryodhana and left quickly. Purochana did as the prince had asked him
to.’
133

Vaishampayana said, ‘The Pandavas yoked excellent horses, swift as the wind, to their chariots. When ascending,
they sorrowfully touched the feet of Bhishma, King Dhritarashtra, the great-souled Drona, Kripa, Vidura and others who were old. Since they were rigid in their vows, they paid homage to all the elders of the Kuru lineage and
embraced their equals. Even the children said farewell. Taking leave of all the mothers47 and circling them with
respect, they said farewell to the citizens and set out for Varanavata.
‘The immensely wise Vidura, other bulls among the Kurus and the citizens sorrowfully followed those tigers
among men. O bull among the Bharatas! There were some fearless Brahmanas there. Aggrieved over what had
happened to Pandu’s sons, they said, “The evil King Dhritarashtra isn’t impartial and is immersed in darkness.
Dhritarashtra doesn’t follow the path of dharma. The Pandava who has no sin in his heart,48 Bhima, supreme
among those who are strong, and Kunti’s son, Dhananjaya, cannot commit a sin. Nor can the immensely wise sons
of Madri. Dhritarashtra cannot bear that they have inherited the kingdom from their father. How could Bhishma
have allowed such a great act of adharma, so that Kunti’s sons, bulls of the Bharata lineage, have been banished to
another city without reason? Vichitravirya, Shantanu’s son and Kuru’s descendant, and rajarshi Pandu were like
our fathers. Since that tiger among men49 has now met his destiny, Dhritarashtra cannot bear his sons, these
princes, though they are young. We cannot sanction this. Therefore, let us leave this supreme city and our houses
and go to the place where Yudhishthira is going.” Dharmaraja Yudhishthira thought about this for a while and then
sorrowfully addressed the sorrowing citizens. “The lord of the earth50 is like our father, he is our greatest preceptor. It is our duty to unhesitatingly obey whatever he commands. O illustrious ones! You are our well-wishers. Circle around us and make us happy with your blessings. Then return home. When the time comes for you to do
something for us, do that which is pleasing and is good for us.” Having been thus addressed, the citizens circled
the Pandavas and gave them their blessings. Then they returned to the city.
‘When the citizens had returned, Vidura, who knew all the principles of dharma, spoke to the eldest Pandava so
as to warn him. The learned one51 spoke to the learned one52 in nonsensical words,53 “One who knows will act
so as to avoid danger. There is a sharp weapon that can pierce the body, but is not made of iron. He who knows this
is not killed and can turn it against the enemy. The burner of grass and the drier of dew do not kill animals in holes.
He who protects himself through knowledge lives. The blind man doesn’t see the way, because the blind man has
no sense of direction. He who doesn’t have perseverance is never prosperous. Know this and be alert. He who accepts an ironless weapon from the untrustworthy, can escape from the ﬁre like a porcupine. Through travelling, a
man gets to know the way and from the stars can deduce the directions. He who keeps the ﬁve54 under self-control
is never oppressed by the enemy.” Having thus addressed the Pandavas, Vidura circled them, and having said
farewell, returned to his house.
‘After Vidura, Bhishma and the citizens had returned, Kunti went to Ajatashatru55 and said, “What did
kshatta56 tell you among so many people? He spoke as if he said nothing and you replied similarly. We have not
understood. If it is not inappropriate that we should know, I wish to know what you spoke to each other.” Yudhishthira replied, “Vidura said that there is danger from poison and ﬁre and that there should be no path that I do
not know. He told me that the man who is self-controlled wins the entire world. I told Vidura that I had understood.” On the eighth day of the month of Phalguna, when Rohini57 was in the ascendant, they left for Varanavata
and saw the city and its people.’
134

Vaishampayana said, ‘Hearing that the Pandavas were coming, the citizens of Varanavata were delighted and swiftly came out in thousands, in various conveyances. In order to receive those best of men, they carried with them
auspicious gifts, as laid down in the shastras. Coming to Kunti’s sons, the citizens of Varanavata reverently surrounded them in a circle and uttered the blessed word “Jaya”.58 Thus surrounded by them, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, tiger among men, looked like the one with the vajra in his hand,59 surrounded by gods.
‘Welcomed by the citizens and paying homage to them in return, those unblemished ones entered Varanavata,
populated and decorated for the festival. O protector of the earth! Entering the city, the warriors ﬁrst went to the

houses of the Brahmanas engaged in their duties. They then went to the houses of the city ofﬁcials and next to the
houses of those with chariots.60 Next they went to the houses of the Vaishyas and even to the houses of the Shudras. The citizens paid homage to the Pandavas, bulls among men. Next, with Purochana leading the way, they
went to their house.61 Purochana gave them beautiful food, drinks, beds and seats. Served by Purochana and worshipped by the town’s citizens, they lived there, attired in expensive garments. When they had lived there for ten
nights, Purochana told them about a house that was blessed, though it was actually unblessed. Attired in expensive
garments, those tigers among men then entered the house at Purochana’s request, like the guhyakas enter Kailasha.
Inspecting the house, Yudhishthira, supreme among those who know all the dharma, told Bhimasena, “O scorcher
of enemies! From the smell of fat and ghee mixed with lac, it is clear that this house is made of inﬂammable materials. The evil Purochana has used trusted and well-skilled artisans to build a house with straw, bark and cane,
sprinkled all over with ghee. After winning my conﬁdence, he wishes to burn me to death. O Partha!62 This is the
danger that the immensely intelligent Vidura foresaw and warned me about earlier. But now that he has told us, we
know this house to be full of danger, constructed by skilled artisans under Duryodhana’s control.” Bhimasena said,
“If you think this house is inﬂammable, then let us go back to our earlier house.”
‘Yudhishthira said, “I think we should live here as if we are keen and suspect nothing and thus doomed to be destroyed. But we must ﬁnd a certain way of escaping. If Purochana deduces from our appearance that we suspect,
he may act quickly and suddenly burn us to death. Purochana does not shrink from outrage and sin. The evil one is
based here on Suyodhana’s63 orders. The question remains whether grandfather Bhishma will be angry if we are
burnt alive. Will he anger the Kouravas by displaying his anger to them? It may be that if we are burnt, grandfather
Bhishma and other bulls of the Kuru lineage may be angry for the sake of dharma. But if we ﬂee from this place,
scared of being burnt, Suyodhana, avaricious for the kingdom, may kill us through assassins. The evil Suyodhana
has position, we have none. He has allies, we have none. He has a large treasury, we have no riches. There is no
doubt that he can kill us through diverse means. Deceiving this evil one64 and that evil one, Suyodhana, let us live
here for some time, hiding where we go. Let us roam the earth the way hunters do, so that we become aware of all
the routes that exist for escape. We will now secretly dig a hidden tunnel in the ground. If we can keep that a secret, the ﬁre will not be able to destroy us. Let us live here in a way that neither Purochana nor the inhabitants of
the city know what we are doing.”’
135

Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! There was a skilled digger65 who was Vidura’s friend. This man came and spoke to
the Pandava66 secretly. “I have been sent by Vidura to do that which is pleasing to the Pandavas. I am well skilled
in digging. Please tell me what I can do for you. Vidura told me to go to the Pandavas and do that which is for their
welfare. He trusts me. What can I do for you? On the fourteenth night of this krishnapaksha,67 Purochana will set
ﬁre to the door of your house. O Partha! I have heard that Dhritarashtra’s son has decided to burn the Pandavas,
bulls among men, together with their mother. O Pandava! Vidura told you something in the mleccha68 language
and you replied in that language. I am telling you this to establish my credentials.”
‘Yudhishthira, Kunti’s truthful son, replied, “O agreeable one! I now know you to be a trusted and true friend of
Vidura’s, always devoted to him. There is nothing that learned one does not know. Just as you are his, you are ours.
Do not distinguish between him and us. We are yours as much as his. Protect us the way that wise man does. I
know Purochana built this inﬂammable house for me on the command of Dhritarashtra’s son. That evil-hearted and
malicious one, with control over riches and allies, has always oppressed us. Use all your efforts to save us from the
ﬁre. If we are burnt to death, Suyodhana’s wishes will be fulﬁlled. That evil-hearted one’s store of arms is there.
This large house has been built along those walls. Vidura certainly knew in advance the evil crime that was being
plotted and warned me about it. The danger that kshatta foresaw earlier is upon us now. Help us escape from that
without Purochana knowing.” The digger promised to help.
‘Carefully, he began the work of excavation and made a deep tunnel under the ground. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! He built that tunnel in the centre of the house, with a narrow mouth and level with the ground,

and covered it with wooden planks. Because of the fear of Purochana, the opening was thus covered. He69 constantly kept a watch on the gate of the house. O king! They lived in the hole in the night, with their weapons ready.
During the day, the Pandavas went out hunting, from forest to forest. O king! Deceiving Purochana with a display
of trustfulness and contentment, they were actually distrusting and discontented and lived very unhappily. The inhabitants of the city knew nothing about all this, except for Vidura’s friend, the excellent digger.’
136

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having seen them live there for an entire year, happy and unsuspecting, Purochana was extremely delighted. Witnessing Purochana’s delight, Yudhishthira, Kunti’s virtuous son, spoke to Bhimasena, Arjuna and the twins. “The cruel-hearted and evil Purochana thinks us to be trusting and has been deceived well. I
think the time has come for our escape. Let us escape, unobserved by anyone, after setting ﬁre to the armoury,
burning Purochana to death and leaving six bodies here.”
‘O king! On the occasion of giving alms, Kunti fed a large number of Brahmanas in the night. A number of
women also came. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They enjoyed themselves and ate and drank as much as
they wished. When it was night, with Madhavi’s70 permission, they returned home. Driven by destiny and in
search of food, a hunter woman also happened to come to the feast, accompanied by her ﬁve sons. All of them
drank wine, until, with her sons, she was completely drunk. O ruler of men! She and her sons lost their senses and
slept in that house, as if dead. When everyone was asleep and a violent storm started in the night, Bhima started a
ﬁre at the spot where Purochana was sleeping. The intense heat and great roar of the ﬁre soon became manifest and
awoke a large number of the citizens. The citizens said, “Under Duryodhana’s instructions, the evil-minded one71
built this house for his own destruction. Curse on Dhritarashtra, whose intelligence isn’t impartial. He has burnt to
death Pandu’s pure sons, as if they are his enemies. As fate would have it, that evil-hearted and evil-minded one72
has burnt those innocent and unsuspecting ones, supreme among men, and has himself been burnt.” Thus did the
citizens of Varanavata mourn, as they stood around the house throughout that entire night.
‘However, with their mother, the grieving Pandavas emerged through the tunnel and ﬂed quickly, unobserved.
The scorchers of enemies, the Pandavas, could not move swiftly with their mother, because of fear and lack of
sleep. O lord of kings! Bhimasena, with great speed and power, then took up all his brothers and his mother. With
his great strength, the valorous one carried his mother on his shoulder, the twins on his hips and his brothers, the
two Parthas,73on his arms. He shattered the trees with force and pounded the earth with his feet. The energetic
Vrikodara rushed on, with the violence of a storm.’
137

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the night passed, all the city’s inhabitants went there quickly to look for Pandu’s sons.
They put out the ﬁre and saw that the house which had been burnt down had been constructed with lac and that the
adviser Purochana had been burnt. The citizens said, “There is no doubt that the evil Duryodhana committed this
act to destroy the Pandavas. Without a doubt, this was done with Dhritarashtra’s knowledge. Otherwise, he would
have prevented Dhritarashtra’s son from burning Pandu’s heirs. Indeed, Shantanu’s son,74 Drona, Vidura, Kripa
and the other Kouravas haven’t followed the dictates of dharma either. Let us send the news to the evil-hearted
Dhritarashtra that his supreme desire has been fulﬁlled and that he has burnt to death the Pandavas.” When they
stirred the ashes to look for the Pandavas, they found the burnt hunter woman and her ﬁve sons. While cleaning up,
the digger covered up the opening with debris, so that none of the men present noticed it.
‘The citizens then sent the news to Dhritarashtra, that the Pandavas, together with the adviser Purochana, had
been burnt in a ﬁre. Hearing the terrible news of the death of Pandu’s sons, King Dhritarashtra lamented in great
sorrow. Dhritarashtra said, “When those warriors and their mother have been burnt to death, today my unparalleled
brother, Pandu, is truly dead. Let men quickly go to Varanavata and perform the funeral ceremonies for those warriors and for the princess Kunti. Let the bones of the dead be sanctiﬁed in large and white receptacles. Let the wellwishers of the dead pay homage to them. Now that this has happened, let us spare no riches to perform acts that

bring welfare to Kunti and the Pandavas.” Having said this, surrounded by his relatives, Ambika’s son75 tendered
offerings of water to Pandu’s sons. Afﬂicted with grief, all the Kouravas lamented. But Vidura did not sorrow
much, because he knew more.
‘O lord of kings! After escaping from the city of Varanavata, the Pandavas swiftly moved on, heading towards
the south. In the night, they found their way towards the south by the stars. O king! After a lot of suffering, they
reached a deep forest. Pandu’s sons were tired, thirsty and blind from lack of sleep. Yudhishthira again spoke to the
immensely valorous Bhimasena. “What can be more painful than our being in this dense forest? We do not know
the directions and we are incapable of proceeding further. We do not know if that evil Purochana has actually been
burnt to death. Unobserved, how will we escape from these dangers? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Carry
us once again, as earlier, and let us proceed. Among us, you alone are strong and swift as the wind.” Thus addressed by Dharmaraja, the immensely strong Bhimasena once more picked up Kunti and his brothers and walked
with great strength.’
138

Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! The force and speed of his thighs raised a storm, like strong winds when shukra and
shuchi draw near.76 He strode on, tearing down large trees77 with ﬂowers and fruit on them and demolishing
creepers that obstructed the way. He uprooted, with his immeasurable power, trees and bushes and his speed dazed
Pandu’s sons.78 Using his arms as boats, he swam across many streams whose banks were distant. Fearing Dhritarashtra’s son,79 they assumed disguises. He carried his delicate and illustrious mother on his back, when the going was difﬁcult, over riverbanks and uneven terrain.
‘When it was evening, those bulls of the Bharata lineage reached an impenetrable forest where roots, fruits and
water were scarce and the place was full of cruel birds of prey and beasts. The twilight became terrible and fearful
with birds and beasts and the directions disappeared, as a storm was imminent. Those descendants of the Kuru lineage were tired and thirsty and overcome with sleep. They could proceed no further. Then Bhima entered a large,
desolate and terrible forest. He saw a beautiful ﬁg tree80 that offered extensive shade.
‘O bull among the Bharata lineage! Placing them there, he said, “O lord!81 Rest here. I am going to bring water.
I hear the sweet voices of water-dwelling cranes. I am certain there must be a large lake here.” O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! His elder brother permitted him to go and he went where the water-dwelling cranes were. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! There, he drank the water and bathed. O king! He brought water back by soaking his
upper garment. Swiftly retracing his steps, he went to his mother, who was two measures of distance away.
‘On seeing his mother and brothers asleep on the ground, Vrikodara was afﬂicted with great grief and lamented.
“Earlier, they could not sleep in Varanavata on expensive beds. Now they are asleep on the ground. Kunti is the
daughter of Kuntibhoja and is blessed with all the auspicious marks. She is the sister of Vasudeva, who grinds his
enemies down. She is the daughter-in-law of Vichitravirya and the wife of the great-souled Pandu. She is as radiant
as the ﬁlament of a lotus. The most delicate of all women, she should always sleep in palaces, on the most expensive of beds. Look at how she now sleeps on the ground. She has given birth to sons through Dharma, Indra and
the wind-god. She is now tired and asleep on the ground like a common person. What more painful sight will I see
than what I am seeing now? I see those tigers among men sleeping on the ground. The king, who is always devoted
to dharma and who deserves all the three worlds as his kingdom, is tired and asleep on the ground like an ordinary
person. He whose complexion is like the blue ocean82 and who is unequalled among men is asleep on the ground
like an ordinary person. What can be more painful than this? The twins, who are as handsome as the divine
Ashvins, are asleep on the ground like ordinary men. He who has no evil relatives who deﬁle his lineage lives happily, like a single tree in a village. When there is only one tree with leaves and fruits in a village, it is without kin,
becomes sacred and venerated and is worshipped. They who have many relatives who are virtuous and brave live
happily in this world, without disease. They make the sons of their friends and relatives powerful and prosperous,
living on each other’s support like trees in a garden. We have been banished by the evil-souled Dhritarashtra and
his sons. We escaped the conﬂagration he had instructed. Having escaped from that ﬁre, we have now found refuge
under this tree. Having suffered unequalled misfortunes, where will we go now? I think I see a city not far away

from this forest. But someone should be awake while they are sleeping. Therefore, I will stay awake. When they
awake and have rested, they can drink the water.” Having decided this, Bhima himself stayed awake.’

Section Nine
Hidimba-vadha Parva
This parva has 169 shlokas and six chapters.
Chapter 139: 32 shlokas
Chapter 140: 21 shlokas
Chapter 141: 24 shlokas
Chapter 142: 34 shlokas
Chapter 143: 38 shlokas
Chapter 144: 20 shlokas
Vadha means to slay or kill and this parva is about the killing of the rakshasa Hidimba.
139

Vaishampayana said, ‘Not very far from where they1 slept in the forest, a rakshasa named Hidimba lived on a shala2 tree. He was cruel, addicted to human ﬂesh, very brave and very powerful, malformed, with yellow eyes, and
terrible and fearful to look at. He was thirsty and hungry and was looking around, when he happened to see them.
With his ﬁngers extended upwards, he scratched the dry and unkempt hair on his head and yawning with his large
mouth repeatedly, looked at them. The evil eater of human ﬂesh, with a huge form and great strength, smelt humans and told his sister, “After a long time, I will today devour my favourite food. Anticipating the pleasure, my
tongue is moist with saliva. My eight sharp-pointed teeth are impatient because they have had nothing to bite. I
will dip them into these bodies and the delicious ﬂesh. I will attack the human throats and arteries. I will drink copious quantities of the warm, fresh and foaming blood. Go and ﬁnd out who are sleeping in the forest. The strong
smell of humans alone pleases me. Kill those men and bring them to me. They are asleep in our territory and you
need not fear. We will both eat a lot of ﬂesh from these humans the way we like it. Quickly do what I tell you.” O
bull of the Bharata lineage! On hearing her brother’s words, the rakshasi quickly went to where the Pandavas
were. On going there, she saw that the Pandavas and Pritha3 were asleep, while the invincible Bhimasena was
awake.
‘On seeing Bhimasena, whose shoulders were like a shala tree and who was unrivalled on earth in his beauty,
the rakshasi was ﬁlled with desire. She thought, “This dark, mighty-armed, lion-shouldered, greatly radiant, conchnecked and lotus-eyed man is the right husband for me. I will not obey my brother’s cruel orders. A wife’s love is
stronger than affection for a brother. If he is killed, my brother’s pleasure and mine will be satisﬁed for a short
while. But if I do not kill him, my gratiﬁcation will be eternal.” She could assume any form at will. She adopted a
beautiful human form and slowly came to where the mighty-armed Bhimasena was, like a shy creeper adorned in
divine ornaments. With a smile, she then addressed him in these words. “O bull among men! Where have you
come from and who are you? Who are these god-like men who are asleep here? O unblemished one! Who is this
tall, dark and delicate lady, who is asleep trustfully in this forest as if it was her own home? Do you not know that
this deep forest is inhabited by rakshasas? Here dwells the evil-minded rakshasa named Hidimba. O god-like man!
I have been sent here by my brother, that evil rakshasa, with the intention of eating your ﬂesh. But, on seeing you,
like one who has emerged from the wombs of the gods, I honestly tell you that I desire no one but you as my husband. O learned one who knows the dharma! Please do that which is proper for me. My mind and body are over-

come by desire. I wish to make you mine. Make me yours. O mighty-armed one! I will save you from the rakshasa
who eats human ﬂesh. O unblemished one! Become my husband and we will live in the safety of the mountains. I
can travel in the sky and can go where I want. With me, you will ﬁnd incomparable pleasure in those places.”
‘Bhimasena replied, “O rakshasi! For the sake of what power can a man leave his mother, elder brother and
those who are younger than him? What man like me would gratify his desire while leaving his sleeping mother and
brothers as food for a rakshasa?” The rakshasi replied, “I will do that which pleases you. Wake them all up. I will
save all of you from the desire of that man-eating rakshasa.” Bhimasena said, “O rakshasi! I will not awaken my
mother and brothers, who are sleeping blissfully in this forest, out of fear for your evil-minded brother. O fearful
one! There is no rakshasa who can withstand my valour. O one with beautiful eyes! Nor can any man, gandharva
or yaksha. O slender lady! Go or stay, as you please. Or send your man-eating brother to me.”’
140

Vaishampayana said, ‘On seeing her delay, Hidimba, the lord of the rakshasas, got down from his tree and came to
where the Pandavas were. His eyes were red, his arms were gigantic, his hair stood up and he had great strength.
His complexion was like that of clouds, his teeth were sharp and his face was aﬂame. On seeing this malformed
one descend,4 Hidimba5 was frightened and told Bhimsena, “The evil-minded maneater is coming and he is angry.
You and your brothers do what I ask you to. O brave one! Since I have the power of the rakshasas, I can go wherever I want, at will. Climb onto my hips and I will carry you through the sky. O scorcher of enemies! Awake your
mother and brothers who are sleeping. Taking all of them, I will travel through the sky.” Bhima replied, “O lady
with the broad hips! Do not be afraid. I am certain that as long as I am here, no one can harm us. O slender-waisted
one! I will kill him before your eyes. O frightened one! The worst of rakshasas is no match for my strength. All the
rakshasas together cannot stand up to me in a ﬁght. Look at my arms, as round as the trunks of an elephant. Look
at my thighs, like iron clubs. Look at my broad and hard chest. O beautiful one! Today, you will be witness to my
valour, like that of Indra. O broad-hipped one! Do not think that I am only a man and consider me to be weak.”
Hidimba replied, “O tiger among men! You are like a god. I do not consider you to be weak. But I have witnessed
the power this rakshasa has unleashed on men.”
‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! While Bhimasena was engaged in this conversation with her, the man-eating rakshasa heard these words and was furious. He also saw Hidimba in human form, the crown of her head bedecked with ﬂowers and her face like the full moon. Her eyebrows, nose, eyes and the tips of her hair were beautiful and her nails and skin were delicate. She was adorned with all kinds of ornaments and attired in a ﬁne and
transparent dress. On seeing her in that beautiful and deluding human form, the maneater thought she was lusting
for a man and became furious. O best of the Kurus! Becoming very angry with his sister, the rakshasa dilated his
gigantic eyes and told her, “Who is the deluded one who comes in my way when I am hungry? O Hidimba! Have
you become so senseless that you are not frightened of my anger? Shame on you, you who lust after men! You do
that which causes me displeasure. You bring disrepute to all the chief rakshasas, your ancestors. Today, I will kill
you, together with all those for whose sake you have done this great injury to me.” Having addressed Hidimba in
these words, the red-eyed Hidimba gnashed his teeth against each other and rushed at her, with the intention of
killing her. On seeing him rush at her, Bhima, the supreme wielder of all weapons, reproached him strongly, asking
him to stop.’
141

Vaishampayana said, ‘Seeing that the rakshasa was furious with his sister, Bhimasena laughed in scorn and said,
“O Hidimba! Why are you waking those who are sleeping peacefully? O evil one! Attack me quickly, you eater of
men! Use your blows on me. You should not kill a woman who has done no wrong, especially since she has been
wronged against. Afﬂicted by desire for me, this woman has no control over herself. She has been goaded by the
bodiless one6 who has pervaded her body. O evil one! You bring disrepute to your lineage. Your sister came here
on your instructions and, on seeing my beauty, the timid one was afﬂicted by desire. O evil-souled rakshasa! The
wrong was committed by Ananga,7 she has not erred. While I am here, you will not kill a woman. O eater of men!

Come to me and ﬁght it out, one against another. Today, I will singly send you to the land of Yama. O rakshasa!
Your head will be squashed on the ground till it breaks, as if squashed by the foot of a powerful elephant. When I
have killed you in the ﬁght today, your body will be happily torn apart by carnivorous animals, hawks and jackals.
In an instant, I will free this forest of its thorn. It has been polluted for too long a time by those who eat men. Today, your sister will see how I drag the evil one, like a lion drags a large elephant that is the size of a mountain. O
worst of the rakshasas! When you have been killed by me, the men who live in this forest will roam safely in the
forest, without hindrance.”
‘Hidimba said, “Human! What is the need for this pointless roaring and bragging? Perform the actions ﬁrst, then
comes the bragging. Don’t take long. You think yourself to be powerful and valorous. In your ﬁght with me today,
you will ﬁnd out that I am stronger. Till that time, I will not harm those who are sleeping and dreaming. I shall ﬁrst
kill you, the stupid one who speaks such wicked words. After drinking your blood from your body, I will kill them
and then this one,8 who has done that which brought displeasure to me.” Having uttered these words, the maneater
stretched out his arms and angrily dashed towards Bhimasena, the conqueror of enemies.
‘But the immensely powerful Bhima quickly seized his arms and laughingly ﬂung him down. Seizing the struggling demon with great force, Bhima dragged him eight bow-lengths away, like a lion drags a small deer. At that,
the furious rakshasa clasped the Pandava Bhimasena with great force and let out a terrible roar. Yet again, the immensely strong Bhima dragged him away, so that the sound would not wake his brothers who were happily sleeping. Clasping and dragging each other with great force, both Bhimasena and the rakshasa exhibited supreme
strength. Fighting like two enraged sixty-year-old elephants, they tore down large trees and ripped off the creepers
that grew around. At that great noise, those bulls among men9 and their mother woke up and saw Hidimba standing before them.’
142

Vaishampayana said, ‘Waking up, those tigers among men,10 together with Pritha, were astonished on seeing the
divine beauty of Hidimba. Then, astonished at the richness of her beauty, Kunti looked at her and addressed her in
soft, gentle and assuring words. “O beautiful one, equal to the offspring of the gods! Who are you? Where have
you come from? What business has brought you here? Are you the goddess of this forest or are you an apsara? Tell
me everything and also tell me why you are standing here.”
‘Hidimba replied, “The great forest that you see, blue like monsoon clouds, is the habitation of the rakshasa
Hidimba and me. O noble lady! Know me to be the sister of the lord of the rakshasas. O honoured lady! My brother sent me here to kill you and your sons. I came here on the instructions of that cruel one and saw your immensely
powerful son, with a complexion like that of pure gold. O fortunate lady! Then, under the inﬂuence of
Manmatha,11 who pervades the essence of everything, I fell under your son’s spell. Therefore, I chose your immensely powerful son to be my husband. Though I tried to control my passion, I could not. Since I was delayed,
the maneater himself came here to kill all these sons of yours. But he has been ﬂung on the ground and dragged
away by your great-souled and wise son, my husband. Look at the man and the rakshasa, both with great strength
and valour, grasping each other with great force and ﬁghting and roaring.” On hearing these words, Yudhishthira,
Arjuna, Nakula and the valorous Sahadeva quickly got up. They saw those two ﬁghting, grasping and dragging
each other, desirous of victory like two immensely powerful lions. They grasped and dragged each other again and
again. Dust rose from the earth like billowing smoke from a forest ﬁre. Covered with the dust of earth, they were
enveloped like two mountains in whirling mists.
‘On seeing Bhima oppressed at the hands of the rakshasa, Partha12 slowly said, as if in jest, “O Bhima! O one
with mighty arms! Do not be afraid. We did not know that you were tired from ﬁghting this terrible rakshasa. O
Partha!13 I am here to help you. I shall kill the rakshasa, while Nakula and Sahadeva will guard our mother.” Bhima replied, “Watch this ﬁght as a neutral. You don’t have to take part. When I have got him in my clutches, he will
not live for long.” Arjuna said, “O Bhima! What is the need to keep this evil rakshasa alive for so long? O conqueror of enemies! We have to leave this place as quickly as we can. We cannot stay here longer. Before long, the
east will redden. The morning dawn is about to set in. At the roudra14 moment, the rakshasas become stronger. O

Bhima! Be quick. Kill the terrible rakshasa before he begins to use his powers of delusion.15 Therefore, show the
strength of your arms.” Having been thus addressed by Arjuna, Bhima threw up the body of the terrible rakshasa
and whirled it around a hundred times.
‘Bhima said, “Your body has thrived in vain on impure ﬂesh. Your intelligence is in vain and you have aged in
vain. Therefore, you deserve a useless death. Today, I will end your useless existence.” Arjuna said, “If you think
that killing this rakshasa in battle is too onerous a task, let me help you. O Vrikodara!16 Kill him quickly. Otherwise, let me kill him. You are tired and have almost ﬁnished the work. You deserve to rest now.” On hearing these
words, Bhimasena was enraged. Crushing him on the ground with all his strength, he killed him the way one kills
an animal. As he was thus being killed by Bhima, he let out a mighty roar that ﬁlled the entire forest, like the
sound of a kettledrum drenched in water. Then the strong son17 of Pandu held the body in his hands and tore it
into two, pleasing the Pandavas with the strength of his arms. On seeing Hidimba killed, they were delighted and
swiftly congratulated Bhimasena, a tiger among men and conqueror of enemies. Worshipping the great-souled Bhima of terrible strength, Arjuna again told Vrikodara, “O lord! I think there is a city not far from this forest. O fortunate one! Let us go there quickly, before Suyodhana18 discovers us.” The scorchers of enemies and tigers among
men19 agreed, as did their mother, and left, with the rakshasi Hidimba following.’
143

‘Bhimasena said, “The rakshasas remember their enmity and use delusions.20 O Hidimba! Therefore, you also follow the path that your brother has taken.” Yudhishthira said, “O tiger among men! O Bhima! Do not kill a woman
even in anger. O Pandava! Following the righteous path is more important than preservation of the physical body.
You have killed the immensely powerful rakshasa who came here with the intention of killing us. What can his sister do to us, even if she is angry?”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Thereupon, Hidimba respectfully saluted Kunti and Yudhishthira with joined hands and
told Kunti, “O honoured lady! You are familiar with the pangs women suffer through Ananga.21 O fortunate lady!
I am now suffering those pangs for Bhimasena. I have suffered that great misery, waiting for the right time. But
now that time has come and I expect my happiness. O fortunate lady! I have left my friends, relatives and my designated path. I have chosen your son, this tiger among men, as my husband. O illustrious lady! Will the choice of a
woman be rejected because of the way I speak? O greatly fortunate lady! Whether you think me stupid or whether
you think that I am devoted to you, please unite me with your son, my husband. O fortunate lady! Let me go as I
wish, taking this god-like one. Trust me that I shall bring him back here. Whenever you think of me, I shall immediately come to you and swiftly carry these bulls among men on my shoulders, over pastures and difﬁcult terrain,
wherever you wish to go. Please take pity on me and let Bhimasena make love to me. It is in accordance with what
is right that one should preserve oneself from disaster and act accordingly, by whatever means. One who follows
this righteous path in calamities is supreme among those who know what is right. Calamities are the greatest danger to what is right and to righteous ones. What preserves life is holy and, therefore, what grants life is what is
holy. The means through which this righteousness is ensured can never deserve condemnation.”22 Yudhishthira
replied, “O Hidimba! There is no doubt that what you have said is true. O lady with the slender waist! Act in accordance with the righteous path, as you have described it to be. O fortunate lady! When he has bathed, performed
his ablutions and ﬁnished all rites, he will make love to you until the sun sets. O you who are swift as the mind!
Have your pleasure with him, as you wish, during the day. But you must bring Bhimasena back every night.” Having taken an oath to do this, the rakshasi Hidimba then took Bhimasena up and rose into the sky.
‘Assuming the most beautiful of forms, adorned in every kind of ornament and sometimes breaking out in sweet
music, she pleasured with the Pandava on beautiful mountain peaks cared for by the gods and always frequented
by animals and birds; and also in forests and mountain passes with ﬂowering trees and creepers; in beautiful ponds
adorned with lotuses and water lilies; in islands on rivers where the gravel was like lapis lazuli and in mountain
streams where the woods and the water were pure; on the shores of the ocean with jewels and gold; in beautiful
cities and in forests with large shala trees; in forests sacred to the gods and the peaks of mountains; in the dwelling

places of the guhyakas and the hermitages of ascetics; and along the waters of Lake Manasa,23 abounding in ﬂowers and fruit in all seasons. Assuming a beautiful form, she pleasured with the Pandava. In every such place, the
one who was as swift as the mind, pleasured with Bhima.
‘From Bhimasena, the rakshasi then gave birth to an immensely powerful son. He had a fearful appearance, with
terrible eyes, a large mouth and ears like spikes. His form was distorted. His lips were brown as copper and his
teeth were sharp, with great strength in them. He had mighty arms, possessed great energy and was born extremely
valorous, a great archer. He had great speed, with gigantic size and was a conqueror of enemies, greatly skilled in
the powers of delusion. Though born from a man, with great speed and great strength, he had nothing human in
him. He surpassed all pishachas and other such creatures, not to speak of humans. O lord of men! Although a
child, by human standards he seemed to be a fully grown youth. He became a powerful and supreme hero, skilled
in the use of all the weapons that are known.
‘Rakshasa women give birth on the day they conceive. They are capable of assuming any form they want and
they can adopt many different forms. The child who had grown and become a supreme archer, then saluted his father and mother by touching their feet. They gave him a name. His mother said, “He is shiny like a pot,”24 and his
name became Ghatotkacha. Ghatotkacha was devoted to the Pandavas and they always loved him. He became one
of them. Knowing that the prescribed time of her stay with them was over, Hidimba made another agreement with
them25 and went where she wanted. Ghatotkacha, the best of rakshasas, told his father that he would come whenever he was required and left for the north. He had been created by the great-souled Maghavan26 as a powerful antagonist against the great-souled maharatha Karna.’
144

Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! The maharathas27 then went from one forest to another, killing many animals and
travelling fast, through the lands of Matysa, Trigarta, Panchala and Kichaka, where they saw many beautiful
woods and lakes. All of them had their hair in matted locks and they wore barks of trees and deerskin. Those greatsouled ones and Kunti assumed the form of ascetics. Sometimes, the maharathas had to hasten, and carried their
mother. Sometimes, they proceeded slowly and in the open.28 They studied about the brahman in the Vedas and all
the Vedangas and nitishastra.29
‘At that time, those wise ones met their grandfather.30 Having respectfully saluted Krishna Dvaipayana, those
scorchers of enemies31 and their mother stood before him with joined palms. Vyasa said, “O bulls of the Bharata
lineage! I had known in advance how Dhritarashtra’s sons would not follow the righteous path and would unjustly
banish you. Having known this, I have now come for your welfare. It is not right to sorrow. Know that this will
bring future happiness. There is no doubt that you and they are equal in my eyes. But men love more those who
suffer from ill fortune or are young. Therefore, my love for you is now greater. As a result of that love, I wish to do
something good for you. Listen to me. Not far from here, there is a beautiful town that is a safe place for you. Go
and live there in disguise and wait for my return.” After he had thus comforted the Parthas,32 the conquerors of
enemies Vyasa led them to Ekachakra.
‘The lord33 also comforted Kunti. “O daughter! Live. Your son Yudhishthira, the son of dharma, will rule righteously over all the kings on earth. Well versed in righteousness, he will conquer the earth through his virtue, aided
by the might of Bhima and Arjuna. There is no doubt that he will rule. Your sons and those of Madri, all maharathas, will enjoy themselves happily in their own kingdom. Conquering the entire earth, those tigers among
men will perform rajasuya,34ashvamedha35 and other sacriﬁces, in which the alms given will be very large. They
will rule over the kingdom of their father and grandfathers and ensure their friends and relatives enjoy pleasures
and prosperity.” Having said this, rishi Dvaipayana took them to the house of a Brahmana and told the best36 of
the Parthas, “Wait for me. I will return for you. You will ﬁnd great happiness if you learn to adjust to time and
place.” O ruler of men! With joined hands, they said, “So it shall be.” Lord Vyasa, the fortunate rishi, then went
away where he wanted to.’

Section Ten
Baka-vadha Parva
This parva has 206 shlokas and eight chapters.
Chapter 145: 40 shlokas
Chapter 146: 36 shlokas
Chapter 147: 24 shlokas
Chapter 148: 16 shlokas
Chapter 149: 20 shlokas
Chapter 150: 27 shlokas
Chapter 151: 24 shlokas
Chapter 152: 19 shlokas
This parva is about the killing of a demon named Baka.
145

Janamejaya said, ‘O best of those who are born twice! What did the maharatha Pandavas, the sons of Kunti, do after going to Ekachakra?’
Vaishampayana said, ‘After going to Ekachakra, the maharatha Pandavas, the sons of Kunti, lived in a Brahmana’s house for a short while. O king of the world! They then begged for alms. They saw many beautiful woods,
distant parts of the earth, countries, rivers and lakes. Because of their many qualities, they became the favourites of
the citizens. Every night, they handed over their alms to Kunti. She divided it into parts and each separately ate his
share. The valorous ones, the scorchers of foes, and their mother ate half. The immensely powerful Bhima ate the
other half entirely. O best of the Bharata lineage! O king! Those great-souled ones lived there like that and a great
deal of time passed.
‘One day, when the bulls of the Bharata lineage had gone out begging, Bhimasena was at home with Pritha1 for
company. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then Kunti heard a great uproar in the Brahmana’s house, terrible
sounds of lamentations. O king! Because of her compassion and goodness, the lady2 could not bear the sight of
that weeping and lamenting. Feeling sorry, the virtuous Pritha then spoke to Bhima in compassionate words. “O
son! Unknown to the sons of Dhritarashtra, we have lived happily in this Brahmana’s house, respected and treated
well by him. O son! I have always thought about what can be good for the Brahmana and what I can do to please
him, as those who happily live in others’ houses should. He is truly a man who returns what is received and such
an act is never destroyed. One should do more good than others do to one. Without a doubt, this Brahmana has
fallen into some grief. If we can be of any help to him, that will be a good deed.” Bhima said, “Let us ﬁnd out what
the distress is and how it has arisen. Having learnt it, I shall try to remove it,3 no matter how difﬁcult it will be.” O
ruler of the world! When those two were thus conversing, they heard a pitiful wail from the Brahmana and his
wife.
‘Like Surabhi4 dashes at her tethered calf, Kunti hurried towards the inner quarters of the great-souled Brahmana. She saw there the Brahmana, his wife, his son and his daughter, their faces distorted with grief.
‘The Brahmana said, “Cursed be this worldly life, without meaning, and like the substance of ﬁre. Its root is unhappiness, slavery to others and it is based on great sorrow. To live means to suffer great misery, to live means to

suffer a great fever. Without a doubt, those who live have to choose between evils. The atman may be one, but one
has to serve dharma, artha and kama. The simultaneous pursuit of these leads to great misery. Some say that salvation is the greatest object, but it can never be reached. The acquisition of artha is hell, its desire creates misery.
Great is unhappiness for those who desire wealth, greater for those who have acquired it. There is attachment to
the acquired wealth and when it is lost, unhappiness is greater. I do not see any way of escaping from this danger
unless I run away with my wife and son to a healthier place. O brahmani!5 I have told you before that we should
go to a place that is safe, but you didn’t listen to my words then. O foolish woman! When I repeatedly asked, you
said, ‘I was born here. I grew old here. This is my father’s house.’ Your father is now dead and your old mother
died a long time ago. Your relatives are also dead. Why was there the desire to live here? You didn’t listen to my
words as a result of affection towards your relatives. We are now faced with the terrible misery that comes from
losing a relative. How can I bear it? Perhaps the time has come for my own death. I cannot live like a cruel one after abandoning one of my own relatives.
‘“Always giving, you have been my companion in all virtuous acts. You are like a mother to me. The gods gave
you to me as a friend. You have been my chief support. My father and mother gave you to me as a partner in my
duties as a householder. I chose you in accordance with the law. I married you in accordance with the mantras. You
were born into a good family. You have a good nature. You are the mother of my children. You have always been
faithful to me. You are chaste and have never harmed anyone. You have always been constant in your vows. I cannot give up my wife in order to save my own life.
‘“How can I sacriﬁce my daughter? She is still a child, not yet an adult, and without any signs of coming of age.
The great-souled creator gave her to me in trust so that I could ﬁnd her a husband. Through her, together with my
ancestors, I will be able to attain worlds reached by those who have sons through their daughters. How can I give
up a daughter I have fathered myself? Some men think that a father loves a son more than a daughter. Not I. I love
them equally. How can I give up this innocent girl? On her are based my continuity and the worlds that bring eternal bliss.
‘“If I sacriﬁce myself and go to the other world, I will still have to repent. Abandoned by me, they will not be
able to live. To give up any one of these6 will be a cruel act, condemned by those who are learned. But if I sacriﬁce myself, they will also die without me. Great distress has befallen me. I do not know how to escape. I am
cursed. What path will I and my relatives follow? It is better that I should die with all of them. I cannot live.”’
146

‘The brahmani said, “You must not grieve like a common person. For someone who is as learned as you, this is not
the time to grieve. All men must certainly come to an end. If something is certain, one should not grieve over it. A
man desires a wife, a son and a daughter for his own sake. Therefore, since you have great learning, abandon this
grief. I shall go there myself. It is the supreme and eternal duty of women in this world that they should give up
their lives for the welfare of their husbands. Done by me, such an act will bring you happiness. It will also bring
me eternal fame in this world and the hereafter. What I have told you is the highest dharma. Through this, it will
perceptibly bring you artha and dharma. You have already obtained from me the purpose for which a man acquires
a wife—a daughter and a son. Through this, I have been freed from the debt I owe you.
‘“You are capable of supporting and protecting your children. I cannot protect and support the children as you
can. You have given me all that I desire and protected me from all danger. If I am abandoned by you, how can
these young children and I survive? How can an unprotected widow with two young children support them both,
while treading a path of virtue? How can I protect our daughter when she is wooed by arrogant and selﬁsh suitors
who are unworthy of an alliance with you? Like birds grabbing a lump of meat thrown on the ground, all men
crave women without their husbands. O best of the twice-born! Solicited by evil-hearted ones, I might waver and
might not be able to stick to the path of virtue. How can I ensure that this only daughter of the lineage, young and
innocent, walks along the path trodden by her forefathers? How can I teach this young boy, fatherless and without
a protector, every desirable quality so as to make him as learned in virtue as you? When I am in this state, those
who are unworthy will overcome me and demand this unprotected girl, like Shudras craving to hear the Vedas. If I
refuse to give her, endowed with all qualities and with your blood, they may forcibly carry her away, like crows

after sacriﬁcial offerings. When they see a son who is unlike you and your daughter under the control of those who
are unworthy, I will be despised in the worlds. O Brahmana! I do not know what will happen to me, under the control of the arrogant. But there is no doubt that I shall die. There is no doubt that these young children, deprived of
you and of me, will perish like ﬁsh when the water dries up. There is no doubt that without you, all three of us will
perish in this way. Therefore, you should sacriﬁce me.
‘“O Brahmana! Those who are learned in dharma have said that the supreme salvation of women is to go on the
last journey before their husbands and not remain under the protection of their sons. For you, I am ready to give up
this son and this daughter, my relatives and my life. To be always engaged in what pleases her husband is a greater
duty for a woman than sacriﬁces, austerities, vows and donation of alms. Thus, the act I wish to perform is in conformity with the supreme dharma. It is for the welfare of you and of the lineage. The virtuous say that objects of
desire, children, possessions and friends, even the wife, are cherished to rescue oneself in a time of distress. O you
who have extended your lineage! The wise ones have said that if all one’s relations are placed on one side of the
scale, they do not equal oneself on the other side. My lord! Thus, do through me what has to be done. Save yourself by sacriﬁcing me. Give me permission and protect my children. In deciding the path of virtue for men, those
who are learned in dharma have said that women should never be killed and that rakshasas also know dharma.
Therefore, he may not kill me. It is certain that he will kill a man. But it is doubtful that he will kill a woman. O
you who are learned in dharma! Therefore, you should let me go. I have enjoyed my life. I have enjoyed great happiness. I have trodden the path of dharma. Through you, I have borne beloved children. I will not grieve if I have
to die. I have borne a son and I have grown old. I have always desired to do that which pleases you. Counting all
my blessings, I have arrived at my decision. O revered one! You can take another wife after you have sacriﬁced
me. You will then again be able to tread the path of dharma. O virtuous man! To have more than one wife is not a
sin among men. But it is a grave sin for a woman to have another husband after the ﬁrst. Having considered all this
and realizing that your self-sacriﬁce must be condemned, today, without any delay, save yourself, your lineage and
these two children through me.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing her words, her husband embraced her.
Stricken with grief, he shed copious tears, along with his wife.’
147

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the daughter heard these words of her parents, who were extremely sorrowful, she
was overcome with grief and spoke to them. “Why are you lamenting so grievously? Why are you weeping as if
you have no one to protect you? Now listen to what I have to say. On hearing my words, do what is proper. There
is no doubt that dharma dictates that I have to be sacriﬁced at some time. Since I have to be abandoned in any case,
abandon me now and save everyone through me alone. That is the reason men desire children, so that they can be
saved. That time has come. Use me as a boat and save yourselves. A child saves everywhere, in this world and in
the next. It is because a child saves everywhere that the learned know a child by the name of putra.7 My grandfathers have always desired to have daughter’s sons through me. Now I shall myself save them by saving my father’s
life. My brother is very young. There is no doubt that he will soon perish after you have left this world. When my
father has gone to heaven and my younger brother has perished, the funeral cakes offered to the ancestors will
come to an end and that act will displease them. Having been abandoned by my father, my mother and my brother,
I shall descend from misery to misery and will ﬁnally perish in great distress. There is no doubt that if you are
healthy and can save yourself, my mother and my child brother, and our lineage, the practice of offering funeral
cakes will continue. The son is one’s own self. The wife is one’s friend. The daughter is the cause of suffering.
Save yourself from that cause of suffering. Set me on the path of dharma. O father! Without you, I will be an unprotected and wretched girl, going everywhere and whenever, always miserable. Therefore, I shall save my lineage
and I shall acquire the merit that this difﬁcult act brings. O best of the twice-born! If you abandon me and go
there,8 I will be greatly oppressed. Therefore, be kind to me. O good father! Abandon me, who am to be abandoned eventually. Save yourself for my sake, for the sake of dharma and for the sake of your lineage. There should
not be any delay in performing the inevitable. By offering them9 water, you will do that which is good. What can

be more painful to us than you ascending to heaven and our roaming like dogs, begging food from others? But if
you are saved from this calamity with your relatives10 and are healthy, I shall be very happy in the immortal
world.” When they heard her piteous lamentations, all three, the father, the mother and the daughter, began to
weep.
‘Then, on seeing all of them cry, their young son uttered these mumbling words, his eyes wide open. “O father!
O mother! And you too, O sister! Do not cry.” Saying this, he smilingly came to each of them. Picking up a blade
of grass, he again said happily, “I will kill the man-eating rakshasa with this.” Though they were overcome with
grief, hearing the mumbling words of the child, they were cheered up. Knowing that this was the right time, Kunti
went to them and thus spoke, like ambrosia reviving the dead.’
148

‘Kunti said, “I wish to learn exactly from you the reason for this grief. On learning it, I will remove the cause from
you, if it can be removed.”
‘The Brahmana said, “O lady blessed with austerities! What you have said is worthy of righteous ones. But removal of this grief is beyond humans. Not far from this town lives a rakshasa named Baka. That immensely powerful one is the lord of this town and this country. That evil-minded maneater, chief among asuras, and with the
power of rakshasas, rules over and protects this town, this country and this region, sustained through human ﬂesh.
Thus protected by him, we have no fear from any encirclement by enemies or any living beings. But his stipend
has been ﬁxed to a supply of food—a cartload of rice, two buffaloes and the human who takes these to him. One
after another, all the people provide him with food. After intervals of many years, this difﬁcult task comes to a particular man and it is impossible to escape. If men ever try to escape their turn, the rakshasa eats them up, with their
wives and children.
‘“The king lives in a place known as Vetrakiyagriha. But he makes no efforts to free his subjects from this danger for good. We deserve all of this, because we live in continued harassment in the kingdom of a weak and incompetent king. Brahmanas are free to live, as they wish, on anyone’s land.11 They base themselves on their qualities
and like birds freely go where they will. It is said that ﬁrst one should ﬁnd a king, then a wife, and then riches. By
acquiring all three, one can maintain one’s relatives and one’s sons. But in acquiring these three, I have chosen the
wrong order. Therefore, having fallen into this danger, I am suffering great grief. It is now my turn and it will destroy my family. I shall have to provide food and a man as stipend. I don’t have the riches to purchase a man. Nor
am I able to give up someone who is dear to me. I do not see any means of saving myself from that rakshasa. I am
immersed in this great ocean of grief from which no escape seems possible. Today, I will go to that rakshasa with
my entire family, so that the evil one can eat all of us together.”’
149

‘Kunti said, “Do not grieve because of this fear. I see a means through which you can escape from that rakshasa.
You have an only son who is a child and an only daughter who is engaged in austerities. It does not seem right to
me that they, you or your wife should go there. O Brahmana! I have ﬁve sons. One of them will go, taking on your
behalf the offerings to that evil rakshasa.”
‘The Brahmana said, “In order to live, I can never do this. For the sake of saving my own life, I cannot cause the
death of a Brahmana and a guest. Even those who are of low birth and sinful refuse to do this. One should sacriﬁce
oneself and one’s children for the sake of a Brahmana. I consider this principle to be the best for me and I would
like to follow it. Between the death of a Brahmana and my own, it seems to me that the latter is better. There is no
salvation from the great sin of killing a Brahmana. Even if I do it without the right frame of mind, it is better for
me to sacriﬁce myself. O fortunate lady! In sacriﬁcing myself, I will not commit the crime of self-destruction, because there is no sin if someone else does the killing. But if I deliberately kill a Brahmana, I will commit a cruel
and vile act, from which there is no means of atonement. The learned have said that the sacriﬁce of someone who
has come to your house or has sought your protection or the killing of a supplicant are cruel and sinful deeds.
Great-souled ones, learned in principles that should be followed at times of distress, have earlier said that one

should never commit cruel deeds capable of censure. It is best for me that I should perish today with my wife, than
that I should ever cause the killing of a Brahmana.”
‘Kunti said, “O Brahmana! It is also my ﬁrm view that Brahmanas must always be protected. If I had 100 sons, I
would not love any one of them less. But this rakshasa will not be able to kill my son. My son is full of energy, valorous and has knowledge of the mantras. He will deliver all that food to the rakshasa, but it is my ﬁrm conviction
that he will be able to save himself. Earlier, I have myself seen that powerful and gigantic rakshasas have fought
with that brave one and have been killed, one after another. O Brahmana! But do not reveal this to anyone through
any means. For people, curious and wishing to learn,12 will trouble my sons. The learned have said that if my son
parts with this knowledge without the permission of his preceptor, the receiver will not gain from it.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Hearing these words of Pritha,13 the Brahmana and his wife were very happy and agreed
to her words, which were like ambrosia.14 Then, Kunti and the Brahmana went to Anila’s son15 and said, “Do
this.” “So shall it be,” was his reply.’
150

Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhima said that he would do it before all the Pandavas
returned there after collecting their alms.16 Looking at his17 appearance, Pandu’s son Yudhishthira guessed and
sitting down with his mother, alone and privately, asked her, “What is the exploit that the immensely powerful Bhima wishes to undertake? Is it something he wishes to do on his own or is it something you have commanded?”
Kunti replied, “On my instructions, the scorcher of enemies18 will perform this great task, for the sake of the
Brahmana and in order to save this town.”
‘Yudhishthira said, “What have you done in your extreme rashness? This is a difﬁcult task. The learned have
certainly never praised the sacriﬁce of one’s own son. Why do you wish to sacriﬁce your own son for the sake of
someone else’s? You have performed an act of abandoning your son. This is not approved by the worlds and by the
Vedas. Through the strength of his arms all of us sleep in peace and hope to recover the kingdom that the evil ones
have deprived us of. It is because of his inﬁnite powers that Duryodhana, Shakuni and all the others spend sleepless nights of worry. Through his valour we escaped from the burning of the house of lac and other dangers when
Purochana was killed. It is through dependence on his valour that we believe that we have already acquired this
earth and its riches and have killed Dhritarashtra’s sons. What came to your mind that you deliberately decided to
sacriﬁce him? Have you lost your senses and your intelligence because of the miseries?”
‘Kunti said, “O Yudhishthira! You need not lament over Vrikodara.19 I did not take my decision because of the
weakness of my intelligence. O son! We have lived happily in the house of this Brahmana. O son! I wish to regard
this as our compensation. A man is true to the extent he recognizes a good deed. Having witnessed Bhima’s valour
in the house of lac and in the killing of Hidimba, I have great conﬁdence in Vrikodara. The strength in Bhima’s
arms is as much as that in 10,00020 elephants. It is because of this that he was able to carry us, as heavy as elephants, from Varanavata. There has been no one, nor will there be any one, as strong as Vrikodara. In battle, he is
the equal of the best, the wielder of the vajra21 himself. Earlier, as soon as he was born, he fell from my lap on a
mountain. Through the hardness of his body, he shattered the rock into pieces. O Pandava! From that day, I have
known Bhima’s strength and, remembering it, I wished to repay the Brahmana. I have not done this from folly,
delusion or desire for gain. I have consciously desired to perform this act because it is what dharma requires. O
Yudhishthira! Two objectives will be attained in this way. We will repay the Brahmana for his lodging us and we
will obtain great religious merit. I have heard that a Kshatriya who helps a Brahmana in any way obtains the fortunate worlds after death. A Kshatriya who saves the life of another Kshatriya obtains great fame in this world and
the next. A Kshatriya who helps a Vaishya on this earth is certainly loved by the subjects in all the worlds. A king
who frees a Shudra who comes to him for protection is reborn in a wealthy family in his next life and is revered by
other kings. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Earlier, the illustrious and extremely wise Lord Vyasa told me this.
That is why I want to act in this way.”

‘Yudhisthira said, “O mother! What you have intelligently decided to do, driven by compassion for the poor
Brahmana, is indeed right. It is certain that Bhima will kill that maneater and return alive. But the Brahmana must
carefully be told that he must restrain himself, so that the inhabitants of this town do not ﬁnd out.”’
151

Vaishampayana said, ‘Thereafter, when night had passed, Pandava Bhimasena took the food with him and left for
the place where the maneater lived. Reaching the forest where the rakshasa lived, the immensely strong Pandava
began to eat the food himself and called out to the rakshasa by name. Then, on hearing Bhimasena’s words, the
rakshasa was greatly enraged and came to where Bhima was. His body was huge and his speed was swift, as if he
was breaking up the ground. His forehead was furrowed into three lines and he bit his lips. On seeing Bhimasena
eating the food, the rakshasa dilated his eyes and angrily said, “Who are you, stupid one, who dares to eat these offerings meant for me, that too in front of my own eyes? Do you wish to go to the land of the dead?” O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! On hearing this, Bhimasena began to laugh. Ignoring the rakshasa, he turned his head away
and continued to eat.
‘Uttering a terrible roar and raising both arms high, the maneater rushed at Bhimasena, with the intention of
killing him. Even then, Pandava Vrikodara, the killer of enemy warriors, ignored the rakshasa. Casting only a
glance, he went on eating. Greatly enraged, the rakshasa struck a mighty blow with both his hands on the back of
Kunti’s son. Though Bhima was powerfully struck by those arms, he did not even look up, and continued to eat.
Thereupon, the rakshasa became even more enraged. He uprooted a tree and powerfully dashed at Bhima, so as to
strike him again. Bhima, bull among men and immensely strong, slowly ﬁnished eating all the food. He washed
himself and then cheerfully stood up to ﬁght. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The valorous Bhima laughingly
caught the tree that had been angrily hurled in his left hand. Then that powerful one hurled many other trees at
Bhimasena and the Pandava Bhima also hurled many at him. O great king! The terrible and great ﬁght between
Baka and the Pandava with trees went on, denuding the forest of its trees. Announcing his name, Baka dashed at
the Pandava and grasped the immensely powerful Bhimasena in both his arms. Bhimasena also grasped the rakshasa in his great arms and began to violently drag the swift and strong one.22
‘Dragged by Bhima and also dragging the Pandava, the maneater was gradually overcome by great fatigue. The
earth shook because of their violent movements. Giant trees that stood there were shattered into pieces. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! On seeing the rakshasa fading away, Vrikodara pressed him down on the ground and
began to strike him with his arms. Powerfully pushing the middle of his23 back down with one knee, the Pandava
grabbed his neck with his right hand and his loincloth with the left, and then ripped the rakshasa into two with
great force. O ruler of the earth! Uttering a terrible roar, the fearsome rakshasa was torn into two by Bhima and
vomited blood.’
152

Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! Frightened by that noise, the rakshasa’s relatives and their attendants came out of
their houses. On seeing them terriﬁed and bereft of reason, the powerful Bhima, supreme among those who wield
arms, paciﬁed them and made them promise. “You shall never do violence to humans here. Those who perform violence will quickly die the same way.” O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing his words, the rakshasas
gave the desired promise and accepted the terms. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! From that day, the rakshasas there were friendly and behaved peacefully when they were sighted in town by the inhabitants of that town.
Then, unobserved by anyone, Bhima took the dead maneater and placed him at one of the gates. He then went
away.
‘After killing him,24 Bhima returned to the Brahmana’s house and described in detail to the king25 all that had
happened. The next morning, the inhabitants of the town came out and saw the rakshasa lying dead on the ground,
his body wet with blood, horrible and spread out, as huge as the peak of a mountain. They went to Ekachakra and
spread the news throughout the city. O king! In their thousands, the citizens went with their wives, old people and
the young to see Baka. They were astonished at the sight of this superhuman feat. O ruler of the earth! They gave

offerings of gratitude to the gods. Then they began to calculate whose turn it had been the previous day to supply
food. Learning that it was the Brahmana’s turn, they went to him and questioned him.
‘Thus repeatedly asked, the bull among Brahmanas then protected the Pandavas, but told the citizens everything
else. “When I was ordered to supply the food, I was weeping with my family, when a great-souled Brahmana,
learned in the mantras, saw me. He asked me about the cause and learnt about the calamity that had befallen this
city. That best among Brahmanas then reassured us and smilingly comforted us. He said that he would himself carry the food to the evil-hearted one and that we should not be frightened for his sake. After taking the food, he set
out for the forest where Baka lived. For the welfare of the worlds, he must have been the one who performed this
deed.” Thereupon, all the astonished and delighted Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras had a feast in
honour of the Brahmana. All the inhabitants of the country came to the city to witness this extraordinary miracle.
Pritha’s sons went on living there.’

Section Eleven
Chaitraratha Parva
This parva has 557 shlokas and twenty-one chapters.
Chapter 153: 12 shlokas
Chapter 154: 25 shlokas
Chapter 155: 52 shlokas
Chapter 156: 11 shlokas
Chapter 157: 16 shlokas
Chapter 158: 55 shlokas
Chapter 159: 22 shlokas
Chapter 160: 41 shlokas
Chapter 161: 20 shlokas
Chapter 162: 18 shlokas
Chapter 163: 23 shlokas
Chapter 164: 14 shlokas
Chapter 165: 44 shlokas
Chapter 166: 45 shlokas
Chapter 167: 21 shlokas
Chapter 168: 25 shlokas
Chapter 169: 25 shlokas
Chapter 170: 21 shlokas
Chapter 171: 26 shlokas
Chapter 172: 17 shlokas
Chapter 173: 24 shlokas
The parva is named after Chitraratha, a gandharva, whose stories ﬁgure in this section.
153

Janamejaya said, ‘O Brahmana! After killing the demon named Baka, what did the Pandavas, those tigers among
men, do?’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! After killing the demon named Baka, they lived in the house of that Brahmana,
engaging themselves in studies about the supreme brahman. A few days later, a Brahmana who was rigid in the
practice of his vows came to live in that Brahmana’s house. That learned bull among Brahmanas, always hospitable towards guests, duly worshipped him and gave him a place to live in his house. Then those bulls among
men, the Pandavas, and Kunti, requested the Brahmana to tell them about his wonderful experiences. He told them
about many countries, places of pilgrimage, rivers, many kings and many wonderful cities.
‘O Janamejaya! When these accounts were over, the Brahmana told them about the wonderful svayamvara1 of
Yajnasena’s2 daughter in the land of Panchala and the births of Dhrishtadyumna and Shikhandi and also that of
Krishna,3 who was born from Drupada’s great sacriﬁce and not from any woman’s womb. Hearing of these wonderful events that had happened in this world, those bulls among men4 asked the great-souled one5 to narrate these
accounts in greater detail. “How did Drupada’s son, Dhrishtadyumna’s birth take place from the ﬁre? How did
Krishna’s wonderful birth take place from the middle of the altar? How did he6 learn the usage of all weapons

from the great archer Drona? How did the great friendship between those two7 break up?” O king! Having been
thus asked by those bulls among men, the Brahmana recounted in detail the story of Droupadi’s birth.’
154

‘The Brahmana said, “At the source of the Ganga, there lived a rishi of great austerities. He was always rigid in his
vows and he was extremely wise. His name was Bharadvaja. One day, the rishi went to the Ganga to have his bath
and saw there the apsara Ghritachi, who had arrived before him and now stood there, having ﬁnished her bath.
Then a wind arose from the riverbank and removed the clothing from her body. Seeing her nude, the rishi was afﬂicted with desire. He had been celibate8 since boyhood. As soon as his mind felt desire, his semen dropped and
the rishi collected it in a wooden cup.9 From that was born a son, who became the learned Drona and who studied
all the Vedas and the Vedangas.
‘“Bharadvaja had a king as his friend. His name was Prishata and he had a son named Drupada. Parshata,10 that
bull among Kshatriyas, always used to go to the hermitage and play and study with Drona. After Prishata died,
Drupada became the king. Drona heard that Rama11 wanted to give away all his riches. When Rama was leaving
for the forest,12 Bharadvaja’s son went to him and said, ‘O bull among Brahmanas! I am Drona and I have come
to you for some riches.’ Rama said, ‘O Brahmana! Now I have only my body left. Ask for either my body or my
weapons.’ Drona said, ‘O illustrious one! Give me all your weapons, together with the knowledge of releasing
them and recalling them.’ The descendant of Bhrigu13 agreed and gave those to him. On receiving them, Drona
concluded that he had become successful. On obtaining from Rama that supreme weapon known as brahmastra,
Drona became extremely happy and became supreme among men. Thereupon, Bharadvaja’s powerful son went to
Drupada, a tiger among men, and said, ‘Know me to be your friend.’ Drupada said, ‘A man without learning cannot be a friend to one who is learned, nor one without chariots to one who has chariots, nor one who is not a king
to one who is a king. Why do you desire our old friendship?’ Turning his mind against the king of Panchala, the
intelligent one14 went to Nagasahrya,15 the capital of the Kurus.
‘“Thereupon, Bhishma took a lot of riches with him and offered his grandsons to the wise Drona as students.
With the intention of humiliating Drupada, Drona assembled all his students and told them, ‘O unblemished ones!
When you have become skilled in the use of all weapons, as a preceptor’s fee, you must promise that you will give
me what I wish for.’ When the Pandavas became skilled in the use of all weapons and became successful in their
labour, Drona spoke to them and reminded them about the preceptor’s fee, ‘Parshata Drupada is the king in Chhatravati.16 Take his kingdom away from him and give it to me quickly.’ Then Pandu’s ﬁve sons defeated Drupada
in battle. Taking him and his advisers prisoners, they showed them to Drona. Drona said, ‘O king of men! I again
seek your friendship. One who is not a king cannot be a friend to one who is a king. O Yajnasena! Therefore, I will
divide the kingdom with you. You will be the king on the southern banks of the Bhagirathi and I on the north.’ The
thought of that great insult never left the king’s17 mind for a single instant. Being miserable, the king became
thin.”’
155

‘The Brahmana said, “Being miserable, King Drupada wandered in many places where Brahmanas lived, searching for bulls among Brahmanas who were perfect in all the rites.18 He wished for the birth of a son. Afﬂicted with
grief and out of his mind, he always thought, ‘I don’t have excellent offspring.’ When his sons were born, he said,
‘Cursed are my relatives19 who are without learning.’ He kept on sighing, thinking about taking revenge on
Drona.”
‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But however much that best among kings tried, he could think of no
means to overcome Drona’s inﬂuence, humility, learning and accomplishments through his Kshatriya powers.
Wandering around, the king came to a holy hermitage of Brahmanas located on the banks of the Ganga. There was
no Brahmana there who was not rigid in his vows, nor one who was not a snataka.20 Prishata’s son found two

brahmarshis named Yaja and Upayaja there. They were greatly illustrious, rigid in their vows, self-controlled and
given to the study of the samhitas. They were descended from Kashyapa’s lineage and both of those supreme Brahmanas were capable of rescuing him.21 Having controlled his mind, he served them in every possible way. Knowing the strength of the younger one to be greater, he worshipped Upayaja of rigid vows, giving him every object of
desire, serving at his feet and addressing him in pleasant words.
‘Worshipping him in accordance with the prescribed rites, he told Upayaja, “O Brahmana! O Upayaja! If you
perform the sacriﬁce that will give me a son who can kill Drona, I will give you ten crore22cows. O best of the
Brahmanas! I will give you whatever else is in your mind and whatever pleases you. There is no doubt about this.”
Having been thus addressed, the rishi refused. Thereupon, Drupada again began to worship him and serve him. O
king! After one year had passed and at the right time, Upayaja, best of the Brahmanas, spoke to the king in gentle
words, “When roaming in a forest and at a waterfall, my elder brother picked up a fruit that had fallen on the
ground, not knowing that it was impure and should be discarded. I was following him and witnessed my brother’s
impure act. He never has scruples about taking that which is unclean. He did not see the impurities that were on the
fruit. One who does not see impurities in one’s acts, is not expected to see it in another. When he was in his preceptor’s house and was studying the samhitas, without any scruples he used to eat the leftover food of others and
repeatedly praise its qualities. Judging from this, my brother desires material fruit. O king! Go to him and he will
perform your sacriﬁces.” Hearing Upayaja’s words and thinking about them, the king, who was well versed in the
ways of dharma, went to Yaja, though he had a low opinion of him.
‘Worshipping the rishi who was deserving of worship, he told Yaja, “O lord! I will give you 80,000 cows. Please
perform the sacriﬁce. I am inﬂamed with enmity for Drona. Pacify my heart. That best of men is learned in the
Vedas and is skilled in the use of brahmastra. Therefore, Drona defeated me in a quarrel that arose over our friendship. There is no Kshatriya on this earth, however great, who is superior to him and that wise son of Bharadvaja
has become the chief preceptor of the Kurus. Drona’s net of arrows can kill every living creature. His bow is 6 cubits long and looks great and matchless. That great-minded and great archer, Bharadvaja’s son, is undoubtedly capable of destroying the might of Kshatriyas with the might of a Brahmana. He has been created like another son of
Jamadagni23 to destroy the Kshatriyas. There is no man on earth who can withstand the terrible power of his
weapons. Like a blazing ﬁre that has been fed with sacriﬁcial offerings, Drona’s Brahmana powers consume every
Kshatriya power in battle. Though his Brahmana powers are combined with Kshatriya powers, your Brahmana
powers are superior to his. I am inferior because I only possess Kshatriya powers. Give me your Brahmana powers. I have now found you, whose Brahmana powers are superior to Drona’s. O Yaja! Perform the sacriﬁce so that I
obtain a son who will be invincible and can kill Drona. I will give you ten crore24 cows.” Yaja agreed and began
to think of what was required for the sacriﬁce.
‘Upayaja wished for no rewards, but was called to assist his elder. Then Yaja promised Drona’s destruction. The
great ascetic Upayaja instructed the king of men25 on the sacriﬁcial rites that would produce a son. “O king! According to your desires, a son will be born to you, who will possess great valour, great energy and great strength.”
King Drupada, wishing to obtain a son who would kill Bharadvaja’s son, began to make the required preparations
for bringing success to his effort. Yaja poured offerings into the sacriﬁcial ﬁre and instructed the queen, “O queen
Prishati! Come here. The time for uniting has arrived.”26 The queen said, “O Brahmana! My face is anointed with
divine scents. O Yaja! Wait a little. My body is not yet ready for the happy consummation that will give a son.”
Yaja said, “Offerings made sacred by Upayaja’s incantations have already been prepared by Yaja. Why should the
object of this sacriﬁce not be attained, whether you come or wait?” Saying this, Yaja poured the sanctiﬁed sacriﬁcial offerings into the ﬁre.
‘Then a youth who resembled a god arose from the ﬂames. His complexion was like the ﬁre and his form was
terrible. He wore a crown on his head and his body was encased in excellent armour. He had a sword in his hand
and a bow and arrows and he let out many loud roars. As soon as he was born, he ascended a supreme chariot and
went forth. All the Panchalas were delighted and exclaimed, “Blessed!” From the sky issued the voice of an invisible and great being. “This terrible prince has been born for Drona’s destruction. He will increase the fame of the
Panchalas and remove the king’s grief.” Then a young maiden arose from the centre of the altar. She was blessed

with good fortune and was known as Panchali. She was beautiful and her waist was shaped like an altar. She was
dark. Her eyes were like the petals of lotuses. Her hair was dark blue and curled. She was truly a goddess born in
human form. The sweet fragrance of blue lotuses emanated from her body, a full 2 miles27 away. Her form and
supreme beauty were such that she had no equal on earth. When the one with beautiful hips was born, the invisible
voice said, “Supreme among women, this beauty of the dark complexion will bring about the destruction of the
Kshatriyas. In time, this one with the beautiful waist will perform the objective of the gods. From her will arise terrible fear among the Kshatriyas.” Hearing this, all the Panchalas roared like a pride of lions. The earth was unable
to bear their great joy.
‘On seeing these two, Prishati wished to get them and came to Yaja and said, “Let these two know no one but
me as their mother.” Desiring to please the king, Yaja agreed. The Brahmanas, whose desires were entirely satisﬁed, gave the two names. “Because of his great courage and because he has been born from lustre, let this son of
Drupada be called Dhrishtadyumna.28 Because she is dark in complexion, let her be called Krishna.” Thus Drupada’s twin children were born from the great sacriﬁce. Bharadvaja’s powerful son29 took the Panchala prince
Dhrishtadyumna to his own house and taught him the use of all weapons. Thus did the illustrious Drona ensure
that his own deeds would become famous, because the immensely wise one knew that what was destined would
come to be.’
156

Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing this, Kunti’s sons seemed to be pierced with spears. All those maharathas lost
their mental peace. On seeing that her sons were confused and not in control of their senses, the truthful Kunti
spoke to Yudhishthira.
‘Kunti said, “We have lived in this Brahmana’s house for many nights. O Yudhishthira! We have lived in this
beautiful city and have received alms. O chastiser of enemies! We have seen again and again all the beautiful
forests and woods. Seeing them again will not give us any pleasure. O brave descendant of Kuru! Alms will not be
as easily available. O fortunate one! If you wish, let us go to Panchala. O son! We have not seen it before and it
must be beautiful. O destroyer of enemies! It has been heard that alms are easily obtained in Panchala and that
King Yajnasena himself is devoted to Brahmanas. It is my view that one should not live in the same place for a
long time. O son! Therefore, if you also think the same, let us go there.” Yudhishthira said, “Your views are for our
welfare and we should act in that way. But I don’t know if my younger brothers will wish to go.” Then Kunti
spoke to Bhimasena, Arjuna and the twins about going there, and all of them agreed.
‘O king! Kunti and her sons saluted the Brahmana and left for the beautiful city of the great-hearted Drupada.’
157

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the great-hearted Pandavas lived in disguise, Vyasa, Satyavati’s son, once came to see
them. On seeing him come, those scorchers of enemies advanced to meet him. They prostrated themselves to welcome him and stood before him with folded hands. Returning their greetings, and worshipped and pleased by
Pritha’s sons, the sage spoke to them in affectionate words, after they were all seated, “O scorchers of enemies! Do
you follow the path of dharma and that laid down in the sacred texts? Do you worship the Brahmanas and those
who deserve worship?” The illustrious rishi uttered many words about dharma and artha.
‘Speaking about many subjects, he again said, “A great-souled rishi lived in a hermitage. He had a daughter who
was slender of waist and wide of hips. Her eyebrows were beautiful and she had all the qualities. Because of her
earlier deeds,30 she was unfortunate. Despite being beautiful and pure, that girl did not get a husband. With sorrow
in her heart, she then began to perform austerities so as to obtain a husband. She satisﬁed Shankara with her severe
austerities. Gratiﬁed, the illustrious lord spoke to the ascetic lady. “O fortunate one! O beautiful one! Ask for a
boon and I shall give it to you.” Desirous of ensuring her own welfare, she repeatedly told the supreme god, “I
want a husband with all the qualities.” Then the eloquent Ishana31 Shankara told her, “O fortunate one! You will
have ﬁve husbands.” Thus addressed, she told Shankara, “Give me only one husband.” The god addressed her
again in these excellent words, “You have repeatedly asked me for a husband ﬁve times. Therefore, when you are

reborn in another body, it shall be as I have just said.” That daughter of divine form was born in Drupada’s family,
as the unblemished Krishna Parshati and is destined to be your wife. O mighty ones! Go to the city of Panchala.
There is no doubt that you will be happy in obtaining her as your wife.” Having told the Pandavas this, the greatly
fortunate grandfather,32 the great ascetic, bid his farewell to Kunti and Pritha’s sons and left.’
158

Vaishampayana said, ‘Placing their mother ahead of them, those bulls among men, the scorchers of enemies, set
out over smooth roads towards the north, as they had been directed. They walked day and night and reached the
pilgrimage of Somashravayana. Pandu’s sons, those tigers among men, reached the Ganga. The immensely famous
Dhananjaya33 walked in front, with a torch in his hand to show the way and protect them.
‘In the beautiful waters of the Ganga, the jealous king of the gandharvas was sporting with his wives. He heard
the sound34 as they approached the river. That strong one was inﬂamed with rage at the sound. Seeing the Pandavas, the scorchers of enemies, and their mother, he drew his terrible bow and uttered these words. “It is known
that except for the ﬁrst eighty instants,35 when terrible dusk colours and night is about to descend, the rest36 is set
aside for yakshas, gandharvas, rakshasas and others who can travel wherever at will. For the rest of the time, it is
said that humans can travel at will. Therefore, if at those times, men wander around out of greed, we and the rakshasas attack and kill those stupid ones. Those who are learned in the Vedas disapprove of those men, even if they
are kings with their armies, who come near the water in the night. Stay at a distance and do not come near me. Do
you not know that I am bathing in the waters of the Bhagirathi? Know me to be the gandharva named Angaraparna. I rely on my own strength. I am proud and jealous and I am Kubera’s beloved friend. This is my beautiful
forest on the banks of the Ganga, known as Angaraparna. I dwell here. No corpses,37 horned animals, gods or humans dare to set foot here. How dare you come?”
‘Arjuna said, “O evil-minded one! Whether it is night or day or twilight, how can the ocean, the Himalayas or
this river be barred to anyone? We are endowed with strength. We do not care even if we disturb you at the wrong
time. It is only weak men who worship you in this cruel hour. Issuing from the golden peaks of the Himalayas, this
Ganga descends into the ocean in seven streams. O gandharva! This holy Ganga, ﬂowing through the celestial regions, is known there as Alakananda. In the region of the ancestors, it is known as Vaitarani and cannot be crossed
by those who commit sins. Krishna Dvaipayana has said that this divine and pure river, which can take one to
heaven, is accessible to everyone. How can you bar us access? That is not in accordance with eternal dharma. Because of your words, why should we not touch, as we will, the sacred waters of the Bhagirathi, accessible to everyone?”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Hearing these words, Angaraparna became very angry. He drew his bow and shot ﬂaming
arrows that were like extremely venomous snakes. With the torch in his hand, Pandava Dhananjaya warded off the
arrows with his excellent shield. Arjuna said, “O gandharva! Don’t try to frighten those who are skilled in the use
of weapons, because weapons unleashed at them disappear like froth. O gandharva! I know that gandharvas are superior to men. Therefore, I will ﬁght you with divine weapons, not with the use of maya. In ancient times, this agneya missile was given by Brihaspati, Shatakratu’s38 preceptor, to Bharadvaja. From Bharadvaja it went to Agniveshya and from Agniveshya to my preceptor. Drona, supreme among Brahmanas, gave it to me.” Having said
this, the angry Pandava unleashed the blazing agneya weapon at the gandharva and it instantly burnt down his
chariot. Knocked unconscious from the energy of the missile, the immensely powerful gandharva fell face down,
dislodged from his chariot. Dhananjaya seized him by the hair on his head, which was adorned with garlands, and
dragged the one knocked unconscious from the missile towards his brothers. On seeing this, his wife, who was
named Kumbhinasi, sought refuge with Yudhishthira so that her husband might be saved.
‘The gandharva woman said, “O great king! Save me and set my husband free. O lord! The gandharvi Kumbhinasi seeks your protection.” Yudhishthira said, “O destroyer of enemies! Which hero will kill an enemy who has
been defeated in battle, has lost his fame and is now protected by a woman? Set him free.” Arjuna said, “O gandharva! Have your life. Go from here and do not grieve. Yudhishthira, king of the Kurus,39 has ordered safety for
you today.”

‘The gandharva said, “I have been defeated by you. Therefore, I will give up my earlier name of Angaraparna.
Among men, I can no longer show my pride in strength or in name. I wanted to ﬁght, with the powers of maya of
the gandharvas, with someone who was at the peak of his youth. It is my good fortune that I encountered one with
celestial weapons. My supreme and adorned chariot has been burnt by the agneya weapon. I was earlier called Chitraratha40 and have now become Dagdharatha.41 I spoke to you about the knowledge that I earlier attained
through austerities. Today, I will give it to the great-souled one who has granted me life. He who saves the life of a
vanquished enemy who seeks sanctuary deserves good fortune. This knowledge is called chakshushi.42 It was given by Manu to Soma and Soma gave it to Vishvavasu. Vishvavasu gave it to me.
‘“When the preceptor gives the knowledge to a coward, it is destroyed. I have spoken to you about its origin and
transmission. Now learn from me its power. Whatever you wish to see through your eyes in all the three worlds
will be seen by you, exactly as you wish. One can acquire this knowledge by standing on one leg for six months. I
have given word that I will myself bestow this knowledge on you. O king! It is because of this knowledge that we
are superior to men. Because we have the power of seeing everything, we are the equals of the gods. O best of
men! I wish to give each of you ﬁve brothers, separately, 100 horses from the land of the gandharvas. They are divinely scented and possess the speed of the mind. They are used to transport the gods and the gandharvas. However tired they are, they never lose their speed. In ancient times, the great Indra created the vajra to kill Vritra. But it
shattered into a thousand pieces when ﬂung on Vritra’s head. Since then, the gods divided the vajra pieces among
themselves and worshipped them. Whatever is known as wealth in this world is but a piece of that vajra. The hands
of Brahmanas are the vajra. The chariots of Kshatriyas are the vajra. The alms of the Vaishyas are the vajra. The
servitude of the Shudras43 is the vajra. The horses of the Kshatriyas are the vajra and it is said that they should
never be killed. The horses that draw chariots are the offspring of vadava.44 One who drives horses is called a
suta. These45 can assume any colour at will, can assume any speed at will and can go anywhere at will. These
horses from the gandharva region will always fulﬁl any desire.”
‘Arjuna said, “O gandharva! I have no desire to accept the knowledge or the riches if you are giving them to me
out of satisfaction at my having saved your life.”
‘The gandharva said, “An encounter with a great person is always a matter of satisfaction. In addition to that,
you have given me my life. Being pleased with you, I am giving you the knowledge. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O Bibhatsu!46 In return, to make it equal, I shall take from you the supreme agneya weapon,47 so that our
friendship is eternal.”
Arjuna said, “O gandharva! I shall accept your horses in return for my weapon. Let our friendship be eternal. O
friend! Tell me how we can be free from the danger from your race.”’
159

‘Arjuna said, “O gandharva! We are the chastisers of enemies. We are learned in the Vedas. We are all virtuous.
Yet, why did you abuse us when we were travelling in the night?”
‘The gandharva said, “O son of Pandu! You do not keep the ﬁre.48 You do not make sacriﬁcial offerings. You
do not have Brahmanas walking ahead of you. That is the reason you were abused by me. The yakshas, the rakshasas, the gandharvas, the pishachas, the uragas and men speak in detail about the prosperity of the Kuru dynasty.
O brave one! I have heard Narada and other devarshis speak of the qualities and wisdom of your ancestors. When I
myself roamed this rich earth that has this ocean as a garment, I saw the inﬂuence of your dynasty. O Arjuna! I
personally know your preceptor in knowledge of the Vedas and the science of weapons, Bharadvaja’s famous son.
He is revered in the three worlds. O Partha! O tiger among the Kurus! I also know Dharma, Vayu, Shakra,49 the
Ashvins and Pandu, the six who extended this lineage. These best of gods and men are your ancestors. I know that
all you brothers are divine-minded, great-souled, supreme among those who wield arms, excellent in observance of
vows, supreme in mind and intelligence and perfect in character. O Partha! Nevertheless, I abused you. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! No man who has the strength of his arms can patiently tolerate abuse before his wife’s
eyes. O son of Kunti! Especially at night, our strength increases. Since I was with my wife, I was ﬁlled with anger.

‘“O extender of Tapati’s lineage! I was defeated by you in battle. Hear from me the reason why I suffered. O
Partha! Brahmacharya is the supreme dharma and you are established in that. That is the reason you defeated me in
the battle. O chastiser of enemies! If any Kshatriya, driven by desire, wishes to ﬁght with us in the night, he can
never escape alive. O descendant of Tapati’s lineage! However, a king, driven by desire, can vanquish all the wanderers of the night in battle if he is led by a priest. O descendant of Tapati’s lineage! Therefore, men should always
employ priests who are learned and self-controlled in all acts that are desired. He who is learned in the six Vedangas, and is always pure, truthful, devoted to dharma and self-controlled, is ﬁt to be a priest for kings. A king who
has a priest who is learned in the precepts of dharma, eloquent, well behaved and pure ahead of him is always victorious and is assured of heaven afterwards. A king must always choose a priest who has all the qualities, who can
protect what he possesses and acquire that which he does not. A king should always be guided by his priest to acquire the entire earth, from Mount Meru to where the ocean is the garment. O descendant of Tapati’s lineage! A
king who is without a Brahmana can never acquire any land through his bravery or high birth alone. O extender of
the Kuru lineage! Therefore, know that kingdoms with Brahmanas at their head can be sustained eternally.”’
160

‘Arjuna said, “You have addressed me as the descendant of Tapati. Therefore, I wish to know what that precisely
means. O blessed one! We are the sons of Kunti and are known as Kounteya. Who is Tapati and why are we called
Tapatya?50 I wish to know.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having been thus addressed by Kunti’s son Dhananjaya, the gandharva recounted the story that is famous in the three worlds.
‘The gandharva said, “O Partha! O chief among those who follow dharma! I will tell you this virtuous and wonderful story exactly as it happened. Listen attentively to what I have to say and you will understand the reason why
I have called you Tapatya. He who pervades the entire ﬁrmament51 with his energy had a daughter named Tapati
who was equal to him. Tapati was born to Vivasvat52 after Savitri and was famous in the three worlds because of
her austerities. There was no one equal to her in beauty among the gods, the asuras, the yakshas, the rakshasas, the
apsaras and the gandharvas. She was symmetrical in form and unblemished in features. She had large and black
eyes. She was dressed in beautiful garments. She was pure in conduct. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On
seeing her, Vivasvat thought that no one in the three worlds possessed beauty, conduct, learning and qualities equal
to her so as to be her husband. On seeing that his daughter had grown and attained the age of marriage, he had no
peace of mind, thinking about whom to give her to.
‘“O Kounteya! The mighty King Samvarana, the son of Riksha and a bull among the Kurus, always used to worship the sun, with offerings and garlands, observing fasts and rituals and practising various austerities. Puru’s descendant worshipped Anshuman53 when he arose, with devotion, obedience, selﬂessness and purity. On seeing
that Samvarana was learned in the path of dharma and was unparalleled on earth for his handsomeness, Surya decided that he was the best husband for Tapati. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Surya desired to give his daughter
to that supreme king, whose lineage was famous. Just as the blazing rays of the sun suffuse the sky with radiance,
King Samvarana ﬁlled the earth with his splendour. O Partha! Just as those who know the brahman worship the rising sun, all subjects other than Brahmanas worshipped Samvarana. The fortunate king surpassed the moon in
benevolence towards those who wished him well and the sun in scorching those who wished him ill. O descendant
of the Kuru lineage! Tapan54 himself decided that Tapati should be given to a king who had such great virtue and
qualities.
‘“O Partha! It is told that once the king, blessed with such great good fortune and immensely famous on earth,
went out to hunt in the woods on the slopes of a mountain. O son of Kunti! When he was hunting, his unequalled
horse, overcome with hunger and thirst, died on that mountain. O Partha! Abandoning the dead horse, the king
walked on that mountain on foot and saw a lady who had large eyes and was unrivalled in the worlds in beauty.
That scorcher of enemies, a tiger among kings, was alone. That lady was also alone. He stood motionless and
stared at her with an unwavering gaze. From her beauty, the king thought that she might be the goddess Shri.55 He
again thought that her beauty was the manifestation of the sun’s rays on earth. The black-eyed lady stood on the

mountain slope, with its trees and creepers, like a statue of gold. Having seen her, the king became contemptuous
of all other beings and considered that his eyes had now accomplished their purpose. The king thought that nothing
that he had seen from the date of his birth could rival her beauty. He thought that the creator had created the beauty
of this large-eyed lady after churning the worlds of gods, asuras and men. The king’s heart and mind were tied up
in the noose of her perfection. Deprived of his senses, he was rooted to the spot. Thus, King Samvarana then decided that the lady’s richness of beauty was unmatched in the three worlds.
‘“As soon as he had seen that fortunate one, the king of noble lineage was pierced by the arrows of the god of
love and began to worry. Burning with the ﬁerce ﬁre of desire, he spoke to the illustrious lady, who was an adult,
but was still innocent, ‘O lady with thighs like that of a plantain tree!56 Who are you? Who do you belong to?
Why have you come here? O lady with the beautiful smile! Why are you wandering alone in this lonely forest?
You are unblemished in every limb and adorned in every ornament. You are like a coveted ornament to those ornaments themselves. You don’t seem to be a goddess or an asuri, or a yakshi or a rakshasi, or a nagini or a gandharvi,
or a human. O supreme among beautiful ones! None of the beautiful women I have seen, or heard of, can match
you.’ Thus, struck by desire, did the ruler of the earth then speak to her in the lonely forest.
‘“But she did not utter a word in reply. When the king kept asking, the large-eyed lady vanished like a ﬂash of
lightning. Like one who had lost his senses, the king wandered around in the forest, looking for the lady with eyes
like a lotus. Having failed to ﬁnd her, that best of the Kuru lineage lamented a lot and for a long time remained
motionless in grief.”’
161

‘The gandharva said, “When she disappeared, the king, the one who caused the downfall of enemy armies, was
struck by desire and fell down on the ground. On his falling down on the ground, the one with the beautiful smile
and swelling and rounded hips appeared once again before the king. In a gentle voice, the fortunate beauty then
spoke to the king, the extender of the Kuru lineage who had lost his senses because of desire, ‘O tiger among
kings! O fortunate one! O scorcher of enemies! You are known in the world. You should not be seen in loss of your
senses. Arise! Arise!’ Having heard these sweet words, the king looked up and saw standing before him the lady
with the wide hips.
‘“The ruler of men then addressed the black-eyed one in these words, his heart burning with the ﬁre of desire
and his words weak with emotion, ‘O black-eyed lady! O fortunate one! I am burning with desire. O lady with the
large eyes! I am seeking you. Accept me in return, because my life is ebbing away because of you. O you whose
complexion is like the inside of a lotus! Love’s sharp arrows never stop piercing me. O fortunate one! The god of
love has bitten me like a large snake. O one with the unblemished face! O one with the tapering thighs! O one with
a voice like the song of the kinnaras! My life is in your hands. O one with unblemished and beautiful limbs! O one
with a face like a lotus or the moon! O bashful one! I shall certainly not be able to live without you. O lady with
the large eyes! O black-eyed one! You should not forsake me. O beautiful one! You must save me with your affection. O beautiful and timid one! O one with thighs like a plantain tree! Marry me according to the gandharva rites,
because among all forms of marriage, the gandharva is said to be the best.’
‘“Tapati said, ‘O king! I am not in control of myself. I am a daughter under a father’s superintendence. If you
really seek pleasure from me, go and ask my father for me. O ruler of men! You say that I have robbed you of your
life. But know that at the ﬁrst sight, you have also robbed me of my life. O best of kings! I am not the mistress of
my own body. Therefore, I cannot come to you. Women are always dependent. But is there any woman in the three
worlds who will not desire a husband like you, who has a noble lineage and is always benevolent to his dependants? Therefore, since the time is right, ask for me from my father Aditya, with reverence, austerities and rituals.
O destroyer of enemies! O king! If he desires to give me to you, I shall always be under your superintendence. O
bull among the Kshatriyas! I am Tapati, Savitri’s youngest sister. I am the daughter of Savitar,57 who is a torch to
the worlds.’”’
162

‘The gandharva said, “Having said this, the unblemished one swiftly rose up into the sky. The king once more fell
down on the ground. Searching for that supreme among kings, his minister and attendants found him in that state
in the great forest, prone on the ground like Shakra’s ﬂag when the season is right.58 On seeing the great archer
prone on the ground and without a horse, the minister was burnt, as if by a ﬁre. Drawing quickly near, the minister
raised the king, who was lying senseless on the ground in the afﬂiction of desire, affectionately and reverently, just
as a father raises a fallen son. This minister was old in age, wisdom, fame and deeds. When he had raised him and
senses were recovered, the minister addressed him in sweet and benevolent words, ‘O tiger among men! Do not be
frightened. O unblemished one! You will be blessed.’ The minister thought that the king, the destroyer of hostile
armies in battle, had been lying down on the ground because he had been overcome with hunger, thirst and exhaustion. He sprinkled cold water, fragrant with the scent of lotuses, on the king’s head, but without touching the
crown. Thereupon, the powerful king regained his consciousness. He then sent away all his attendants, except the
minister.
‘“When that large retinue had gone away on the king’s instructions, the king again sat down on that mountain
plain. Then, on that great mountain, the king puriﬁed himself and joined his palms. He raised his arms up and worshipped the sun. King Samvarana, destroyer of enemies, also mentally thought of his priest Vashishtha, supreme
among rishis. Without a break, the ruler of men remained there for days and nights. Then, on the twelfth day, the
brahmarshi59 came to him. Through his power of austerities, the great rishi who was self-controlled knew that, as
decreed by destiny, the king’s heart had been stolen by Tapati. Then the best of sages, who was rigid in his vows,
wished to bring good fortune to the virtuous king and assured him. As the ruler of men watched, the illustrious
rishi ascended the sky to meet the sun, as radiant himself as that blazing one. With his palms joined, the Brahmana
joyfully introduced himself to the one with a thousand rays and said, ‘I am Vashishtha.’ Then the immensely radiant Vivasvat60 said to the best of sages, ‘O maharshi! You are welcome. Tell me what you desire.’”’
163

‘“Vashishtha said, ‘O Vibhavasu!61 On Samvarana’s behalf, I have come to ask you for your daughter Tapati, Savitri’s younger sister. He is a mighty king with great deeds. He is great-souled and is well versed in dharma and
artha. O traveller in the sky! Samvarana is a ﬁt husband for your daughter.’”
‘The gandharva said, “Hearing these words, Savita62 decided on giving her. Divakara63 saluted the Brahmana
and said, ‘O sage! Samvarana is the best among kings and you are the best among rishis. Tapati is the best of
women. Why give her somewhere else?’ Thereupon, Tapana64 himself gave the unblemished and perfect Tapati to
the great-souled Vashishtha, for Samvarana’s sake. The maharshi accepted the lady Tapati and taking his leave,
Vashishtha returned to where the bull among the Kurus and the one with famous deeds was seated. The king was
possessed by love and his heart was ﬁxed on her. He became extremely glad when he saw that Vashishtha was
leading the divine maiden Tapati, the one with a beautiful smile, towards him. The illustrious rishi Vashishtha, pure
of spirit, came to the king when he had completed the twelfth night of his vows. Thus Samvarana obtained his wife
through austerities and worship of the Lord Gopati65 and Vashishtha’s energy. That bull among men accepted Tapati’s hand on that best of mountains, frequented by gods and gandharvas, in accordance with the prescribed rituals.
‘“With Vashishtha’s permission, the rajarshi66 desired to sport with his wife on that mountain. He then instructed his minister to rule over his city, kingdom, mounts and armies. Bidding farewell to the king, Vashishtha left.
The king sported on that mountain like a god. The king pleasured with his wife in the groves and streams of that
mountain for twelve years. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! For those twelve years, the one with a thousand
eyes67 did not pour any rain in the king’s city and kingdom. Because of hunger and starvation, the men became
like dead bodies. The city looked like a city of the king of the dead, populated by dead people. Then, seeing that
condition, the illustrious rishi Vashishtha, learned in dharma, went to the supreme among kings.68 O king! He
brought back the tiger-like king, who had been away from his city for twelve years, together with Tapati. When
that tiger among kings entered the city again, the slayer of demons69 poured down rain, as before. Thus, enervated

by that foremost among kings, who had himself enervated his soul, the city and the kingdom became extremely
happy. With his wife Tapati, the king performed sacriﬁces for twelve years, like Shakra,70 lord of the maruts.
‘“O Partha! This is the story of the greatly fortunate Tapati of ancient times. She was the daughter of Vivasvat
and it is after her that you are named Tapatya. O Arjuna! O greatest among those who scorch! On Tapati, King
Samvarana had a son named Kuru. Born in that lineage of Tapati, you are known as Tapatya.”’
164

Vaishampayana said, ‘Hearing the gandharva’s words, the bull of the Bharata lineage, Arjuna, shone with joy, like
the full moon. His curiosity was excited by what he had heard about Vashishtha’s ascetic powers. The best of the
Kurus, the great archer, spoke to the gandharva, “I wish to hear the story of the rishi whom you have referred to as
Vashishtha. Tell me in detail. O lord of the gandharvas! Tell me who this illustrious rishi, the priest of our ancestors, was.”
‘The gandharva said, “Desire and anger, which even the gods ﬁnd difﬁcult to conquer, were overcome through
his71 austerities and washed his feet. Though the supreme sage’s wrath was stirred at Vishvamitra’s evil deed, he
was noble enough not to annihilate the Kushikas.72 Though he mourned the death of his sons, and had the power
to do so, he did not perform any terrible deed to destroy Vishvamitra. Like the great ocean does not cross its shoreline, he did not transgress Yama’s law by bringing his sons back from the land of the dead. Obtaining this greatsouled and self-controlled supreme rishi Vashishtha as their priest, Ikshvaku and other kings conquered the entire
earth. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! These kings performed many sacriﬁces. O best of the Pandavas! This
brahmarshi was the priest for those excellent kings, like Brihaspati was for the gods.
‘“Therefore, look for a Brahmana in whose heart dharma is supreme, who is learned in the Vedas and in dharma
and who has all the qualities, and appoint him as your priest. O Partha! A Kshatriya of noble birth who wishes to
conquer the earth must ﬁrst appoint a priest to be in front, so that the kingdom ﬂourishes. A king who wishes to
conquer the earth must have a Brahmana before him. Therefore, let a Brahmana who has all the qualities be your
priest.”’
165

‘Arjuna said, “How did the hostility between Vashishtha and Vishvamitra, both of whom lived in divine hermitages, arise? Tell us in detail.”
‘The gandharva said, “O Partha! Vashishtha’s account is known as a purana in all the worlds. Listen to me as I
recount it in its entirety. O bull of the Bharata lineage! There was a great king in Kanyakubja. He was known in the
world as Gadhi and he was devoted to true dharma. His virtuous son, a conqueror of enemies, was known by the
name of Vishvamitra and he had many armies and mounts. With his ministers, he used to wander in deep forests
and beautiful wildernesses, to hunt deer and boar. Once, tired and exhausted from pursuit of a deer, that best of
men came to Vashishtha’s hermitage. On seeing him come, the fortunate and illustrious rishi, Vashishtha, offered
homage to Vishvamitra, the best of men. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He welcomed him and offered him
water to wash his feet and face and gave him offerings of forest fare.
‘“The great-souled Vashishtha possessed a kamadhenu. When she was asked to give, she produced whatever
was desired. O Arjuna! She yielded products of villages and forests, herbs, milk, juices with six different
ﬂavours73 that tasted like ambrosia itself, and different types of food that could be chewed, drunk, eaten, licked
and sucked, all tasting like ambrosia. The king was honoured with everything that he desired, in abundant measure.
He, his ministers and his entourage were greatly satisﬁed. With great surprise, he74 saw Vashishtha’s beautiful and
unblemished cow, named Nandini75—six measures long, three measures wide and ﬁve measures around, with
beautiful ﬂanks and thighs, with eyes prominent like those of frogs, with a beautiful carriage, large udders, beautiful tail, uplifted and straight ears, handsome horns and a well-developed head and neck. O king! Gadhi’s son was
gratiﬁed with what he saw and saluted the cow. The king76 then spoke to the rishi,77 ‘O Brahmana! O great sage!
Give me Nandini in exchange for my kingdom or for 10,000 cows. Enjoy the kingdom.’ Vashishtha said, ‘O un-

blemished king! I keep this milk-yielding cow for the sake of the gods, ancestors, guests and sacriﬁcial offerings.
Nandini cannot be given away, even in exchange for your kingdom.’ Vishvamitra said, ‘I am a Kshatriya and you
are only a Brahmana devoted to studies and austerities. How can there be strength in Brahmanas who are peaceful
and control themselves? If you don’t give me what I want in exchange for 10,000 cows, I will not give up my own
dharma. I will take the cow away by force.’ Vashishtha said, ‘You are a powerful king with an army with you. You
are a Kshatriya with valour in your arms. Do what you wish quickly, and without thinking over it.’ O Partha! Thus,
addressed, Vishamitra seized the cow Nandini, as translucent as a swan or the moon.
‘“He dragged her here and there and beat her with a stick. The blessed Nandini bellowed piteously and came to
Vashishtha. O Partha! She stood near the illustrious sage and raised her head up at him. Though she had been beaten a lot, she did not leave the hermitage. Vashishtha said, ‘O fortunate Nandini! I hear your repeated cries. But you
are being taken away by force. What can a forgiving Brahmana do?’ O bull among the Bharata lineage! Frightened
by the force of Vishvamitra’s army and frightened by Vishvamitra himself, she came closer to Vashishtha. Nandini
said, ‘O illustrious one! Why do you overlook it when I am beaten by the sticks and lashes of Vishamitra’s fearful
army? Why do you orphan me when I am crying?’ O Partha! The great sage did not lose his patience. Nor did he
deviate from his rigid vows78 on hearing her cries of suffering. Vashishtha said, ‘A Kshatriya’s strength is his energy. A Brahmana’s strength is his forbearance. I cannot give up forbearance. If you wish, go.’ Nandini said, ‘O
illustrious one! O Brahmana! Are you forsaking me in this way? If you do not forsake me, I cannot be taken away
by force.’ Vashishtha said, ‘O blessed one! I am not forsaking you. Stay, if you can. Tethered with a strong rope,
your calf is now being taken away by force.’ Hearing him say ‘stay’, Vashishtha’s cow raised up her head and neck
and became fearful to look at.
‘“Eyes red with anger and with thunderous bellows, she attacked Vishvamitra’s army from all sides. Stung with
their sticks and lashes and being dragged here and there, her anger increased and her eyes became red with rage. A
shower of burning embers was unleashed from her tail. She blazed with anger like the midday sun. She created an
army of pahlavas79 from her tail, an army of shabaras80 and shakas81 from her dung and an army of yavanas82
from her urine. She swooned with anger. From her froth, she produced pundras, kiratas,83 dramidas,84
Simhalas,85 barbaras,86 daradas87 and mlecchas.88 When she had produced these many armies of mlecchas, clad
in different types of armour and armed with different types of weapons, before Vishvamitra’s own eyes, she scattered with her ferocious troops his large army. Every single one of his soldiers was surrounded by ﬁve or seven of
hers and with a shower of weapons was dispersed and ﬂed in all directions in panic. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Though greatly enraged, not a single one of Vishvamitra’s soldiers was separated from his life by a single
one of Vashishtha’s. Vishvamitra’s army was driven 3 yojanas away and though it cried out in panic, there was no
saviour to be found.
‘“On seeing this amazing sight born out of a Brahmana’s powers, Vishvamitra was disgusted with his Kshatriya
powers and said, ‘A curse on my Kshatriya powers! The true power is that of a Brahmana. In judging weakness
and strength, I see that true strength arises from the power of austerities.’ He gave up his prosperous kingdom and
his radiant regal fortune. Turning his back on all pleasures, he decided to devote himself to austerities. Through his
power of austerities, he became successful and ﬁlled the worlds with his radiance. Through all his radiant energy,
he became a Brahmana and Kushika’s son89 eventually drank the soma90 juice with Indra himself.”’
166

‘The gandharva said, “O Partha! In the world, there was a king named Kalmashapada. He was born in the lineage
of Ikshvaku and he was unrivalled on earth in his prowess. One day, the king left his capital to go on a hunt in the
forest. That chastiser of enemies shot many deer and boars. Hungry and thirsty, the king followed a narrow path
and met Vashishtha’s great-souled son on the way. The son was an illustrious sage and his name was Shakti. He
was the illustrious extender of Vashishtha’s lineage and was the eldest of the great-souled Vashishtha’s 100 sons.
As they came face to face in opposite directions on the narrow path, the king said, ‘Move off from our path.’ The
rishi then spoke to him in a soothing and kind voice, but did not yield the path, because he was following the path
of dharma.91 Out of pride and anger at the sage, the king did not yield the path either. When the sage refused to

give way, the best of kings, deluded like a rakshasa, struck the sage with his whip. Thus struck by the whip,
Vashishtha’s son, the best of sages, was angered and cursed the best of kings. ‘O worst of kings! Since you have
struck an ascetic like a rakshasa, from today you will become a maneater. O corrupt king! Go from here and wander around the earth, eating human ﬂesh.’ Thus, Shakti cursed him through the strength of his powers.
‘“Vashishtha and Vishvamitra had had a quarrel over who should be the ofﬁciating priest.92 At that time, Vishvamitra, came to that place. O Partha! The immensely powerful Vishvamitra, the rishi with great austerities, neared
the place where the two were quarrelling. After the curse on the great king, the rishi93 recognized that the rishi94
was none other than Vashishtha’s son, as powerful as Vashishtha himself. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Desiring to bring some beneﬁt to himself, Vishamitra remained there, but concealed himself by making himself
invisible from them. Having been cursed by Shakti, that best of kings95 sought Shakti’s mercy and worshipped
him, so as to pacify him. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Knowing the king’s nature, Vishvamitra ordered a rakshasa to enter the king’s body. Because of the Brahmana rishi’s curse and because of Vishvamitra’s instruction, a
rakshasa named Kimkara then entered the king’s body. O chastiser of enemies! Knowing that the rakshasa had entered the king’s body, Vishvamitra, the best of sages, went away.
‘“Thereafter, the wise king was possessed and tormented by the rakshasa within him and found it difﬁcult to
save himself. A certain Brahmana saw the king roaming in the forest. Being hungry, he begged for some food with
meat. Rajarshi Kalmashapada Mitrasaha96 said, ‘O Brahmana! Stay here for a while. When I return, I will give
you the food you desire to have.’ Having said this, the king went away and that best of Brahmanas remained there.
But when he entered the inner quarters of his palace, the king forgot about his promise to the Brahmana and remembered it only at midnight. He told his cook, ‘Go to the forest. A Brahmana is waiting for me there, hoping to
get some food. Take some meat to him.’ Having been thus addressed, the cook could not ﬁnd any meat anywhere
and came and sorrowfully informed the king about this. Possessed by the rakshasa, the king unhesitatingly told the
cook, ‘Feed him human ﬂesh,’ and repeated his instructions. Agreeing, the cook quickly went to where executioners lived and took some human ﬂesh from them. Washing it and cooking it properly, he mixed it with rice and
quickly took it to the hungry and ascetic Brahmana.
‘“Through his ascetic sight, the best of Brahmanas immediately recognized the food to be forbidden. His eyes
red with anger, he said, ‘That worst of kings has offered me food that is forbidden. Therefore, that deluded one will
himself become fond of such food. Becoming fond of human ﬂesh, as Shakti had cursed him earlier, he will roam
the earth and persecute all beings.’ Repeated for the second time, the curse on the king became very strong. Being
possessed by the rakshasa, the king soon lost all his senses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing Shakti,
that best of kings, having been deprived of his senses by the rakshasa within him, said, ‘Because you have imposed
this unparalleled curse on me, I shall begin my man-eating predicament by eating you ﬁrst.’ Having said this, the
king immediately separated Shakti from his life and ate him up, the way a tiger devours its favoured prey. Having
seen Shakti killed thus, Vishvamitra urged the rakshasa to kill Vashishtha’s other sons. Like an angry lion devours
small animals, he ate up all the younger sons of the great-souled Vashishtha.
‘“When Vashishtha learnt that Vishvamitra had conspired to get his sons killed, he bore his grief patiently, like a
great mountain bears the earth. That best of sages, chief among those who are intelligent, resolved to sacriﬁce himself rather than set his mind on extinguishing the Kushika lineage. The illustrious rishi threw himself down from
the peak of Mount Meru and his head struck the stones like a bale of cotton. O Pandava! When the illustrious one
found that the fall did not kill him, he lit a ﬁre in that great forest and entered it. But though the ﬂames blazed up
high, they did not kill him. O chastiser of enemies! Instead, the blazing ﬂames cooled him. Seeing the ocean, the
grief-stricken and great sage tied a heavy stone around his neck and ﬂung himself into the water. But the strong
waves brought the great sage back to the shore. With a sorrowful heart, he then returned to his hermitage.”’
167

‘The gandharva said, “On seeing that his hermitage was bereft of his sons, the grief-stricken sage left it again. O
Partha! He saw a river swollen with the new water of the rainy season. It was sweeping away many trees that grew
along the banks. O descendant of Puru! On seeing this, the miserable one again began to think that he would cer-

tainly be killed in this water. Thereupon, the great sage bound himself with strong ropes and, struck with great
grief, ﬂung himself into the waters of that great river. O chastiser of enemy armies! But the river tore those ropes
away and, unfettered, washed the rishi up onto the bank. Freed from the bindings, the great rishi arose and gave the
river the name of Vipasha.97
‘“However, his mind was obsessed with grief and he did not stay in any one place. He went to mountains, rivers
and lakes. Seeing once more the terrible river Himavati,98 terrible of appearance and full of ﬁerce animals, he
once more ﬂung himself into its waters. That best of rivers, thinking that the Brahmana was ﬁre, immediately ﬂed
in a hundred directions and thereafter came to be known as Shatadru.99 Finding that he was once again on dry
land, he exclaimed that he was unable to die at his own hands and returned to his hermitage.
‘“When he was returning to his hermitage, his daughter-in-law Adrishyanti followed him. As she came near, he
heard the sound of Vedic incantations, embellished with the fullness of meaning of the six branches.100 ‘Who is
following me?’ he asked. ‘I am Adrishyanti, Shakti’s wife,’ his daughter-in-law answered. ‘O illustrious one! I am
austere, engaged in austerities.’ Vashishtha said, ‘O daughter! Who is reciting the Vedas and their angas that I
hear? It is just as I have heard it from Shakti earlier.’ Adrishyanti said, ‘In my womb, there is a son begotten by
Shakti. He has been there for twelve years. O sage! You have heard his recitations.’ Having been thus addressed by
her, Vashishtha, the best of rishis, was greatly delighted. O Partha! Exclaiming that there was a son, he refrained
from death.
‘“The unblemished one returned,101 accompanied by his daughter-in-law. He found Kalmashapada seated in the
deserted forest. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing him,102 possessed by the rakshasa, the king arose
in anger and sought to devour him. But seeing the king of evil deeds, Adrishyanti spoke to Vashishtha in fear and
alarm, ‘O illustrious one! This terrible rakshasa looks like death himself, as he advances towards us with a fearful
wooden club in his hand. O best among those who are learned in all the Vedas! Except you, no one on earth has the
power to ward him off. O illustrious one! Save me from this evil one, whose form is terrible. Without a doubt, the
rakshasa is advancing towards us to devour us.’”’
168

‘“Vashishtha said, ‘O daughter! Do not be frightened. There is nothing to be frightened of from a rakshasa. There
is no danger from the one you see advancing. He is not a rakshasa. He is King Kalmashapada, powerful and famous on earth. That terrible one lives in this part of the forest.’”
‘The gandharva said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As he103 advanced towards them, the illustrious
and energetic rishi Vashishtha stopped him with a roar. He sprinkled water sanctiﬁed with mantras over him and
freed the good king from the terrible rakshasa. For twelve years, the king had been swallowed through the energy
of Vashishtha’s son, like the sun is swallowed by the one who swallows104 at the time of an eclipse. Thus freed
from the rakshasa, the king reddened the great forest with his energy, like the sun illuminates the evening105
clouds. Regaining his senses, the king worshipped Vashishtha, the best of rishis, with joined palms and said, ‘O illustrious one! O best of Brahmanas! I am the son of Sudasa. You are my preceptor. Tell me what your wish is now
and what I should do.’ Vashishtha said, ‘O lord of men! My desire was fulﬁlled when the right time arrived. Return
to your kingdom and rule and never again disregard Brahmanas.’ The king said, ‘O illustrious one! I shall never
again disregard the bulls among Brahmanas. In accordance with your instructions, I shall always worship the
twice-born. O best among the twice-born! O best among those who are learned in the Vedas! I wish to obtain a
boon from you, so that I can be freed from the debt I owe to the Ikshvaku lineage. I wish to have a son. Please go
to my beloved queen,106 who is virtuous, beautiful and has all the qualities, so that the Ikshvaku lineage can be
extended.’
‘“Vashishtha, the best of Brahmanas and always devoted to the truth, agreed to the desires of the great archer,
the king. O king of men! After some time, Vashishtha, accompanied by the one without blame,107 went to his capital, famous in this world as Ayodhya. In great joy, all the people came out to welcome the great-souled and sinless

one,108 like gods welcome their chief. Accompanied by the great-souled Vashishtha, the king of men soon entered
his auspicious city. O king! The citizens of Ayodhya saw him, like the sun rising in Pushya.109 The king, the most
fortunate among those who are blessed with fortune, ﬁlled Ayodhya, like the cool moon which ﬁlls the skies when
it rises in the autumn. His mind was gladdened when he saw that supreme of cities, with its streets clean and
washed, adorned with ﬂags and pennants. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! That city was full of people who were
happy and well fed. It looked as radiant as Amaravati110 in Indra’s presence.
‘“After the rajarshi had entered the best of cities, the queen came to Vashishtha at the king’s command. When
the season was right, maharshi Vashishtha, the rishi who always obtained the best share, united with her, in accordance with the divine rites laid down by the gods. Thereafter, when the queen conceived through him, the best of
sages received salutations from the king and returned to his hermitage. When she had carried the embryo for a long
time, the famous lady split her womb open with a stone. O bull among men! After twelve years, rajarshi Ashmaka
was born, the one who founded the city of Potana.”’
169

‘The gandharva said, “O king! Living in the hermitage, Adrishyanti gave birth to a son who was the extender of
Shakti’s lineage and was like a second Shakti. O best of the Bharata lineage! The best of the sages, the illustrious
one, himself performed the prescribed birth ceremonies of his grandson. Because the sage Vashishtha had resolved
to kill himself, but refrained from doing so when he heard of the son in the womb, he was known in the world by
the name of Parashara.111 From the date of his birth, that virtuous one knew Vashishtha to be his father and behaved towards him like a father. O Kaunteya! O scorcher of enemies! When the child addressed the Brahmana
rishi Vashishtha as ‘father’ in front of his mother Adrishyanti, she heard the sweet word, so full of meaning, uttered by him. Adrishyanti spoke to him with tears in her eyes. ‘O son! Do not use the word father. The great sage is
not your father. O son! Your father was devoured by a rakshasa in the deep forest. O innocent son! The one you
think of as your father is not your father. The illustrious one is the father of your famous father.’ Having been thus
addressed, the best of rishis112 was grief-stricken, because he always spoke the truth. The great-souled one resolved to destroy all the worlds. On seeing him thus resolved, the great-souled Vashishtha, great in austerities, gave
reasons for refraining. Hear them.
‘“Vashishtha said, ‘There was a great king known by the name of Kritavirya. In this world, that bull among
kings had as his priest the Bhrigus, learned in the Vedas. At the end of his soma sacriﬁce, the king gratiﬁed those
who are the ﬁrst receivers of offerings113 with many presents of grain and riches. When that tiger among men had
ascended to heaven, there came a time when his descendants were in need of riches. O son! Knowing that the Bhrigus were afﬂuent, those kings went to the best of the Bhrigus, in the disguise of beggars, to ask for riches. To save
their indestructible riches, some of the Bhrigus buried them in the ground. Fearing danger from the Kshatriyas,
others gave away their riches to Brahmanas. O son! Some of the Bhrigus gave them as much of riches as they
wanted, thinking that some other use might be found for the Kshatriyas.
‘“‘O son! Then one day, some of the Kshatriyas, according to their wishes, dug up the ground in the dwelling
place of the Bhrigus and discovered a treasure. All the bulls among the Kshatriyas, who were assembled there, saw
the treasure. Thereafter, angry and contemptuous, those supreme archers shot down the Bhrigus with their sharp
arrows, though they craved for mercy. They travelled all over the earth, killing even children in wombs. O son!
When they were killed in this way, many Bhrigu wives ﬂed in fear and sought refuge in the mountains of the
Himalayas.
‘“‘Among them was a lady with beautiful thighs. She resolved to perpetuate her husband’s race and kept her immensely energetic embryo hidden in her thigh, so that it might not be discovered. But the Kshatriyas discovered
the Brahmana lady, who blazed in her radiance. Then the child appeared, tearing her thigh open and blinding the
eyes of the Kshatriyas like the midday sun. Thereupon, deprived of their eyesight, the Kshatriyas began to wander
around in the difﬁcult passes of the mountain. Frustrated in their desire and frightened, those bulls among the
Kshatriyas sought refuge with that unblemished Brahmana lady, so that their eyesight might be restored. They
were out of their minds with pain. They had lost their eyesight and were like a ﬁre that has been put out. Those

Kshatriyas spoke to the lady. “O illustrious lady! Through your grace, may the Kshatriyas regain their eyesight. All
of us will depart from here with our evil deeds. You and your son should show us mercy. You should save these
kings by restoring their eyesight to them.”’”’
170

‘“‘The Brahmana woman said, “O sons! I have not robbed you of your eyesight. Nor am I angry with you. It is the
Bhargava who has been born from my thigh who is angry with you. O sons! There is no doubt that your eyesight
has been taken away by this great-souled one, whose anger has been aroused on remembering that you had killed
his relatives. O sons! When you destroyed even the Bhrigu sons in the wombs, I carried this child in my thigh for
100 years so that he might do that which is good for the Bhrigu lineage. All the Vedas, including their six angas,
came to him when he was in the womb. Angry at the killing of his fathers, he certainly wishes to kill you. It is
through his divine radiance that your eyesight has been destroyed. O sons! Pray to Ourva, this supreme son of
mine. If he is placated through your homage, he may restore your eyesight.”’
‘“Vashishtha said, ‘Having been thus addressed, all the kings addressed the son who had been born from her
thigh and begged him for mercy. He was merciful. Since that supreme Brahmana rishi was born after splitting open
the thigh, he came to be known in the worlds by the name of Ourva. Regaining their eyesight, the kings returned.
But the Bhargava sage decided to bring about the destruction of the entire world. O son! That great-souled one decided to bring about the destruction of all the worlds. In order to bring honour to the Bhrigus, that descendant of
the Bhrigu lineage engaged in great austerities, so as to bring about the destruction of all the worlds. Through his
great and severe austerities, he burnt the worlds with the gods, the asuras and men, and gratiﬁed his ancestors. On
learning what the descendant of the lineage was planning to do, the ancestors descended from their world and told
him, “O Ourva! O son! We have witnessed the power of your severe austerities. Have mercy for the worlds and
control your anger. O son! The self-controlled Bhrigus weren’t powerless. Nor were they indifferent to slaughter at
the hands of the violent Kshatriyas. O son! When we got tired of our long lives, we ourselves wished for our
deaths at the hands of the Kshatriyas. The riches that were buried in the ground in the dwelling place of the Bhrigus were placed there with the intention of angering the Kshatriyas and creating enmity with them. O bull among
the twice-born! What use are riches to us when we wish to attain heaven? O son! When we found that death was
completely unable to overcome all of us, we thought this would be the most pleasant way. O son! Those who kill
themselves never attain the best worlds. Remembering that, we did not kill ourselves with our own hands. O son!
That which you desire does not please us at all. Therefore, control your mind and refrain from this evil destruction
of all the worlds. O son! None of the Kshatriyas in the seven worlds114 has offended or harmed our austerities.
Win over the anger that has arisen in you.”’”’
171

‘“‘Ourva said, “O ancestors! In anger, I took a vow that all the worlds would be destroyed and that cannot go in
vain. Because I cannot be one whose anger and vows come to nothing. Without a doubt, my anger will consume
me, the way ﬁre consumes dry kindling.115 When anger arises from a reason that is just, a man who suppresses it
cannot properly safeguard the three goals.116 Anger has the purpose of restraining the evil and protecting the
good. Kings who wish to conquer heaven use their anger for a just cause. I was lying unborn inside my mother’s
thigh; I heard cries when my mothers of the Bhrigu lineage were slaughtered by the Kshatriyas. O ancestors! When
those worst of the Kshatriyas slaughtered the Bhrigus, including those in wombs and the worlds ignored this, anger
entered my heart. My mothers, heavy in their wombs, and my fathers were frightened, but did not ﬁnd a protector
in all the worlds. When the women of the Bhrigu lineage did not ﬁnd a single protector, my fortunate mother hid
me in one of her thighs. If there is one who punishes crimes in the worlds, no one in the worlds will dare to commit a crime. But if a crime doesn’t ﬁnd a punisher, many in the worlds will commit crimes. A man who has the
power to punish a crime and doesn’t do so, despite knowing that a crime has been committed, is himself tainted by
the deed, even if he is the lord. The kings and others were capable of protecting my fathers, but failed to do so.
Giving themselves up to the pleasures of life, they neglected their duties. Therefore, I have justiﬁable reason to be

angry with the worlds and am now their lord. Yet, I am not capable of disobeying your instructions, even though I
am capable of punishing a crime. By refraining from doing so, I will once again encourage the spread of evil in the
worlds. The anger of my rage wishes to consume the worlds. If I suppress it with my own powers, it will consume
me with its energy. O lords! I know that you always strive for the welfare of the worlds. Therefore, instruct me on
what is best for the worlds and for me.”
‘“‘The ancestors said, “This ﬁre that is born from your anger wishes to consume the worlds. Cast it into the waters and be fortunate, because the worlds are established on water. Every juice consists of water. Indeed, the entire
universe is made out of water. O best of the twice-born! Therefore, release your anger into the water. O Brahmana!
If you so desire, let the anger of your ﬁre be in the great ocean. Let it consume the water, because we have heard
that the worlds are made out of water. O unblemished one! In this way, your vow will remain true and the worlds,
with their gods, will not be destroyed.”’
‘“Vashishtha said, ‘Thereupon, Ourva hurled the ﬁre of his anger into Varuna’s territory and the ﬁre consumes
the waters of the great ocean. Those who are learned in the Vedas know that it has assumed the form of a large
horse’s head,117 which spouts ﬁre from the mouth and consumes the waters of the great ocean. O Parashara! You
are the foremost among those who are wise. You are familiar with the higher dharma. Be blessed and refrain from
destroying the worlds.’”’
172

‘The gandharva said, “Having been thus addressed by the great-souled Vashishtha, the Brahmana rishi118 controlled his anger, which would have destroyed all the worlds. But the immensely energetic Parashara, Shakti’s son
and chief among those who were learned in the Vedas, performed a rakshasa sacriﬁce. Remembering Shakti’s
slaughter, the great sage began to consume rakshasas, old and young, in that sacriﬁce. Not wishing to restrain him
from this second vow, Vashishtha did not prevent him from destroying the rakshasas. The great sage sat at that sacriﬁce, with three blazing ﬁres in front of him. He himself looked like a fourth ﬁre. Many were the offerings that
were poured at this radiant sacriﬁce and the sky was lit up, like the sun emerging from behind the clouds.
Vashishtha and the other sages regarded the sage, blazing with his own radiance, like a second sun. Thereupon, the
great and noble-minded sage Atri came to that place, wishing to put an end to the sacriﬁce, a task that would have
been impossible for anyone else to accomplish.
‘“O destroyer of enemies! Pulastya, Pulaha and Kratu also came to that great sacriﬁce, since they also desired
that the rakshasas should live. O bull of the Bharata lineage! O Partha! On seeing that many rakshasas had already
been killed, Pulastya spoke to Parashara, that chastiser of enemies. ‘O son! Do you ﬁnd no obstructions in the way
of this sacriﬁce? O son! Do you ﬁnd pleasure in killing all these rakshasas, who are ignorant and innocent?119 O
Parashara! You are foremost among those who drink the soma juice. You should not destroy all my progeny in this
way. You are a virtuous man. You should not think that the path of adharma will be good for you. King Kalmashapada himself wishes to ascend to heaven. Shakti’s younger brothers, sons of the great sage Vashishtha, are now enjoying great happiness in the company of the gods. O son! O hermit! All this was known to the great sage
Vashishtha, including the destruction of the rakshasas. O Vashishtha’s descendant! You have only been an instrument in this sacriﬁce. Be fortunate and give up this sacriﬁce. Let it come to an end now.’ Having been thus addressed by Pulastya and the wise Vashishtha, Shakti’s son Parashara brought an end to the sacriﬁce. The sage
threw away the ﬁre that had been lit for the rakshasa sacriﬁce into the great forest that was to the north of the Himalayas. Even today, the ﬁre is always visible there in all the seasons, consuming rakshasas, trees and rocks.”’
173

‘Arjuna said, “Why did King Kalmashapada himself call and instruct his wife to go to his preceptor, supreme
among those who are learned in the Vedas? Why did the great-souled maharshi Vashishtha, who knew the path of
supreme dharma, agree to go to a woman who was forbidden? Why were these acts done earlier? I wish to know.
Tell me in detail.”

‘The gandharva said, “O Dhananjaya! O one who cannot be repulsed! Listen to my answer to your question
about the unassailable Vashishtha and King Mitrasaha.120 O best of the Bharata lineage! I have already told you
how the king was cursed by Shakti, Vashishtha’s great-souled son. Thus, under the inﬂuence of that curse, the king,
that scorcher of enemies, came out of the city with his wife, his eyes rolling with anger. He went to a deserted forest with his wife and roamed around there. Under the inﬂuence of the curse, he roamed around in that forest, frequented by many beasts and other animals, overgrown with many plants and creepers, dense with many large trees
and echoing with horrible howls. Once, obsessed with extreme hunger and exhausted, he saw in a lonely part of
the forest a Brahmana and a brahmani, about to engage in an act of sexual union. Seeing him, the pair was frightened and ran away, their desire unsatisﬁed.
‘“Pursuing them, the king forcibly grabbed the Brahmana. Seeing that her husband had thus been seized, the
brahmani said, ‘O king who is always rigid in his vows! Listen to what I have to say. It is known in all the worlds
that you have been born in the solar dynasty. You have always been established in the path of dharma and you have
always served your preceptors. O unassailable one! Though you have been deprived of your senses through a
curse, do not commit an evil act. When my season had come, I was about to unite with my husband so as to obtain
offspring. But I have not been successful and have great need. O best of kings! Be merciful to me and let my husband go.’ While she was crying thus, the king cruelly ate up her husband, the way a tiger devours a deer. On account of her anger, tears fell from her eyes on the ground and became a blazing ﬁre that burnt up everything there.
Grief-stricken and enraged at the death of her husband, the brahmani cursed rajarshi Kalmashapada, ‘O evil-minded one! Today, you have cruelly devoured before my own eyes my illustrious and beloved husband, even though I
was not satisﬁed. Therefore, through my curse, you will meet with instant death when you unite with your wife
when she is in season. Rishi Vashishtha, whose sons you have eaten, will unite with your wife and she will give
birth to a son. O worst of kings! That son will perpetuate your lineage.’ Having thus cursed the king, that fortunate
lady of the Angirasa lineage entered the ﬂaming ﬁre in his presence.
‘“O scorcher of enemies! The immensely fortunate Vashishtha knew all this through his great austerities and his
powers of knowledge that come through yoga. After a long time, the rajarshi was freed from the curse and went to
his wife Madayanti when she was in season, but she repulsed him. Deluded by the curse, the king had no recollection of the curse. On hearing the lady’s words, that best of kings remembered the curse and was greatly alarmed. O
best of the Bharata lineage! It was for this reason that the king requested Vashishtha to accept his own wife, because he suffered from the curse.”’

Section Twelve
Droupadi-svayamvara Parva
This parva has 263 shlokas and twelve chapters.
Chapter 174: 12 shlokas
Chapter 175: 20 shlokas
Chapter 176: 36 shlokas
Chapter 177: 22 shlokas
Chapter 178: 18 shlokas
Chapter 179: 23 shlokas
Chapter 180: 22 shlokas
Chapter 181: 40 shlokas
Chapter 182: 15 shlokas
Chapter 183: 9 shlokas
Chapter 184: 18 shlokas
Chapter 185: 28 shlokas
Svayamvara is a form of marriage where the bride chooses her own groom. The parva is about Droupadi choosing her own groom.
174

‘Arjuna said, “O gandharva! You know everything. Tell us who, learned in the Vedas, is ﬁt to be appointed our
priest.” The gandharva said, “There is a tirtha in this forest known as Utkochaka. Devala’s younger brother
Dhoumya is engaged in practising austerities there. If you wish, you can appoint him as your priest.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Then Arjuna happily gave the gandharva his agneya weapon, in accordance with the prescribed rituals. He said, “O best of the gandharvas! Keep the horses for the moment. We shall take them from you
when we need them. Be blessed.” Then the gandharva and the Pandavas respectfully saluted each other and left the
beautiful banks of the Bhagirathi, to go wherever they wished.
‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Pandavas went to Utkochaka tirtha and Dhoumya’s hermitage. They
instated Dhoumya as their priest. Dhoumya, foremost among those who know all the Vedas, received them with
water to wash their feet and with offerings of fruits and roots from the forest. He agreed to be their priest. Having
obtained the Brahmana at their forefront, the Pandavas were hopeful of obtaining riches and the kingdom and of
winning Panchali in the svayamvara. With their mother constituting the sixth person of the group, those bulls of
the Bharata lineage considered themselves well protected, now that they had a preceptor. For the noble preceptor
knew the subtle nuances of the Vedas well. He made the virtuous sons of Pritha his disciples in learning all the
knowledge. Seeing that those warriors were already endowed with intelligence, valour, strength and perseverance
equal to that of the gods, he decided that they were already restored to their kingdom through their own virtues. He
blessed them. Those kings among men decided to go with him to the svayamvara in Panchala.’
175

Vaishampayana said, ‘Then those tigers among men, the ﬁve Pandava brothers, set out to see Droupadi and the
great and divine festival. Those tigers among men, the scorchers of enemies, and their mother saw many Brahmanas who were headed in the same direction. O king! Those Brahmanas asked the Pandavas, who were travelling
as brahmacharis, “Where are you going? Where have you come from?” Yudhishthira said, “O revered ones who

have seen the gods! Know that we are brothers who have come from Ekachakra and are travelling with our
mother.”
‘The Brahmanas said, “Then you should now go to the house of Drupada of Panchala. A large svayamvara ceremony will be held there, with a lot of riches. We are going there ourselves. Let us go together. A great ceremony,
with wonderful events, will take place there. The great-souled Yajnasena Drupada obtained a daughter from the
middle of the sacriﬁcial altar and her eyes are like lotus petals, with unblemished features and beauty, youth and
intelligence. She is the sister of the powerful Dhrishtadyumna, Drona’s enemy. He arose from the blazing ﬁre, as
resplendent as the ﬁre, with mighty arms, natural armour, sword and bow and arrows. His sister is the slenderwaisted Droupadi whose form is ﬂawless. Her body emits the fragrance of a blue lotus from a distance of one
krosha. Yajnasena’s daughter will choose a husband at the svayamvara. We are going there to see her and witness
the divine and great festival. Kings and princes from different regions will be present there—performers of sacriﬁces at which large quantities of alms are offered, those devoted to studying, pure, great-souled, those devoted to
their vows, young, handsome, maharathas and those skilled in the use of weapons. Desiring victory,1 those kings
of men will give away a lot of riches, cows, foodgrains and other objects of pleasure. Accepting whatever they offer and witnessing the svayamvara and all the festivities, we will then go wherever we wish. Actors, bards,
dancers, raconteurs, panegyrists and powerful wrestlers will assemble from many countries. O great-souled ones!
After witnessing those wonderful sights and accepting what is offered, you can also return with us. You are handsome. You look like gods. On seeing you, Krishna2 may decide that one of you is the best and choose you. This
brother of yours is handsome of appearance and has powerful arms. He may win those wrestling bouts and obtain
great riches.”
‘Yudhishthira said, “We will go with you to witness that supreme, great and divine festival, the lady’s svayamvara.”’
176

Vaishampayana said, ‘O Janamejaya! Having been thus addressed, the Pandavas headed for the southern part of
Panchala, ruled by King Drupada. On their way, the brave Pandavas met the great-souled, pure-souled, unblemished and illustrious sage Dvaipayana and paid their respects to him, in accordance with the prescribed rites. He
too showed them his respect and after their conversation was over, on his instructions, they proceeded to Drupada’s palace. Those maharathas proceeded slowly, stopping when they saw beautiful forests and lakes. At last,
Kuru’s descendants, devoted to learning, pure, amiable and sweet of speech, arrived in Panchala. After seeing the
city and the royal residence, the Pandavas lodged in a potter’s house. Adopting the lifestyle of Brahmanas, they
begged for their food. No one recognized those warriors when they stayed there.
‘Yajnasena always desired to give Krishna to Kiriti,3 Pandu’s son, but he never revealed this to anyone. O
Janamejaya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thinking of Kunti’s son, the Panchala got a very hard bow constructed, one that no one else would be able to bend. He had an artiﬁcial machine4 set up above and onto this machine he ﬁxed a golden target. Drupada said, “He who can string this bow and, after stringing, shoot the target
above with these arrows, will obtain my daughter.” With these words, King Drupada announced the svayamvara
everywhere. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Hearing this, all the kings assembled. Many great-souled rishis
also came there, wishing to witness the svayamvara. O king! The Kouravas, led by Duryodhana, also came there,
accompanied by Karna. Many illustrious Brahmanas also came from many countries. The great-souled Drupada
duly worshipped the kings. All the citizens and all the kings took their seats, resulting in a roar like that of the
ocean full of porpoises.
‘The platform was constructed on the north-east of the city, on a ﬂat and auspicious piece of ground. The beautiful meeting place was surrounded by houses on all sides. It was enclosed by a wall and a moat on all sides, decorated with gates and covered everywhere with a colourful canopy. It echoed to the sound of many musical instruments, was scented with agaru,5 adorned with garlands and sprinkled with sandalwood water. Large and white
palaces that were well built surrounded it on all sides, like the peaks of Kailash when they touch the sky. The windows were covered with golden trellises and the walls sparkled with mosaic work of precious stones. The stairs

were easy to climb. The seats were covered with expensive cloth that was not like those that came from villages.
They were white like swans and scented with agaru, so that the fragrance could be smelt one yojana away. Each
palace had 100 doors and had beautiful seats and couches. The expensive beds had many metals on them, like the
peaks of the Himalayas. All the kings were seated on the many storeys of these palaces, each one decorated with
many ornaments and boastful of his success. Those tigers among kings were scented with the paste of black agaru
and were greatly fortunate, devoted to the Brahmanas, protectors of their realms and loved by all the worlds because of their good deeds. When they were seated on their royal seats, the inhabitants of the city and of the country
who had come to see Krishna also took their seats. The Pandavas took their seats with the Brahmanas and witnessed the unrivalled splendour of the king of Panchala. O king! For many days, the numbers who had assembled
increased. Many jewels were distributed and many dancers and actors provided entertainment.
‘O bull of the Bharata lineage! On the sixteenth day, when there was a crowd, Droupadi bathed, wore the best of
clothing and adorned herself with many ornaments. She descended into the arena, carrying in her hand a beautifully adorned golden prize for the winner. After pouring offerings of ghee into the sacriﬁcial ﬁre according to prescribed rites, the priest of the Somakas,6 a pure Brahmana, learned in the mantras, uttered salutations of peace to
the ﬁre and to Brahmanas and stopped the playing of all musical instruments.
‘O ruler of the earth! When everything was quiet, Dhrishtadyumna went to the centre of the arena and spoke, in
a thundering voice, words that were deep with meaning and sweet. “O assembled kings! Hear that this is the bow,
that is the target and these are the arrows. With these ﬁve arrows, shoot the target through the hole in the centre of
the machine. I truly say that the handsome and strong one, born in a noble family, who accomplishes this great feat
today, will obtain as his wife my sister Krishna.” Having thus addressed the assembled kings, Drupada’s son spoke
to Droupadi, recounting to her the lineages and deeds of the assembled kings.’
177

‘Dhrishtadyumna said, “Duryodhana, Durvisaha, Durmukha, Dushpradharshana, Vivimshati, Vikarna, Saha,
Duhshasana, Sama, Yuyutsu, Vatavega, Bhimavegadhara, Ugrayudha, Balaki, Kanakayu, Virochana, Sukundula,
Chitrasena, Suvarcha, Kanakadhvaja, Nandaka, Bahushali, Kunduja and Vikata—these and others are the immensely powerful sons of Dhritarashtra. These warriors have come with Karna for your hand.
‘“Hundreds are the famous and great-souled kings, bulls among the Kshatriyas—Shakuni, Bala, Vrishaka and
Brihadbala, all these sons of the king of Gandhara have come. Adorned with every ornament, the great-souled warriors Ashvatthama and Bhoja, skilled in the use of all weapons, have come. The kings Brihanta, Manimana and the
valiant Dandadhara, Sahadeva, Jayatsena, Meghasandhi of Magadha, Virata and his two sons Sankha and Uttara,
Vardhakshemi, Susharma, King Senabindu, Abhibhu with his sons Sudamna and Suvarchasa, Sumitra, Sukumara,
Vrika, Satyadhriti, Suryadhvaja, Rochamana, Nila, Chitrayudha, Amshumana, Chekitana, the immensely powerful
Shrenimana, Chandrasena, the powerful son of Samudrasena, Jalasamdha, the father and son Vidanda and Danda,
Poundraka, Vasudeva, the valorous Bhagadatta, Kalinga, Tamralipta, the king of Pattana, the maharatha Shalya,
king of Madra with his sons, the brave Rukmagandha and Rukmaratha, the Kourava Somadatta and his three maharatha sons Bhuri, Bhurishrava and Shala, Sudakshina, Kamboja, the Kourava Dridhadhanva, Brihadbala,
Sushena, Ushinara’s son Shibi, Samkarshana, Vasudeva, Rukmini’s brave son Samba, Charudeshna, Sarana, Gada,
Akrura, Satyaki, the immensely powerful Uddhava, Hridika’s son Kritavarma, Prithu, Viprithu, Viduratha, Kanka,
Samika, Saramejaya, the brave Vatapati, Jhilli, Pindaraka, the brave Ushinara, all famous as descended from the
Vrishni lineage; Bhagiratha, Brihatkshetra, Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, Brihadratha, Bahlika, the maharatha
Shrutayu, Uluka, King Kaitava, Chitrangada, Subhangada, the patient king of Vatsa, the king of Kosala.
‘“O fortunate one! These and many other kings of many regions, famous on earth, have come here for you.
These brave ones will try to shoot the excellent target for your hand. O beautiful one! You will choose as a husband the one who hits it.”’
178

Vaishampayana said, ‘Those youthful kings were adorned with earrings. Each regarded himself as the most skilled
in the use of weapons. All of them stood up and brandished their weapons. They boasted at one another, insolent

with beauty, valour, lineage, virtue, riches and youth. They were like kings of elephants from the Himalayas, drunk
in the season of rut. They stared at each other in insolence. Mentally struck with desire, they suddenly stood up
from their royal seats and exclaimed, “Krishna will be mine.” Assembled in that arena and eager to win Drupada’s
daughter, they looked like gods who stood around Uma, the daughter of the king of the mountains. Their bodies
were pierced with the arrows of the god of love.7 They completely lost their hearts to Krishna.8 They descended
into the arena, feeling hatred for their own relatives for Droupadi’s sake.
‘The gods came in their heavenly chariots—the rudras, the adityas, the vasus, the twin Ashvins, all the sadhyas
and all the maruts, with Yama and the god of wealth9 at the forefront. There also came the daityas, the suparnas,10
the great uragas,11 the devarshis, the guhyakas,12 the charanas,13 Vishvavasu, Narada, Parvata, the chief gandharvas with the apsaras, Halayudha,14 Janardana15 and the chiefs among the Vrishnis and the Andhakas. The chiefs
among the Yadus, always devoted to Krishna, were also there, witnessing it. On seeing the ﬁve Pandavas, like elephants in rut that had come to a lake full of lotuses, like a ﬁre covered with ashes, the chief of the Yadus16 began
to wonder. He told Rama,17 “That is Yudhishthira. That is Bhima and that is Jishnu18 and those are the valorous
twins.” Glancing at them leisurely, Rama cast a pleased glance at Janardana.
‘Biting their lower lips in anger, those other warriors, the sons and grandsons of kings, had set their eyes, hearts
and natures on Krishna. Biting their lips and with faces that were like copper in colour, they only looked at her.19
On seeing Droupadi, Pritha’s mighty-armed sons and the brave and great-natured twins were struck with the arrows of the god of love.20 The place was full of gods, rishis, gandharvas, suparnas, nagas, asuras and siddhas, pervaded with divine fragrances and covered with divine garlands. A great roar arose from the drums,21 and the
sounds of the ﬂute, the veena and cymbals echoed. The celestial routes were crowded with the heavenly chariots of
the gods.
‘Then, one after another, those kings exhibited their valour for Krishna. But the bow was so strong that with all
their strength, they could not string it. The ﬁrm wood of the bow recoiled and ﬂung those brave rulers of men on
the ground. They failed in their desire and could be seen on the ground, miserable and broken in spirit. That ﬁrm
bow caused them pain and shattered their bracelets and earrings. Having lost hopes of obtaining Krishna, that assembly of kings was crestfallen. In that assembly, those kings who boasted of noble birth then became objects of
derision. Kunti’s brave son Jishnu then arose, wishing to string the bow and place an arrow on it.’
179

Vaishampayana said, ‘When all the kings gave up attempting to string the bow, the great-souled Jishnu arose from
among the Brahmanas. On seeing Partha advance, with a complexion resplendent like that of Indra’s ﬂag, the chief
Brahmanas shook their deerskins and created a loud uproar. Some of them were pleased. Others were displeased.
Others among them, who lived by their wisdom and were wise, told each other, “O Brahmanas! If Kshatriyas like
Karna and Shalya, who are famous in the world, have great strength and are well versed in Dhanur Veda,22 could
not string the bow, how can this weakling Brahmana, with no knowledge of weapons, succeed? If he fails to succeed in an act that he has undertaken because of his juvenile inexperience, the Brahmanas will become objects of
ridicule in the eyes of the kings. Therefore, stop him from attempting to string the bow. He is doing it out of vanity
and childishness, inexperienced at being a Brahmana. We will not be ridiculed, not incur anyone’s disrespect. Nor
will we displease the kings of this world.” Others said, “He is handsome and youthful. He is like the trunk of the
king of elephants. His shoulders, arms and thighs are built well. In perseverance, he looks like the Himalayas. One
who is so resolute may well accomplish the task. Without a doubt, he has great strength and great endeavour. Without these, he would not have gone on his own. Besides, among the three orders,23 there is no task in the worlds
that Brahmanas cannot accomplish. Brahmanas abstain from food, live on air, eat only fruits, observe rigid vows
and become weak, yet retain the strength of their own energy. A Brahmana should not be looked down upon,
whether his deeds are right or wrong. No one should consider him incapable of performing a deed, big or small,
pleasing or unpleasant.” The Brahmanas continued to voice their opinions in this way.

‘Arjuna came to where the bow was and stood there like a stationary mountain. Circumambulating the bow in
accordance with the rites, the scorcher of enemies bowed his head to the bow and joyously grasped it. In the twinkling of an eye, he strung the bow and grasped the ﬁve arrows. Through the hole in the machine, he suddenly
pierced the target and it fell down on the ground. Thereupon, a great roar was heard in the sky and a great clamour
arose in the assembly. The gods rained down celestial ﬂowers on Partha’s head, that killer of enemies. All the spectators waved their upper garments in joy, or uttered sounds of despair. Flowers showered down from the sky. The
musicians played on hundreds of instruments. In a sweet voice, the bards and the raconteurs began to chant the
praises of the hero. Seeing that destroyer of enemies, Drupada was extremely happy and wished to help Partha
with his army, should the need arise.
‘When the uproar reached its peak, Yudhishthira, foremost among those who tread the path of dharma, swiftly
left the assembly and went home, accompanied by the twins, supreme among men. On seeing the target shot and
on seeing Partha, the equal of Shakra,24 Krishna was extremely happy. She went to Kunti’s son with a garland of
white ﬂowers. All the Brahmanas paid homage to the one who had accomplished the unthinkable and had won her
in the assembly. He soon left the arena, followed by the one who would be his wife.’
180

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the king expressed his desire to give his daughter to that great-souled Brahmana, all
the assembled kings looked at each other and were ﬁlled with anger. The kings said, “We are assembled here and
he passes us over like straw. He wishes to give Droupadi, supreme among women, to a Brahmana. This evil-hearted one does not respect us. Let us kill him. He does not deserve our respect or veneration because of qualities of
age. On account of this, let us kill this wretch who insults kings and their sons. After inviting and entertaining in
the proper fashion all the kings with food, he then shows them disrespect. In this assembly of kings, which is like a
conclave of the gods, can he not ﬁnd a single king who is his equal? The sacred texts clearly say that a svayamvara
is for Kshatriyas; Brahmanas have no right in the choice of a husband. O kings! If this lady does not wish one of us
as her husband, let us throw her into the ﬁre and return to our kingdoms. Though that Brahmana has done injury to
kings out of his impertinence and greed, he should not still be killed. After all, our kingdoms, lives, riches, sons,
grandsons and all our other wealth exist for the sake of Brahmanas. But something must be done to prevent insult
and to protect our own dharma, so that other svayamvaras do not end like this one.” Having said this, those tigers
among kings, with arms like clubs, rushed at Drupada with diverse weapons, so as to kill him.
‘Seeing those angry kings rush at him with bows and arrows, Drupada was frightened and sought the protection
of the Brahmanas. However, as those kings rushed at Drupada like mad elephants, Pandu’s two sons,25 the great
archers who conquered their enemies, advanced to repulse them. Thereupon, all the kings, their ﬁngers clad in armour and with their weapons raised, violently rushed towards the Kuru princes, Arjuna and Bhimasena. Bhima,
the performer of amazing deeds, with immense strength and like a thunderbolt, tore up a large tree with his hands
and stripped it of all its leaves, like an elephant. With that tree, the mighty-armed Bhima, Pritha’s son and the destroyer of enemies, stood next to Partha, bull among men and with long and thick arms, like Yama with his terrible
staff.
‘On seeing the unthinkable feats of Jishnu and his brother, Damodara,26 the one with superhuman intelligence,
turned to his brother Halayudha, himself the performer of awesome deeds, and said, “O Sankarshana! The warrior
who has the gait of a mad bull and who holds a great bow that is 4 cubits long in his hand must be Arjuna. If I am
Vasudeva’s son, there can be no doubt about this. The warrior who has uprooted a tree with his strength and is instantly ready to repulse the kings is undoubtedly Vrikodara.27 No other mortal on earth can perform such a feat
today. O Achyuta!28 The other one who left a while ago, with eyes like lotus petals, slender and with the gait of a
powerful lion, humble, fair and with a long and shining nose, must have been Dharmaraja. I am sure that the other
two youths, each like Kartikeya, must have been sons of the two Ashvins. I had heard that Pandu’s sons and Pritha
had escaped from the ﬁre in the house of lac.” Halayudha, with a complexion like that of clouds, happily spoke to
his younger brother, “I am delighted that our father’s sister Pritha, with the foremost of the Kurus, has escaped.”’

181

Vaishampayana said, ‘Those bulls among the Brahmanas shook their deerskins and water pots29 and said, “Do not
be frightened. We will ﬁght with the enemies.” Arjuna smilingly told those Brahmanas, “Stand aside as spectators.
I will repulse those kings, like poisonous snakes, with mantras, with showers of hundreds of sharp-pointed
arrows.” Having said this, the maharatha took up the bow he had obtained as dowry and accompanied by his brother Bhima stood there like an immovable mountain. Seeing the Kshatriyas, with Karna leading them, furious to do
battle, they fell upon them, like two elephants against hostile elephants. Eager to ﬁght, those kings then said, “It is
permissible to kill a Brahmana who is willing to ﬁght.” Then the mighty Vaikartana30 Karna rushed at Arjuna, eager to ﬁght, like an elephant rushes at a rival over a female elephant. Shalya, king of the Madras, rushed at Bhimasena. Duryodhana and the others rushed at the Brahmanas, but they fought with them lightly and carelessly.
‘Seeing Vaikartana Karna rush towards him, the wise Arjuna stretched his mighty bow and pierced him with
three arrows. The impact of these sharp arrows stunned Radheya31 and he approached with greater circumspection. Then those two invincible warriors fought violently, each eager to vanquish the other. Such was the speed that
they became invisible.32 “Look at the strength in my arms”, “See how I countered that”, they taunted each other in
words that only warriors understand. Seeing the valour in Arjuna’s arms, unparalleled on earth, Vaikartana Karna
fought even more vigorously. Repulsing Arjuna’s swift arrows, Karna shouted out aloud and the warriors applauded his feat.
‘Karna said, “O foremost among Brahmanas! I am pleased with the strength of your arms, which do not tire in
battle, and with your persistent control over weapons. O supreme among Brahmanas! Are you Rama,33 the personiﬁcation of the knowledge of weapons?34 Or are you Harihaya35 himself? Or are you Achyuta Vishnu himself? Have you assumed the form of a Brahmana to disguise yourself and are now ﬁghting strongly with me for
self-preservation, mustering the strength of your arms? When I am angry in the ﬁeld of battle, no one except
Shachi’s husband36 and Pandava Kiriti37 can withstand me.” Hearing these words, Phalguni38 replied, “O Karna!
I am not the science of weapons personiﬁed. Nor am I the powerful Rama. I am only a Brahmana, chief among
warriors and supreme among those who have the knowledge of weapons. Through my preceptor’s grace, I have
become skilled in the use of brahma and paurandara39 weapons. O warrior! Wait for a bit. I stand here today, to
vanquish you in battle.” At these words, Radheya Karna withdrew from the battle, because the maharatha thought
that Brahmana strength was invincible.
‘In another part of the arena, Shalya and Vrikodara, both warriors with great strength and knowledge of ﬁghting,
were engaged in battle. Calling out to each other, they fought like two mad and great elephants, striking each other
with clenched ﬁsts and knees. For a while, they dragged each other around in the duel. Then the immensely powerful Bhima raised Shalya up with his arms and hurled him down on the ground. The Brahmanas began to laugh.
Bhimasena, bull among men, surprised everyone.40 But though he hurled the powerful one on the ground, he did
not kill him. When Shalya was thus hurled down by Bhima and Karna scared away, all the other kings were frightened and surrounded Vrikodara. They said, “These bulls among Brahmanas are supreme. Let us ﬁnd out in what
lineage they were born and where they live. Who can ﬁght with Radheya Karna in battle except Rama, Drona,
Sharadvata Kripa,41 Devaki’s son Krishna and Phalguni, the scorcher of enemies? Who can ﬁght against Duryodhana and who can vanquish in battle the powerful Shalya, king of Madra and chief among warriors, except the
brave Baladeva and Pandava Vrikodara? Therefore, let us desist from this ﬁght against the Brahmanas. Let us ﬁnd
out who they are and then we will happily ﬁght with them again.” On witnessing Bhima’s feat, Krishna believed
them to be Kunti’s sons. He gently restrained the assembled kings and said, “This lady has been won according to
dharma.” Thereupon, those best of kings, skilled in battle, refrained from the ﬁght and returned to their kingdoms,
wonderstruck. Those who had assembled there went away, exclaiming that the Brahmanas had won the day and
Panchali had become the wife of a Brahmana.
‘Surrounded by Brahmanas attired in the skins of deer and other animals, Bhimasena and Dhananjaya found it
difﬁcult to pass. Eventually, those radiant warriors among men freed themselves from the crowd, followed by
Krishna. Their mother had been worried about various evils that might have occurred, since they were late in re-

turning after begging for alms. She even thought that Dhritarashtra’s sons might have recognized and killed those
bulls among the Kurus. Had some terrible rakshasas, versed with powers of maya and ﬁrm in their enmity, killed
them? However, could the great-souled Vyasa’s predictions be wrong? Filled with love for her sons, these were the
thoughts that occurred to Pritha. Then, late in the afternoon, Jishnu, in the company of many Brahmanas, entered
with the Brahmana in the forefront,42 like the sun surrounded by clouds.’
182

Vaishampayana said, ‘Pritha’s two illustrious sons went to the potter’s house and to Pritha. With happiness in their
hearts, those chiefs among men presented Yajnaseni and said, “See what alms we have got.” She was inside the
house and without seeing her sons, replied, “Share it together.” Later, Kunti saw the lady and was miserable at
what she had said.
‘She was anxious not to commit adharma and began to think about what might be done. She took the happy Yajnaseni by the hand and went to Yudhishthira and said, “This daughter of Drupada was presented to me as ‘alms’
your younger brothers had obtained. O king! O son! As I am in the habit of doing, but in ignorance, I said what I
thought was proper, ‘Share it together.’ O bull among the Kurus! Now tell me how those instructions of mine don’t
become a lie. How can the Panchala king’s daughter not be touched by adharma, committing that which hasn’t
been done before?” Having been thus addressed by his mother, the wise king Yudhishthira, chief among the Kurus,
sat for a while and thought.
‘He consoled Kunti and spoke to Dhananjaya. “O Pandava! You are the one who won Yajnaseni. It is proper that
you should make this princess happy. Let the sacred ﬁre be lit and offerings made. You should marry her in accordance with the proper rites.” Arjuna said, “O king of men! Since this is not the law that others accept, do not make
me tread this path of adharma. You should marry her ﬁrst, followed by the mighty-armed Bhima of wonderful
deeds, then I, then Nakula after me and ﬁnally the energetic Sahadeva. O king! Vrikodara, I and the twins think
that the lady should be yours. This is the state of affairs. After reﬂecting on it, please do what is appropriate, in accordance with dharma and fame and the welfare of the king of Panchala. Instruct us. We are all waiting for your
command.” Then they all looked at the illustrious Krishna who was standing there. They looked at each other and
sat down, her image in their hearts.
‘When those immensely radiant ones looked at Droupadi, their love for her arose and put their senses into turmoil. Panchali’s charming form was created by the creator himself. It beguiled all living beings and was supreme
to all others. Kunti’s son Yudhishthira knew from their appearance what was going through their minds. O bull
among men! He remembered Dvaipayana’s words. Fearing that conﬂict might arise between the brothers, the king
said, “This fortunate Droupadi will be a wife to all of us.”’
183

Vaishampayana said, ‘Hearing the words of their eldest brother, all of Pandu’s sons, of inﬁnite energy, were
pleased and began to think about the purport of those words. Suspecting them to be the foremost of the Kurus, the
chief of the Vrishnis43 and Rohini’s son44 then came to the potter’s house, where those foremost among men were
living. Krishna and Rohini’s son saw Ajatashatru,45 with long and thick arms, seated there. In a circle around him
sat the others, like blazing ﬁres. Vasudeva went to Kunti’s son, foremost among those who follow dharma. He
touched with his hands the feet of King Ajamidha46 Yudhishthira and said, “I am Krishna.” Rohini’s son went to
Yudhishthira and did the same. Seeing them, the descendants of Kuru were greatly delighted. O chief of the Bharata lineage! The chiefs of the Yadu lineage then touched the feet of their father’s sister.47
‘Seeing Krishna, Ajatashatru, chief among the Kurus, asked him about his welfare and said, “O Vasudeva!
When we are living here in disguise, how did you manage to track us down?” Vasudeva smiled and replied, “O
king! Even when ﬁre is covered, it comes out. Who but the Pandavas can display such valour among men? O destroyers of enemies! It was through good fortune that you escaped from that ﬁre. It was through good fortune that
Dhritarashtra’s evil son and his advisers did not succeed in their desires. Be blessed. Prosper, the way a ﬁre hidden
in a cave gradually expands and spreads. Permit us to return to camp. Otherwise, the kings may discover you.”

Then, taking permission from the Pandavas, the eternally radiant one quickly went away, accompanied by
Baladeva.’
184

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the two descendants of Kuru went towards the potter’s house, Panchala Dhrishtadyumna followed them. Having sent his attendants away, he hid himself near the potter’s house, unknown to
those men.
‘In the evening, Bhima, the crusher of enemies, and Jishnu returned with the twins, after begging for alms. They
happily handed over to Yudhishthira what they had got. Thereupon, the soft-spoken Kunti spoke to Drupada’s
daughter. “O fortunate one! First, take a portion and offer it to the gods. Then give some alms to a Brahmana. Feed
some to those who are needy and give some to men who are around. Then, divide the rest into two parts. O fortunate one! Give half to Bhima, because that dark youth with a strong body is like a mad bull and is a warrior who
always eats a lot.” Hearing these excellent words, the chaste princess cheerfully did what she was asked to do,
without any doubts. All of them ate the food.
‘Madri’s son, the ascetic Sahadeva, quickly spread out a bed of kusha grass on the ground. Thereafter, each of
those brave warriors spread out his own deerskin and lay down to sleep on the ground. Those foremost among the
Kurus lay down, with their heads facing the direction blessed by Agastya.48 Kunti lay herself down along their
heads and Krishna lay down along their feet. Though she lay on the ground on kusha grass with Pandu’s sons, like
a foot pillow, she felt no grief. Nor did she feel disrespect for those bulls among the Kurus.
‘Then those warriors began to talk to each other—wonderful stories about wars, celestial weapons, chariots, elephants, swords, clubs and battleaxes. The Panchala king’s son heard all that they told each other during their conversation. His men saw how Krishna was lying there in that humble state. Prince Dhrishtadyumna set out49 in
great haste to tell King Drupada in detail everything that he had heard during the night. The Panchala king was
sad, because he did not know where the Pandavas had gone. The great-souled one asked Dhrishtadyumna, “Where
has Krishna gone? Who has taken her away? Is it a Shudra or one of low birth? Has a Vaishya who pays taxes
placed his feet on my head? Has a garland been thrown away on a cremation ground? O son! Or is it a foremost
man from our own varna, or is it one from a higher varna?50 Or has a lower being51 placed his foot on my head
and deﬁled Krishna? I will be happy in my sacriﬁces if she has been united with Partha, that bull among men. Tell
me truthfully. Which illustrious one has won my daughter today? Is there any chance that Vichitravirya’s sons,52
foremost among the Kurus, are still alive? Is it perhaps Partha who took up the bow and shot the target today?”’
185

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having been thus addressed, Prince Dhrishtadyumna, foremost of the lunar dynasty, cheerfully told his father all that had occurred and by whom Krishna had been won.
‘Dhrishtadyumna said, “The handsome youth with the long and red eyes, dressed in black deerskin and like a
god in his form, who strung that supreme bow and brought down the target on the ground, left hurriedly and without concern. He was soon surrounded by the chief among the Brahmanas, who offered him homage. He strode as if
he had vanquished Diti’s sons,53 surrounded by the gods and the rishis. Like an elephant bride happily follows the
male elephant, Krishna followed, holding his deerskin. Unable to bear that sight, the assembled lords of men54
were angered and advanced to ﬁght him. At that, another hero arose in that assembly of kings. He uprooted a gigantic tree and drove away those masses of kings, like angry Yama strikes down all living creatures. O lord of
men! Those assembled kings could only watch. Those foremost among men took Krishna and went away, resembling the sun and the moon. They went to a potter’s house outside the city. A lady sat there, as radiant as a ﬂame of
ﬁre. Around her sat three55 foremost men, each one like a ﬁre himself. I think she was their mother. Coming to
her, those two heroes paid homage at her feet and asked Krishna to pay homage too. Leaving Krishna there, those
foremost among men went out to beg for alms. It was Krishna who took from them the alms and offered a share to
the gods and another to a Brahmana. She then served a part to that old lady and those ﬁve heroes among men and

ate herself. O king! Then they all lay down to sleep together, with Krishna like a foot pillow. Their bed was made
on the bare ground with darbha56 grass on which deerskins were spread. They conversed on various subjects in
voices that were as deep as dark clouds—wonderful tales that Vaishyas, nor Shudras, could speak of. Nor did those
heroes speak of Brahmana tales. O king! There is no doubt that they are foremost among Kshatriyas. The stories
that they told were about wars. Our hopes have clearly been fulﬁlled. We have heard that Pritha’s sons escaped
from the ﬁre. From the way in which the bow was strung and the target brought down with strength, from the way
in which they conversed with each other, it is certain that they are Pritha’s sons, living in disguise.” Thereupon,
King Drupada was extremely happy.
‘He sent his priest to them, directing him, “Go and tell them we know who they are. Ask them if they are by any
chance the sons of the great-souled Pandu.” As instructed by the king, the priest went to them and praised them.
He told them in detail and in the right order the king’s message. The priest said, “O ﬁrst among those who deserve
homage! The king of Panchala, the granter of wishes, wishes to know who you are. Seeing the one who has shot
down the target, his joy has no bounds. Tell us the details of your family and your lineage. Place your feet on the
heads of your enemies. Gladden the hearts of the king of Panchala and his men, and mine as well. King Pandu was
a dear friend of King Drupada, who regarded him as his own self. He has all along desired that his daughter should
be given to that Kourava as his daughter-in-law. O heroes of unblemished limbs! This desire was always in King
Drupada’s heart, that the strong and long-armed Arjuna should marry his daughter according to dharma.” After the
priest had spoken these words and was quiet, the king57 looked at the humble messenger and instructed Bhima,
who was next to him, “King Drupada’s priest is worthy of respect and let him be given more than normal homage.
Get water to wash his feet, and offerings be given.” O ruler of men! Bhima did as he had been instructed and he58
accepted the offerings and happily seated himself.
‘Yudhishthira then spoke to the Brahmana. “The king of Panchala gave his daughter away according to his wishes and according to his own dharma. He set a price59 and this brave one has won her in accordance with that.
Therefore, no questions can be asked about his varna, action, intention, means of living, lineage or gotra.60 All
those questions have been answered by the act of stringing the bow and striking the target. In doing that, this greatsouled one has won Krishna in an assembly of kings. Since that is the case, the king of the lunar dynasty has no
reason to regret his decision or be unhappy. O Brahmana! King Drupada’s eternal desire will certainly come to be
true for the king, because I think that this king’s daughter was unattainable otherwise. No one weak in strength or
of low birth or unskilled in the use of arms could have strung that bow and shot down the target. Today, it is therefore not proper for the king of Panchala to grieve over his daughter. No man on earth can now undo the fact that he
succeeded in shooting down the target.” While Yudhishthira was uttering these words, another messenger swiftly
came from the king of Panchala, to announce that the feast had been prepared.’

Section Thirteen
Vaivahika Parva
This parva has 155 shlokas and six chapters.
Chapter 186: 15 shlokas
Chapter 187: 32 shlokas
Chapter 188: 22 shlokas
Chapter 189: 49 shlokas
Chapter 190: 18 shlokas
Chapter 191: 19 shlokas
Vivaha means wedding and this parva is about Droupadi’s marriage.
186

‘The messenger said, “Because of the wedding, King Drupada has prepared a good feast for the bridegroom’s party. Come there with Krishna after ﬁnishing the daily rituals. Do not delay. These chariots, adorned with golden lotuses and drawn by excellent horses, are worthy of being ridden by those who rule the earth. Ascending on them,
all of you come swiftly to the palace of the king of Panchala.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘When he1 left, all the bulls among the Kurus2 sent the priest on ahead of them. Placing
Kunti and Krishna on one chariot, they ascended those great chariots and left. O king! O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Having heard from the priest the words of Dharmaraja, he3 kept ready a large collection of things like
fruits, sanctiﬁed garlands, shields, armour, seats, cattle, ropes, and other objects used in agriculture, to determine
the nature of the Kurus.4 The king also completely provided for all objects concerning other crafts and all articles
used in sports—chariots, horses, armour that were shining, great swords, adorned horses and chariots, the best of
bows and the choicest of arrows and spears and lances laced with gold, javelins, catapults and battleaxes, all instruments connected with war. There were beds and seats and many other objects of craftsmanship.
‘Taking the righteous Krishna with her, Kunti entered the inner quarters of Drupada. The ladies worshipped the
wife of the king of the Kouravas eagerly. O king! On seeing those chief among men, with eyes like those of powerful bulls, dressed in deerskin for upper garments, with broad shoulders and long arms that were like coiled snakes,
with the gait of lions, the king, the king’s advisers, the king’s sons and the king’s relatives and attendants were then
extremely delighted. Without hesitation or surprise, those warriors then seated themselves on the best of seats, with
separate footstools. One after another, they sat, according to age. Well-dressed male and female servants and
skilled cooks brought all types of food worthy of kings, in plates made of gold and silver.
‘Having eaten, those foremost among men were pleased, and relaxed. They examined all the objects that were
laid out and the warriors showed the most interest in the various implements of war. On seeing this, Drupada’s
sons, the king himself5 and all his chief advisers were delighted at having realized that the sons of Kunti were the
sons and grandsons of kings. They paid their respects.’
187

Vaishampayana said, ‘Then the greatly radiant king of Panchala spoke to Prince Yudhishthira in the form that is
reserved for Brahmanas and cheerfully asked Kunti’s son, “Should we know you as Kshatriyas or Brahmanas? Are

you accomplished Vaishyas or are you born from the wombs of Shudras? Are you siddhas6 who use their powers
of maya to roam in all directions and have come here from heaven in search of Krishna?7 O lord! Tell us the truth,
because we are in great doubt. Will our hearts not be content when our doubts have been removed? O scorcher of
enemies! Will our share of fate prove to be fortunate? From your heart, tell us the truth. Among kings, truthfulness
is a better adornment than sacriﬁces and alms. Therefore, do not say that which is untrue. O destroyer of enemies!
O you who are the equal of the gods! After hearing your reply, I will then make arrangements for the marriage according to what is proper.”8 Yudhishthira replied, “O king of Panchala! Do not be disheartened. Be happy. There is
no doubt that your wishes have come true. O king! We are Kshatriyas and sons of the great-souled Pandu. Know
me to be the eldest of Kunti’s sons. These are Bhimasena and Arjuna. O king! Your daughter was won by these in
an assemblage of kings. O king of kings! The twins are waiting there, where Krishna is. O bull among kings! Let
all sorrow be dispelled from your heart. We are Kshatriyas. Like a lotus, your daughter has been transplanted from
one pond to another. O great king! This is the truth that I have told you. You are like our preceptor and our main
refuge.” On hearing this, King Drupada’s eyes brimmed over with joy.
‘For some time, he could not answer Yudhishthira properly. Controlling his delight with great effort, the king,
the conqueror of enemies, 9 spoke to Yudhishthira in the appropriate form. The one with virtue in his heart10
asked how they11 had escaped from that city.12 The Pandava13 narrated it in detail, from the beginning. On hearing the narration from Kunti’s son, King Drupada censured Dhritarashtra, that ruler of men. Drupada, chief among
all men who are eloquent, gave every assurance to Kunti’s son Yudhishthira and vowed that he would restore him
to his kingdom. On the king’s invitation, Kunti, Krishna, Bhimasena, Arjuna and the twins took up residence in
that great palace.
‘O king! They continued to live there, treated with every respect by Yajnasena.14 Later, the king and his sons
spoke to those15 who had been reassured. Drupada said, “Let the mighty-armed son16 of Kuru today accept my
daughter’s hand in accordance with the prescribed rites. Today, the moment is an auspicious one.” On this, the
righteous-souled Yudhishthira replied, “O lord of people! Then I too, must take a wife.” Drupada said, “O lord! O
warrior! Then you accept my daughter’s hand in accordance with the rites. Or give Krishna in marriage to whomsoever you wish.” Yudhishthira replied, “O king! Droupadi will be the queen to all of us. O lord of the people!
This is what has already been ordered by my mother. I am yet unmarried, and so is the Pandava Bhimasena. Your
jewel of a daughter has been won by Partha.17 O king! It is our rule that every jewel we obtain must be equally
shared. O best of kings! We are not willing to break that rule now. According to the prescribed norms, Krishna will
be the wedded queen of all of us. According to age, let her accept our hands, one after another, before the ﬁre.”
‘Drupada said, “O descendant of the Kuru lineage! It has been decreed that one man may have many queens.
But we have never heard that one woman can have many men. O son of Kunti! Pure as you are, and well acquainted with the path of dharma, you should not commit an act that is counter to dharma, the Vedas and usual practice.
Why has your intelligence become thus?” Yudhishthira replied, “O great king! Subtle is the path of dharma; we do
not know its direction. Let us therefore follow the path that was trodden by illustrious men in ancient times. My
tongue never utters that which is untrue. Nor has my mind ever turned to that which is adharma. This has been
commanded by our mother and my mind also approves of it. O king! This is certainly dharma. Therefore, act accordingly, without hesitation. O ruler of the earth! Do not have any doubt on this score.” Drupada said, “O son of
Kunti! You yourself, my son Dhrishtadyumna and Kunti must settle among yourselves what should be done now.
Tomorrow, I will do that which is proper.” O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! At that, those three got
together and discussed the matter. At that very moment, Dvaipayana arrived there, in accordance with his wishes.’
188

Vaishampayana said, ‘As soon as they saw him, all the Pandavas and the greatly illustrious son of Panchala18
stood up. All of them welcomed and paid their respects to the great-souled Krishna.19 The great-minded one returned their greetings and asked about their welfare. He then sat down on a radiant and golden seat. Instructed by

Krishna, the one with inﬁnite energy, those greatest among men20 also sat down on expensive seats. O lord of the
people! After some time, in sweet words, Parshata21 asked the great-souled one about Droupadi.
‘Drupada asked, “O fortunate lord! How can one woman become the wife of many, without leading to sin?
Please explain this to us in detail.” Vyasa replied, “This dharma has fallen into disuse because it runs counter to the
Vedas and common practice. But on this, I wish to hear the opinions of each one of you.”
‘Drupada said, “In my view, this practice leads to a sin, because it is against the Vedas and common practice. O
best of the Brahmanas! Nowhere can a wife of many be found. Nor did the illustrious ones, of ancient times, follow such a dharma. Those who have wisdom should never follow such a dharma. I can therefore never convince
myself of acting in this way. To me, this dharma appears to be of doubtful morality.” Dhrishtadyumna said, “O bull
among the twice-born! O Brahmana! O one rich with austerities! If he follows the path that is righteous, how can
an elder brother unite with the wife of his younger brother? The ways of dharma are always subtle and, therefore,
we do not know the ways in entirety. Thus, we cannot say what is in accordance with dharma and what is not. O
Brahmana! We cannot therefore perform such an act with a clear mind. I cannot say that Krishna should be the
wife of ﬁve.” Yudhishthira said, “My tongue never utters an untruth and my mind never turns to sin. When my
mind approves, it cannot be sinful. I have heard in ancient tales that there was a lady named Jatila in the Goutama
lineage. She was chief among all virtuous women and consorted with seven sages. O supreme among those who
know the path of dharma! It is said that listening to the preceptor is virtue and among all preceptors, the mother is
the foremost. She has commanded us that we must always share what we obtain. O best among the twice-born!
Thus, do I consider this act virtuous.” Kunti said, “It is as the virtuous Yudhishthira has said. I am frightened that
my words might become untrue. How can I be saved from a lie?”
‘Vyasa replied, “O fortunate one! You will be saved from a lie. This is eternal dharma. O king of Panchala! I
will not reveal this matter before everyone. You will alone hear how this practice was established and why this
should be regarded as old and eternal. There is no doubt that what Kounteya22 has said is in accordance with dharma.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Then, the illustrious lord Dvaipyana Vyasa arose and, taking hold of the king’s23 hand,
went into the king’s palace. The Pandavas, Kunti and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna waited despondently for those two
to return. Thereupon, Dvaipayana explained to the great-souled king how it came to be that these men’s marriage
with a single wife was in conformity with dharma.’
189

‘Vyasa said, “O king! In ancient times, the gods performed a great sacriﬁce in Naimisha forest. There, Vivasvata’s
son24 was the priest who killed the animals. O king! Since he was consecrated in that role, Yama did not kill any
creatures.25 Since death and time were suspended among creatures, the number of beings increased greatly. Then
Shakra,26 Varuna, Kubera, the sadhyas, Rudra, the vasus, the Ashvins—these and other gods gathered together
and went to Prajapati, the creator of the world. Alarmed at the increase in the number of humans, they assembled
and addressed the preceptor of the worlds. ‘We are trembling with fear. We wish to be happy again. We have come
to seek protection with you.’ Brahma replied, ‘Why are you frightened of humans, when all of you are immortal?
There should not be any fear in you from mortals.’ The gods said, ‘Since the mortals have become immortals,
there is no difference any more. Upset at this equality, we have come to you to seek a distinction.’ Brahma replied,
‘Vivasvata’s son is now engaged in the great sacriﬁce. It is for this reason that humans are not dying. When he has
single-mindedly ﬁnished his sacriﬁcial acts, death will again return among them. When that time comes, Vivasvata’s son will be strengthened through your energies. When the time of death comes at the end, humans will have no
energy left in them.’ Hearing these words of the ﬁrst-born god,27 they28 went where the gods were sacriﬁcing.
When those immensely strong ones assembled there, they saw a lotus29 in the Bhagirathi.30
‘“On seeing that lotus, they were surprised. Indra, chief among the warriors among them, went where the Ganga
always issues and saw a lady as radiant as the ﬁre. The lady had come there to fetch water and was immersed in
the goddess Ganga. But she was weeping and teardrops fell from her eyes into the water and became golden lotus-

es. On seeing this wonderful sight, the wielder of the vajra31 went up to the lady and asked, ‘Who are you and
why are you crying? I want to know the truth. If you wish, please tell me.’ The woman replied, ‘O Shakra!32 I am
unfortunate and you may know who I am and why I am weeping. O king! I will lead the way. Come with me and
you will yourself see why I am crying.’ He33 followed her and soon saw a handsome young man. He was surrounded by young women, was seated on a throne and was playing dice on the peak of the king of mountains.34
‘“The king35 of the gods spoke to him, ‘Know that this universe and this world are under my sway. Know me to
be the lord of everything.’ But the person took no notice of what he had said and continued to be immersed in the
dice. Indra became angry and repeated what he had said. On seeing that Shakra was angry, that god cast a glance at
him and smiled. At that glance, the king of the gods was paralysed and stood motionless at the spot, like a pillar.
When the game of dice was over, he36 spoke to the weeping goddess, ‘Bring him here. I will make sure that pride
never enters his heart again.’ As soon as the woman had touched him, Shakra’s limbs were paralysed and he fell
down on the ground. Then the god with the ﬁerce energy told him, ‘O Shakra! Never act like this again. Remove
this great king of the mountains, because your strength and energy are beyond measurement. Enter the centre of
the hole and wait with the others, who are like you and the sun in splendour.’ He37 rolled away the peak of the
great mountain and saw four others who were like him in radiance. On seeing them, he was extremely saddened
and said, ‘Shall I also become like them?’ Then, the god Girisha38 looked at the wielder of the vajra with eyes dilated with anger and said, ‘O Shatakratu!39 Enter this cavern, because in your folly, you have insulted me in front
of my eyes.’ Thus addressed by the lord, the king of the gods shuddered and shook, because of the curse. His limbs
went limp, like the leaf of a ﬁg tree stirred by the wind on the peak of the king of the mountains.
‘“Shuddering at the god’s sudden words, he40 joined his palms and told the terrible god who has many manifestations, ‘O Bhava!41 Show me a way out today.’ Smilingly, the god with the terrible bow replied, ‘Those who act
like this, do not ﬁnd an escape. These others were like you and will become again. Therefore, enter the cavern and
lie down there. There is no doubt that all your fates will be the same. All of you will have to be born in human
wombs. Having achieved great feats of violence there and having sent a large number towards their deaths, you
will again attain the world of Indra through the merit of your actions. You will achieve all that I have said and
much more, with varied signiﬁcance.’ The earlier Indras said, ‘We will go from the world of gods to that of men.
Salvation is difﬁcult to obtain there. Let the gods Dharma, Vayu, Maghavan42 and the Ashvins beget us on our
mother.’ Having heard this, the wielder of the vajra once again spoke to the greatest of the gods,43 ‘With my semen, I will create a man who can accomplish this task. He will be my son and will be the ﬁfth among these.’ In his
good nature, the illustrious lord with the terrible bow granted them the wishes they desired. He ordained that the
woman, the most beautiful in the worlds, who was none other than Shri44 herself, would be their wife in the world
of men. Thereafter, accompanied by them,45 he46 went to the god Narayana, who is beyond measure. He47 approved of everything and thus it was that they were born on earth.
‘“Hari48 plucked two hairs from his body. One was white and the other was black. These two hairs entered the
wombs of two women from the Yadu lineage, Rohini and Devaki. One of them49 became Baladeva and the second
one that was black became Keshava. Those ones who were like Shakra and were earlier conﬁned in the mountain
cavern are none other than the valorous Pandavas, while the Pandava Savyasachi50 is a part of Shakra. O king!
Thus it was that the former Indras were born as the Pandavas, and the celestial Lakshmi, earlier ordained to be
their wife, was born as the divinely beautiful Droupadi. She whose radiance is like the sun and the moon and
whose fragrance can be smelt from the distance of one krosha, cannot have arisen from the earth. At the end of the
sacriﬁce, she arose through divine intervention. O ruler of men! I will happily grant you a most wonderful boon.
With this divine eyesight, behold Kunti’s sons, in their earlier divine forms.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Then the pure Brahmana Vyasa, performer of extremely generous deeds, gave divine sight
to the king through his ascetic powers. The king saw them in their earlier forms. He saw them divine and young,
broad-chested and 5 cubits tall, adorned with golden garlands, crowns and jewels, with complexions as radiant as

that of the ﬁre or the sun, each resembling Shakra, dressed in divine garments that were beautiful and golden, resplendent with fragrant garlands that were the best, the equals of the three-eyed god,51 the vasus and the celestial
adityas, with every quality. On seeing the earlier Indras, King Drupada was surprised and pleased. With the power
of divine maya that is beyond measure, he saw that supreme of women, Shri personiﬁed. In beauty, splendour and
fame, he saw her to be the right wife for those Indras on earth. On seeing this wonderful sight, he touched the feet
of Satyavati’s son and said, with a tranquil mind, “O supreme rishi! For you, this is no wonder.”
‘Vyasa replied, “In a hermitage in a forest, there was once the daughter of a great-souled rishi, who was beautiful and pure, but could not get a husband. It is said that through her austerities, she pleased the god Shankara.52
Pleased with her, the god himself spoke to her, ‘Tell me what you want.’ Thus addressed, she repeatedly told the
boon-granting supreme god, ‘I wish to have a husband who is accomplished in every way.’ Then the god Shankara
happily granted her the boon and said, ‘O fortunate one! You will have ﬁve excellent husbands.’ The one who had
pleased the god said, ‘O Shankara! I wish to have only one husband who possesses all the qualities.’ The god of
gods, extremely pleased with her, again uttered these holy words. ‘You have addressed me ﬁve times, asking for a
husband. O fortunate one! It shall be as you have asked. You will have good fortune and all this will happen in one
of your future births.’ O Drupada! So this daughter, with the form of a goddess, was born to you. Krishna
Parshati53 was preordained to be the wife of ﬁve and remain unblemished. The divine Shri was born out of the
great sacriﬁce to be the wife of the Pandavas. After performing severe austerities, she was born as your daughter.
O King Drupada! That resplendent goddess, sought after by the gods themselves, was ordained to be the wife of
ﬁve through her own actions. She was created by the self-creating one54 to be the wife of these gods. On hearing
this, act as you wish.”’
190

‘Drupada said, “O maharshi! I sought to act in the way that I had said only when I had not heard these words from
you. I cannot act against what has been ordained. I wish to act as you have said. The knot tied by destiny cannot be
untied. There is nothing that results from our own actions. The rites set out for one husband must now become the
rites for this rule.55 Since Krishna herself repeatedly asked for many husbands in ancient times, the great god accordingly granted her the boon. The god himself knows what is best. Since Shankara has ordained it to be thus,
dharma or adharma, I will commit no sin. Therefore, since Krishna is ordained to them, let them take her hand as
they wish, according to the prescribed rites.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Then the great lord56 spoke to Dharmaraja, “O son of Pandu! Today is an auspicious day.
The moon has entered the constellation Pushya. Today, you accept Krishna’s hand ﬁrst.” At that, King
Yajnasena57 and his son made arrangements for the wedding. He made ready a lot of wealth for the marriage. After she had bathed and had been adorned with many jewels, he brought out his daughter Krishna. To witness the
marriage ceremony, the king’s friends and relatives happily came there, with advisers and many Brahmanas and
chief citizens. Crowded with those who had come for alms, the extensive festive grounds thick with lotuses and
lilies, lined with heaps of precious stones, his palace looked like the sky, studded with brilliant stars. Then the
young Kuru princes bathed. Adorned with earrings and ornaments, dressed in expensive garments and perfumed
with sandalwood paste, they performed the preparatory ceremony and other auspicious rites. O lord! Accompanied
by their priest Dhoumya, as radiant as the ﬁre, they then joyfully entered, in due order and one after another, like
mighty bulls entering a pen.
‘Then the priest58 who knew the Vedas built and lit the sacriﬁcial ﬁre and poured offerings, with mantras. He
then called Yudhishthira and united him with Krishna. Then the Veda-knowing one married them, making them
walk around the ﬁre, hand in hand. Then the priest took leave of that ornament of battle59 and went out of the
palace. Then those maharathas, bringers of fame to the Kuru lineage, sons of a king among men, took the hand of
that supreme among women, in succession, one day after another.60 The devarshi61 told me something extremely
wonderful, beyond human powers. That slender-waisted and great lady regained her virginity from one day to another.62

‘When the marriage was over, Drupada gave those maharathas a lot of gifts—100 supreme chariots adorned
with gold, each yoked to four horses with golden bridles; 100 elephants with lotus marks on them, like a hundred
mountains with golden peaks; and 100 young maidservants dressed in expensive garments and adorned with ornaments and garlands. Making the ﬁre his witness, the king of the lunar dynasty,63 beﬁtting his might, separately
gave each of those64 a lot of wealth, garments and ornaments and other riches. When the marriage was over and
the mighty Pandavas, the equals of Indra, had obtained their Shri, along with her great wealth, they lived in the city
of the king of Panchala.’
191

Vaishampayana said, ‘After his alliance with the Pandavas, Drupada’s fears were dispelled. He did not even fear
the gods. All the ladies in the great-souled Drupada’s household came to Kunti. They mentioned their names and
saluted her, with their foreheads touching her feet. Dressed in a silken garment and with the marriage thread still
encircling her,65 Krishna also paid her respects to her mother-in-law and stood before her, her palms joined.
‘Lovingly, Pritha bestowed her blessings on Droupadi, endowed with beauty and auspicious marks and with a
pure disposition and good character. “As Indrani66 is to Harihaya,67 as Svaha68 is to Vibhavasu,69 as Rohini70 is
to Soma,71 as Damayanti is to Nala, as Bhadra72 is to Vaishravana,73 as Arundhati is to Vashishtha and as Lakshmi is to Narayana, so may you be to your husbands. O fortunate one! May you be the mother of long-lived and valorous sons. May you be happy. May you be fortunate and prosperous. May you be strict in your vows and a wife to
your husbands at the time of sacriﬁces. May you always pass your time serving your guests in the proper way—
holy men, the aged, the young and your seniors. May you be anointed queen, with the righteous king,74 in the
kingdom and the capital of Kurujangala. Let the entire earth be conquered by your immensely powerful husbands
and presented to Brahmanas in a great horse-sacriﬁce. O accomplished one! O treasure of all virtues! May all the
riches of the world belong to you. May you be happy for 100 autumns. O daughter-in-law! I bless you today on
seeing you in silken garments. I shall bless you again when you have given birth to a son with all the qualities.”
‘After the Pandavas had taken a wife, Hari75 sent them many golden ornaments, adorned with pearls and lapis
lazuli. Madhava76 also sent them expensive garments from many regions, blankets, deer skins, jewels that were
beautiful and soft, and expensive beds, seats, vehicles and vessels, adorned with diamonds and lapis lazuli. Krishna
also gave them thousands of young maidservants, adorned with ornaments, beautiful, accomplished and brought
from many regions, well trained, and tame elephants, many excellent and caparisoned horses and many chariots,
drawn by horses with large teeth and excellent colours, bedecked with golden cloth. And Madhusudana,77 whose
soul cannot be measured, also sent them in a separate heap crores of pure gold coins. In a desire to please
Govinda,78 Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, who was ﬁlled with pure joy, accepted all this.’

Section Fourteen
Viduragamana Parva
This parva has 174 shlokas and seven chapters.
Chapter 192: 29 shlokas
Chapter 193: 19 shlokas
Chapter 194: 25 shlokas
Chapter 195: 19 shlokas
Chapter 196: 28 shlokas
Chapter 197: 29 shlokas
Chapter 198: 25 shlokas
Agamana means arrival or coming and this parva is about Vidura’s arrival.
192

Vaishampayana said, ‘Then trusted spies brought the news to the kings that the beautiful and fortunate Droupadi
had got the Pandavas as her husbands and that the great-souled one who had strung the bow and had pierced the
target was Arjuna, greatest among those who are victorious and a mighty wielder of the bow and arrows. The
great-souled and strong one who had lifted up Shalya, the king of Madra, and had whirled him around and had
frightened all men in the ﬁght with a tree, himself without fear, was none other than Bhima, whose touch was terrible and who was the tormentor of armies of enemies. When they heard that Kunti’s and Pandu’s sons had assumed
the disguise of peaceful Brahmanas, those rulers of men were greatly surprised, because they had earlier heard that
Kunti and her sons had been burnt alive in the house of lac. Those rulers of men therefore regarded them1 as having been born again. Remembering the extremely cruel deed of Purochana, they cursed Bhishma and the Kourava
Dhritarashtra. When the svayamvara was over, all the kings learnt that the Pandavas had been chosen and returned
the way they had come.
‘On seeing that Arjuna, who was borne by white horses, had been chosen by Droupadi, King Duryodhana was
very depressed and returned with his brothers, Ashvatthama, his maternal uncle,2 Karna and Kripa. Full of shame,
Duhshasana softly spoke to him, “O king! If Dhananjaya3 had not been disguised as a Brahmana, he would never
have succeeded in obtaining Droupadi. No one recognized him because of that. I think destiny is supreme and human endeavours are fruitless. O brother! Cursed be our human endeavours when the Pandavas are still alive.”
Thus, talking to one another and blaming Purochana, they entered Hastinapura, miserable and downcast. They
were frightened and all their resolutions disappeared when they discovered that the immensely powerful sons of
Pritha4 had escaped the ﬁre and were allied with Drupada. They thought of Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi and all the
other sons of Drupada, all skilled in the art of war.
‘On learning that Droupadi had chosen the Pandavas and that Dhritarashtra’s sons had returned in shame, their
pride broken, Vidura was very happy. O lord of the people! The kshatta went to Dhritarashtra and said in great
wonder, “The Kurus5 are prospering from good fortune.” O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing this
from Vidura, Dhritarashtra, the son of Vichitravirya, was overjoyed and exclaimed, “What great fortune!” In his
ignorance, the king of men, who only possessed the eyesight of knowledge, had thought that Droupadi had chosen
his eldest son, Duryodhana. He ordered that many ornaments be made for Droupadi and sent word to his son Dury-

odhana that Krishna6 should be brought in. It was then that Vidura told him that the Pandavas had been chosen,
that those warriors were all in good health and that they had been duly honoured by Drupada. They had many allies and relatives now, with large armies.
‘Dhritarashtra said, “Pandu’s sons are dearer to me than they were to Pandu. O Vidura! My joy is greater, now
that I know that those brave Pandavas are in good health, with friends. O kshatta! Which king, deprived of fortune
on earth and in search of power, would not desire to have an alliance with Drupada and his relatives?”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘When the king uttered such words, Vidura replied, “O king! May this intelligence of
yours last for a hundred years.” O ruler of the people! Then Duryodhana and Radha’s son7 came to Dhritarashtra
and told him, “We cannot speak in Vidura’s presence. We wish to speak to you in private. What do you want to do
now? O father! Do you take the prosperity of your rivals to be that of your own? O supreme among men! You applauded them before the kshatta. O one who is unblemished! You act one way when another needs to be done. O
father! We must always act in a way so as to weaken their strength. The time has come for us to counsel one another, so that they8 do not swallow us up, with our sons, armies and relatives.”’
193

‘Dhritarashtra said, “I myself have the worries that you do. But I do not wish to reveal my attitude to Vidura.
Therefore, I particularly praised their qualities, so that Vidura does not know my true wishes, even through a gesture. This is the time. O Suyodhana!9 Tell me what you think. O Radheya!10 You also tell me what you think.”
‘Duryodhana said, “Let us now use skilled and able Brahmanas who have our trust to create conﬂict among the
Pandavas, between the sons of Kunti and the sons of Madri. Or let us tempt King Drupada, his sons and all his advisers with large presents of wealth so that they abandon Kunti’s son, King Yudhishthira. Or let them11 individually be told how difﬁcult it is to live here,12 so that the Pandavas decide to live there,13 away from us. Or let artful
and skilled men create dissension among the sons of Pritha.14 Or let them15 incite Krishna16 against them. That
should be easy, because they are many.17 Let the Pandavas be dissatisﬁed with her, and she with them. O king! Let
artful and skilled men secretly bring about Bhimasena’s death. He is the strongest among them. O king! When he
is dead, they will lose their enterprise and their energy. Without him, they will no longer wish for the kingdom, because he is their only support. Arjuna is invincible in battle as long as he is supported from the back by
Vrikodara.18 Without him, Phalguna19 is not even worth a fourth of Radheya20 in battle. With Bhimasena dead,
they will know their great weakness and knowing our great strength, the feeble ones will perish. O king! If the
sons of Pritha come here and submit themselves to our desires, we can conﬁdently destroy them. Or, one after another, we can seduce them with pretty women so that Krishna21 is disenchanted with Kunti’s sons. Or we can send
Radheya to bring them here and on the way here, get them killed through an attack by dacoits whom we trust. Employ, without delay, whichever of these strategies seems to you to be faultless. Time passes. As long as their conﬁdence in King Drupada, who is like a bull, is not established, until then, we can succeed. But not afterwards. O father! These are my views. We should suppress them. O Radheya! What do you think? Are these views good or
bad?”’
194

‘Karna said, “O Duryodhana! In my view, your opinions are not distinguished by wisdom. O extender of the Kuru
lineage! The Pandavas cannot be overcome through trickery. O brave warrior! In the past, you have used subtle
tricks to suppress them, but you did not succeed. O king! Then they lived near you and were children who had not
developed friends and allies. But you could not hold them down. They now live far away and have grown up. They
have developed friends and allies. It is my ﬁrm conviction that Kunti’s sons cannot be injured through trickery.
Nor can they be subjugated through vices, because they are protected by fate. They desire to have the kingdom of
their fathers and grandfathers back. We can’t injure them through such means. It is impossible to create dissension
among them. It is impossible to create dissension among those who have taken a common wife. Nor will we suc-

ceed in alienating Krishna22 from them. She chose them in a time of adversity and they are now prosperous.
Women have a quality that they desire many husbands. Krishna has got this and can’t be alienated. The king of
Panchala23 is virtuous and does not crave for riches. Even if we give him our entire kingdom, it is certain that he
will not desert the sons of Kunti. His son24 also has all the good qualities and is attached to the Pandavas. Therefore, I do not think that any subtle strategy that you think of will ever be able to injure them.
‘“O bull among men! But today, this is what is good and advisable for us. O lord of the earth! The Pandavas can
be struck down as long as they have not established their roots. O lord! Agree to smite them with arms. As long as
our side is strong and that of the Panchalas is weak, we should strike them with arms, without hesitation. O son of
Gandhari! Strike them with arms quickly and with valour, before their chariots, their friends and their relatives
gather. O king! Display your valour before the king of Panchala and his immensely brave son decide to take action.
Show your valour before Varshneya25 arrives with his Yadava army to restore the Pandavas to their kingdom. O
ruler of the earth! Riches, diverse objects of pleasure, kingdoms—there is nothing that Krishna will not sacriﬁce
for the sake of the Pandavas. The great-souled Bharata26 acquired the earth through his valour. The slayer of
Paka27 obtained lordship of the three worlds through his valour. O lord of the earth! Valour is always praised
among Kshatriyas. O bull among kings! Valour is the natural dharma of those who are brave. O king! Therefore,
without any more delay, let us defeat Drupada with a large army with four components28 and bring the Pandavas
here. The Pandavas cannot be defeated through conciliation, gifts or dissension. Therefore, vanquish them with
your valour. O ruler of men! After defeating them through your valour, rule over the extensive earth. I do not see
any other way of accomplishing our objective.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing Radheya’s words, the immensely powerful Dhritarashtra praised him and said,
“O son of a suta! You are blessed with great wisdom and are skilled in the use of weapons. Such words that speak
of valour are worthy of you. But let Bhishma, Drona, Vidura and the two of you consult each other and arrive at a
course of action that is the best for our welfare.” Thereupon, the immensely famous King Dhritarashtra summoned
all his advisers and consulted them.’
195

‘Bhishma said, “I will never agree to a war with Pandu’s sons. There is no doubt that Pandu was as dear to me as
Dhritarashtra is. To me, the sons of Gandhari are like the sons of Kunti. O Dhritarashtra! They must be protected
as much by me as by you. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Like they are to me and the king,29 they should be
the same way to Duryodhana and the other sons of Kuru. Therefore, I can never favour a war with them. Have a
treaty with those warriors and give them land. For those best of the Kurus,30 there is no doubt that this is the kingdom of their fathers and grandfathers. O Duryodhana! Just as you consider this kingdom to be your parental property, the Pandavas also see it as their paternal property. If the Pandavas, who practise austerities, cannot get this
kingdom, how can it be yours or of anyone from the Bharata lineage? O bull among the Bharatas! If you think that
you have acquired this kingdom through what is right, I think that they rightfully think that they obtained the kingdom before you. O tiger among men! Peacefully give them half of the kingdom. That will be the best for everyone.
If you act in any other way, no good will come out of it. There is no doubt that you will be covered in dishonour.
‘“Try to preserve your good reputation. A good reputation is the source of supreme strength. It is said that a man
who has lost his reputation, lives in vain. O son of Gandhari! O descendant of Kuru! As long as a man’s good reputation lasts, he does not die. He is destroyed when his good reputation is lost. Therefore, follow the dharma that is
worthy of the Kuru lineage. O one with mighty arms! Act as your ancestors have acted before you. It is fortunate
that those warriors are alive. It is fortunate that Pritha is alive. It is fortunate that the evil Purochana himself perished, without being successful. O son of Gandhari! From the time I heard what had happened to the sons of Kunti,
I was not able to look at any living being. O tiger among men! People do not think Purochana as guilty as they
think you. O king! Therefore, the escape of the Pandavas from that destruction and their reappearance is something
that should be wished for. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Know that as long as those warriors are alive, the
wielder of the vajra31 himself cannot deprive them of their paternal property, because they are established in dhar-

ma and are united. They have been deprived of an equal share in the kingdom through adharma. If you wish to act
in accordance with dharma, if you wish to do that which pleases me, if you wish to do that which is good, give
them half.”’
196

‘Drona said, “O king! It has been heard that Dhritarashtra’s friends who have been summoned for consultation
should always speak that which is right and true and brings fame. My views are the same as those of the greatsouled Bhishma. Let Kunti’s sons have a share in the kingdom. That is eternal dharma. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Send a soft-spoken man to Drupada. Let him carry many riches for them. Let him carry many expensive
presents with him. Let him speak to him32 in good fortune that comes about because of this alliance. O king! O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Let him repeatedly tell Drupada and Dhrishtadyumna that both you and Duryodhana are extremely pleased with what has happened. Let him say that this alliance is appropriate and pleasing. Let
him repeatedly pacify the sons of Kunti and the sons of Madri. O king of kings! On your command, let him present
Droupadi with many brilliant and golden ornaments. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Let presents also be given
to all the sons of Drupada and appropriate ones to all the Pandavas and Kunti. Thus pacifying Drupada and the
Pandavas, he should immediately propose their return.33 When those warriors receive the permission to return, let
Duhshasana and Vikarna34 go to receive them with a magniﬁcent army. O best of kings! Let the sons of Pandu always be treated by you with honour. As desired by the people, let them be instated in their ancestral kingdom. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! Bhishma and I believe that this should be your conduct towards the
Pandavas, who are like your own sons.”
‘Karna said, “These two35 have always been sustained, in all their actions, through your riches and your honour.
What can be more surprising than that they should now offer advice that is not for your own good? How can the
wise accept advice that is apparently good, rendered by a man with malice in his heart, though he hides his true intentions? In times of adversity, friends can neither do that which is good, nor that which is harmful. A man’s misery or happiness depends on destiny alone. A wise one, a fool, an old man, a child, one who has friends and one
who has none ﬁnds anything anywhere. We have heard that in earlier times, there was a king named Ambuvicha.
He was the king in Rajagriha and ruled over Magadha. He was a king who had no abilities. All that he did was to
breathe air in and out. All his affairs were in the hands of his ministers. He had a minister named Mahakarni, who
became the sole lord and thanks to the authority he had obtained, began to dishonour the king. That fool appropriated for himself everything that belonged to the king—his objects of desire, his women, his jewels, his riches and
all his power. But having obtained all this, his avarice only increased and having appropriated everything else, he
coveted the kingdom. We have heard that the king had no abilities, he only breathed air. But despite this, and despite all his attempts, he36 could not take the kingdom away from him.37 O lord of the people! There was no human endeavour in him.38 The kingdom was his through destiny. If this kingdom is yours through destiny, it will
remain with you without a doubt, notwithstanding the enmity of all the worlds. But if ordained otherwise, it will
never remain with you, no matter how much you try. You are learned. Therefore, remembering all this, judging the
honesty and dishonesty of your advisers, weigh the advice of those who have spoken for the good and those who
have spoken for evil.”
‘Drona said, “We know that you say this out of malice and the reasons for that. You are wicked and to bring injury to the Pandavas, you ﬁnd fault with us. O Karna! Know that what I have said is for the supreme welfare of
everyone, for the propagation of the Kuru lineage. If you think this leads to evil, tell us that which brings supreme
welfare. If my advice, leading to the supreme welfare I have described, is not followed, it is my opinion that the
lineage of the Kurus will soon be destroyed.”’
197

‘Vidura said, “O king! There is no doubt that your friends have spoken that which brings your greatest welfare. But
words do not remain with those who are unwilling to listen. O king! Bhishma, the son of Shantanu and supreme
among the Kurus, has spoken that which is for your greatest welfare. But you do not accept it. In many ways,

Drona also said that which is for your welfare. But Karna, the son of Radha, does not believe this to be good for
you. O king! After thinking about it, I do not ﬁnd anyone who is a better friend to you than these two39 lions
among men, supreme in their wisdom. These two are old in age, in wisdom and in their knowledge of the sacred
texts. O lord over kings! They regard the sons of Pandu with equal eyes. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O
king! There is no doubt that in virtue and truthfulness, they are not inferior to Rama, the son of Dasharatha, or
Gaya.40 Never before have they given you bad advice. Nor have they ever done that which brings you injury.
Therefore, why should these tigers among men, whose strength comes from their truthfulness, give you advice that
is not for your welfare? O ruler of men! These best of men are known in this world for their wisdom. They will
never give you bad advice, nor say that which is wicked. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! It is my ﬁrm conviction that these two, well versed in what is right, will not take either side for the sake of personal gain. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! I consider this to bring the greatest welfare to you. O king! There is no doubt that the Pandavas are your sons, as Duryodhana and the others are.
‘“Therefore, those advisers who unwisely advise you against them, don’t really have your interests at heart. O
king! If you have partiality in your heart,41 it is certain it does you no good to encourage your inner feelings. O
king! Therefore, I certainly do not think that those two great-souled and illustrious ones have said anything that
leads to evil. However, you are not inclined towards that. O tiger among men! What those bulls among men have
said about their42 invincibility is quite true. May you be fortunate. O king! Can the handsome Pandava,
Savyasachi Dhananjaya,43 ever be vanquished in battle by Maghavan44 himself? Can the great Bhimasena, with
strong arms and the strength of 10,000 elephants, ever be vanquished in battle by the gods? Can anyone who wishes to live vanquish in battle the twins,45 well skilled in battle and like the sons of Yama himself? How can the eldest Pandava, in whom patience, compassion, mercy, truthfulness and valour are always present, ever be vanquished in war? With Rama46 on their side, Janardana47 as their adviser and Satyaki as their supporter, is there
anyone whom they have not already vanquished in battle? Drupada is their father-in-law. Drupada’s son, Parshata
Dhrishtadyumna and his other brave brothers are their brothers-in-law. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Knowing that they cannot be vanquished and knowing that their claim to the kingdom is prior to yours, you must
act towards them in accordance with dharma.
‘“O king! On account of the act of Purochana, you have been stained by great infamy. You must cleanse yourself
of that by behaving kindly towards them. O king! We have earlier waged a great war with King Drupada. Our side
will be strengthened if we can get him as an ally. O ruler of the people! The Dasharhas48 are powerful and numerous. They will be where Krishna is. And where Krishna is, victory will certainly be there. O king! Unless cursed
by destiny, who seeks to obtain through war that which can be obtained through conciliation? O king! Having
heard that Pritha’s49 sons are alive, the inhabitants of the city and the country are extremely happy and eager to
see them. Do what is pleasing to them. Duryodhana, Karna and Shakuni, the son of Subala, are evil, foolish and
young. Do not listen to their words. O king endowed with all the qualities! Long ago, I told you that this kingdom
and its subjects will be destroyed through Duryodhana’s fault.”’
198

‘Dhritarashtra said, “Shantanu’s son, the learned Bhishma, the illustrious rishi Drona and you yourself have spoken
the truth and that which is best for me. There is no doubt that since those maharathas, the sons of Kunti, are the
sons of Pandu, they are also my sons according to dharma. Since my sons are entitled to this kingdom, there is no
doubt that Pandu’s sons are also entitled to this kingdom. O kshatta!50 Go and honourably bring them51 and their
mother here. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Also bring with them Krishna52 of divine beauty. It is through
good fortune that the sons of Pritha are alive. It is through good fortune that Pritha is alive. It is through good fortune that those maharathas have obtained Drupada’s daughter. It is through good fortune that our strength has increased. It is through good fortune that Purochana is dead. O greatly radiant one! It is through good fortune that
my great grief has been dispelled.”’

Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thereupon, on Dhritarashtra’s command, Vidura
went to Yajnasena53 and the Pandavas. O king! Having gone there, that righteous man, learned in all the shastras,
addressed Drupada appropriately and waited on him. He54 too received Vidura in the appropriate way and they
courteously asked about each other’s welfare. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He55 saw there the Pandavas
and Vasudeva.56 He embraced them lovingly and asked about their welfare. One after another, they worshipped
Vidura, who was immensely wise. O king! On Dhritarashtra’s instructions, he repeatedly and affectionately asked
Pandu’s sons about their welfare. O lord of the people! He then gave the Pandavas, Kunti, Droupadi and Drupada’s
sons the many jewels and other riches that had been sent by the Kouravas through him.
‘In the presence of the Pandavas and Keshava,57 the supremely wise Vidura then addressed Drupada in modest
words of affection. “O king! Listen to my words with your sons and ministers. Dhritarashtra, his sons, his ministers and his relatives have repeatedly and happily enquired about your welfare. O lord of men! He is delighted with
this alliance with you. The immensely wise Bhishma, the son of Shantanu, and all the other Kouravas have enquired about your welfare in every way. The great archer Drona, the son of Bharadvaja and your beloved friend,
has enquired about your welfare, embracing you. O king of Panchala! Dhritarashtra and all the other Kouravas regard themselves as fortunate at this alliance with you. O Yajnasena! This alliance with you has given them greater
pleasure than acquiring a new kingdom.
‘“O lord! Knowing all this, you must allow the Pandavas to depart. The Kurus are extremely eager to see Pandu’s sons. These bulls among men have been away from home for a long time. They and Pritha must be eager to
see their city. All the chief women of the Kuru lineage and all the inhabitants of the city and the country are waiting to see the Panchala princess, Krishna. O illustrious one! It is my view that without any more delay, you should
issue instructions for the Pandavas to go there58 with their wife. O king! When the great-souled Pandavas have got
your permission, I shall send word to Dhritarashtra through swift messengers, and the sons of Kunti can leave,
with Kunti and Krishna.”’

Section Fifteen
Rajya-labha Parva
This parva has a single chapter and there are only ﬁfty shlokas. Rajya-labha means the acquisition of the kingdom.
199

‘Drupada said, “O greatly learned Vidura! It is indeed as you have told me now. O lord! I am also greatly delighted
at the alliance that we have just concluded. It is proper that these great-souled brothers should now return home.
But it is not proper that I should say this myself, in my own words. If that is what the brave Yudhishthira, son of
Kunti, Bhimasena and Arjuna, the twins,1 who are bulls among men, and Rama2 and Krishna, learned in the precepts of the law, desire, then the Pandavas should go there. Those two tigers among men3 are always engaged in
that which is good for them.”4
‘Yudhishthira said, “O king! My followers and I are now dependent on you. We will do that which you tell us is
for our own good.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘At that, Vasudeva said, “I am of the view that they should go. But we must go by what
King Drupada, who knows everything about the law, suggests.” Drupada replied, “Having thought about all the
circumstances, my views are in agreement with what the mighty-armed and valiant Dasharha,5 supreme among
men, thinks. The time is right. There is no doubt that the greatly fortunate sons of Kunti, the sons of Pandu, are
now as dear to me as they are to Vasudeva himself. Yudhishthira, Kunti’s son and the son of Dharma, himself does
not seek their welfare as much as Keshava, tiger among men, does.” Then the great-souled Drupada gave them
leave to depart. The Pandavas, Krishna and the extremely wise Vidura took with them Droupadi Krishna and the
illustrious Kunti, and with pleasure and a leisurely pace, travelled towards the city of Hastinapura.6
‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing that the warriors were coming, Kourava Dhritarashtra sent the
Kouravas to receive the Pandavas—the great archer Vikarna, Chitrasena, the supreme archer Drona and Kripa, the
son of Goutama. Then, surrounded by them, the maharatha and radiant warriors slowly entered the city of Hastinapura, their resplendence increasing. Those tigers among men were freed from their grief and sorrow. The city became radiant with wonder. Dear to the hearts of the people, the Pandavas heard loud exclamations from the citizens, always eager to do what was dear to them.7 “The tiger among men, the one of righteous conduct,8 has returned. He always protected us with the rule of law, as if we were his near relatives. It seems without doubt as if
the great King Pandu, who loved the forest, has returned today from the forest, to do that which pleases us and is
good for our welfare. Can there be any greater joy for us, now that the brave sons of Kunti have returned to the
city? If we have given alms and sacriﬁcial offerings, if we have performed austerities, let the Pandavas remain in
the city for a hundred autumns.” They9 worshipped the feet of Dhritarashtra, Bhishma and others who deserved it,
and asking about the welfare of everyone in the city, entered the place earmarked for them at Dhritarashtra’s
command.
‘When those immensely strong and great souls had rested for some time, they were summoned by King Dhritarashtra and the son of Shantanu.10 Dhritarashtra said, “O son of Kunti!11 Listen with your brothers to what I
have to say. So that strife does not arise again, go to Khandavaprastha. No one can harm you there, if you are pro-

tected there by Partha, as the thirty gods are by the wielder of the vajra.12 Go to Khandavaprastha and take half the
kingdom.” Those bulls among men accepted the king’s words and saluting everyone set out for that terrible forest.
Having received half the kingdom, they entered Khandavaprastha.
‘With Krishna leading them, the invincible Pandavas went there and made it as beautiful a place as heaven. Led
by Dvaipayana, the maharathas selected a pure and holy place, performed propitiatory ceremonies and measured
out the land for a city. It was surrounded by moats as wide as the ocean and walls that rose high up into the sky. It
was white like the clouds and like snow-covered mountains. This greatest of cities was as resplendent as
Bhogavati13 of the nagas. It was protected by terrible double-doored gates that were like two-winged Garudas.
The high towers were like dense clouds, like many Mandara mountains. It was well covered with many weapons,
with sharp spears and javelins like double-tongued snakes and impenetrable to the weapons of enemies. The splendid and spiralling turrets were guarded by warriors and well stocked with weapons of attack. There were many
sharp hooks and shataghnis14 and other weapons of war. Great iron chakras adorned that best of cities. The streets
were wide and well laid out, preventing collisions among large chariots. It shone with many beautiful white mansions. Like a mass of dense clouds circled by lightning and reﬂecting the image of heaven, it came to be known as
Indraprastha.
‘“In that lovely and beautiful place was the dwelling of the Kouravas.15 It was full of every kind of treasure,
like the palace of the treasurer16 himself. O king! Brahmanas, the best of those who knew all the Vedas, went
there. It was a desired habitation for those who knew all the tongues. Desiring to earn wealth, many merchants
from every direction went there. Desirous of living there, came many artisans of every craft. Lovely gardens surrounded the city, with amras,17amratakas,18nipas,19
ashokas,20champakas,21punnagas,22nagapushpas,23lakuchas,24panasas,25 shalas,26talas,27kadambas,28bakulas29 and ketakas.30 These trees were beautiful, full of ﬂowers, and bent down with the burden of their fruit. Amlokas,31lodhras,32 blossoming ankolas,33jambus,34patalas,35kubjakas,36atimuktakas,37karaviras,38parijatas39
and many other kinds of trees were there, always adorned with ﬂowers and fruit and swarming with many different
kinds of birds. There echoed the calls of frenzied peacocks and delighted cuckoos. There were houses that were as
white as mirrors and bowers full of creepers. There were artiﬁcial hillocks designed to bring pleasure. There were
ponds ﬁlled with clear water and charming lakes that were fragrant with lotuses and water lilies and adorned with
many swans, geese and chakravaka40 birds. The beautiful ponds were surrounded by many trees and there were
many beautiful and large tanks.
‘O great king! Living in that large kingdom populated by holy people, the joy of the Pandavas continued to increase eternally. Thus, because of the righteous conduct of Bhishma and the king,41 the Pandavas came to live in
Khandavaprastha. With the ﬁve great archers,42 each like an Indra, that best of cities was adorned like Bhogavati
of the nagas. O king! Having settled them there and taking the consent of the Pandavas, the brave Keshava, with
Rama,43 then went to Dvaravati.’44

The second volume will recount Arjuna’s banishment, Subhadra’s marriage
to Arjuna, the burning of the Khandava forest, the building of a magniﬁcent
assembly hall for the Pandavas, the conquest of the world by the Pandavas,
the slayings of Jarasandha and Shishupala and then the game with dice,
leading ﬁnally to the banishment of the Pandavas.

Acknowledgements
Carving time out from one’s regular schedule and work engagements to embark on such a mammoth work of translation has been difﬁcult. The past
tense should not be used, since only 10 per cent of the road has yet been traversed. Sometimes, I wish I had been born in nineteenth-century Bengal,
with a benefactor funding me for doing nothing but this. But alas, the days
of gentlemen of leisure are long over. The time could not be carved out
from professional engagements, barring of course assorted television channels, who must have wondered why I have been so reluctant to head for
their studios in the evenings. It was ascribed to health, interpreted as adverse health. It was certainly health, but not in an adverse sense. Reading
the Mahabharata is good for one’s mental health and is an activity to be recommended, without any statutory warnings. The time was stolen in the
evenings and over weekends. The cost was therefore borne by one’s immediate family, and to a lesser extent by friends. Socializing was reduced,
since every dinner meant one less chapter done. The family has ﬁrst claim
on the debt, though I am sure it also has claim on whatever merits are due.
At least Suparna does, and these volumes are therefore dedicated to her. I
suspect Sirius has no claim on the merits, though he has been remarkably
patient at the times when he has been curled up near my feet and I have
been translating away. There is some allegory there about a dog keeping
company when the Mahabharata is being read and translated.
Most people have thought I was mad, even if they never quite said that.
Among those who believed and thought it was worthwhile, beyond immediate family, are Ashok Desai, Pratap Bhanu Mehta and Laveesh Bhandari.
And my sons, Nihshanka and Vidroha. I know I didn’t run the translations

by you ﬁrst. I wanted you to wait for the ﬁnal product. But thank you for
believing that I would be able to do it. Incidentally, I wouldn’t have been
able to do it without Vaman Shivram Apte. When he compiled the student’s
Sanskrit dictionary more than a hundred years ago in Pune, I am certain he
had no idea that it would be used so comprehensively to translate the
Mahabharata.
Penguin also believed. My initial hesitation about being able to deliver
was brushed aside by R. Sivapriya, who pushed me after the series had been
commissioned. And then Sumitra Srinivasan became the editor and the enthusiasm of these two was so infectious that everything just snowballed.
Sumitra claims she doesn’t know much about Indian mythology. This was
just as well, because she kept raising so many irritating questions about the
copy that we have ended up with a much better product from the point of
view of the lay reader. If the ﬁrst volume is so clean and clear editorially,
the reader must realize that this isn’t quite the product I produced. This is
the outcome of a Sumitra Srinivasan editorial churning.
When I ﬁrst embarked on what was also a personal voyage of sorts, the
end was never in sight and seemed to stretch to inﬁnity. Now that 10 per
cent is over (and 10 per cent more is in the pipeline), the horizon can be
seen. And all the people mentioned above have had a role to play in this
journey.

1 Brahmana is a text and also the word used for the highest caste.
2 A class of religious and philosophical texts that are composed in the forest, or are meant to be studied when one retires to the forest.
3 The six Vedangas are shiksha (articulation and pronunciation), chhanda
(prosody), vyakarana (grammar), nirukta (etymology), jyotisha (astronomy)
and kalpa (rituals).
4 Religion, duty.
5 Wealth. But in general, any object of the senses.
6 Desire.
7 Release from the cycle of rebirth.
9 Krishna or Krishnaa is another name for Droupadi.

1 The word !‘jaya’ means victory and was also the title of an original and shorter version of the Mahabharata.
So this invocation, which is not part of the main text, can be interpreted in two different ways—a literal uttering of
the word ‘victory’ or a recital of the Mahabharata.
2 Nara and Narayana were ancient sages, invariably referred to together. But Narayana eventually came to be
identiﬁed with Vishnu (hence Krishna) and Nara with Arjuna.
3 Head or chief. But in this context, a sage who feeds and teaches 10,000 students.
4 A sacred forest.
5 A suta was the son of a Kshatriya father and a Brahmana mother and by profession sutas were charioteers. But
they were also bards and raconteurs.
6 The Puranas are sacred texts, composed by the sage Vyasadeva. There are eighteen major Puranas.
7 Arjuna’s grandson and Abhimanyu’s son.
8 Vedavyasa or Vyasadeva, thus named because he classiﬁed the Vedas. Vedavyasa or Vyasadeva is a title and
there has been more than one sage with such a title. This particular Vedavyasa’s name was Krishna Dvaipayana:
Krishna because he was dark in complexion and Dvaipayana because he was born on an island (dvipa).
9 Meaning the ﬁrst three castes: Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas. Twice-born (dvija) is also used speciﬁcally for Brahmanas, the second birth referring to the donning of the sacred thread. The ﬁrst three castes were all entitled to this right.
10 Sages with knowledge of the supreme being (brahman).
11 Sacred texts, four in number: Rig Veda, Sama Veda, Yajur Veda and Atharva Veda.
12 Sacred texts.
13 Ruler, master, lord. Ishana is a name for Shiva, Vishnu, even the sun. But here, the general meaning is
intended.
14 The word brahman or paramatman refers to the supreme spirit and should not be confused with Brahmana,
though they have the same etymological root.
15 Class of gods.
16 Royal sages. Brahmarshis were of the Brahmana caste. Rajarshis were Kshatriyas, but obtained the status of
being a sage (rishi) through their learning.
17 Union between the human soul and the supreme being.
18 Knowledge obtained through self-realization.
19 Sacred texts in the category of revelation.
20 Collections of sacred texts, particularly in verse form, speciﬁcally the Vedas.
21 Bhishma.
22 That is, impregnated Vichitravirya’s wife.
23 Death.
24 Krishna’s name, as the son of Vasudeva.
25 These are two (Asita and Devala) ancient sages, whose names always occur together.
26 A semi-divine species, singers and musicians of the gods.
27 Nakula and Sahadeva.
28 Kunti.
29 Kunti and Madri.
30 Indra.
31 Those in the celibate stage of life.

32 Arjuna.
33 Droupadi.
34 Yudhishthira.
35 A great sacriﬁce, at the time of coronation, when other kings and princes pay tribute and accept the superiority of the crowned universal monarch.
36 Shishupala.
37 Droupadi.
38 Krishna and Balarama.
39 Shakuni.
40 A Brahmana who has ﬁnished his period of study and celibacy (brahmacharya) and is about to enter (or just
entered) the householder stage (garhasthya) is known as a snataka.
41 Yudhishthira.
42 Kubera.
43 Yudhishthira.
44 Virata.
45 A large army with 21,870 chariots, 21,870 elephants, 65,610 horses and 109,350 foot soldiers.
46 This is a reference to the ﬁfth incarnation of Vishnu, when in the form of a vamana (dwarf), he had humbled
the demon king Bali.
47 Krishna.
48 Kunti.
49 Dronacharya.
50 Instead of tens of thousands, this can also be translated as many.
51 Warriors from the Panchala region.
52 Venus, also a sage.
53 The sun.
54 There was a hierarchy of warriors. Maharatha can loosely be translated as great warrior. However, more
speciﬁcally, a maharatha was a warrior who could take on ten thousand warriors single-handed.
55 Warriors who had taken an oath never to withdraw from the ﬁeld of battle.
56 Abhimanyu.
57 Drona.
58 Jayadratha.
59 Arjuna.
60 Satyaki.
61 Arjuna.
62 Ashvatthama.
63 Shalya.
64 Jayadratha.
65 Indra was the king of the gods. The celestial spear (shakti) was given by Indra to Karna, though Karna is not
mentioned by name in this shloka. The next shloka is explicit.
66 Krishna.
67 Arjuna.

68 Karna.
69 Ashvatthama.
70 Ashvatthama.
71 Shalya.
72 Shakuni.
73 That is, circuits of the club.
74 Ashvatthama.
75 Droupadi was Drupada’s daughter and Drupada was the king of Panchala.
76 Ashvatthama.
77 Uttara.
78 Akshouhinis.
79 Sanjaya.
80 Indra.
81 Nishada means hunter.
82 Earth, water, energy, wind and sky.
83Sattva, rajas and tamas.
84 Literally, history. More speciﬁcally, the two epics.
85 Though sacred texts, the Vedas have been personiﬁed here.
86 Reference here is to Krishna Dvaipayana (Vedavyasa).

1 A very holy region, identiﬁed with the area around Kurukshetra.
2 Two of the four yugas or eras, the four being satya (krita), treta, dvapara and kali.
3 Reference is to Parashurama.
4 Parashurama’s paternal grandfather.
5 Ashvatthama.
6 Kritavarma.
7 Kripacharya.
8 The supreme soul, the brahman or the paramatman.
9 These numbers are not part of the text. They have been added so that the reader can get a better sense of the
one hundred books.
10 The burning of the house of lac.
11 The killing of Baka.
12 Droupadi.
13 The wedding.
14 The arrival of Vidura.
15 Winning of the kingdom.
16 Arjuna’s sojourn in the forest.
17 The abduction of Subhadra.
18 The burning of Khandava forest.
19 Assembly hall.
20 When the council meets.
21 The killing of Jarasandha.
22 Conquest.
23 Royal sacriﬁce.
24 Offerings or gifts.
25 The slaying of Shishupala.
26 The game of dice.
27 The sequel to the game of dice.
28 Characterizing the forest.
29 The slaying of Kirmira.
30 Shiva.
31 The travel to the world of Indra.
32 The killing of Jatasura.
33 War of the yakshas.
34 Boa constrictor.
35 Named after a sage known as Markandeya.
36 Travel with the cattle.
37 Dream of the deer.
38 The abduction of Droupadi.
39 Jarasandha.

40 The theft of the earrings.
41Arani is a wood or stick used for kindling a sacred ﬁre and this parva is named after that.
42 Virata was the king of the Matsya kingdom and the Pandavas lived there in exile.
43 The slaying of Kichaka.
44 The stealing of cattle.
45 Endeavour.
46 The arrival of Sanjaya.
47 Sleeplessness at night.
48 An arrival in search of peace.
49 Krishna.
50Niryanana means departure or exit.
51 One of the seven continents (dvipa) that surround Mount Meru. Sometimes, the number of continents is also
given as eighteen. But seven is more standard. The word dvipa also means island. But here, it has been used in the
alternative meaning, a division of the terrestrial world.
52 The slaying of Abhimanyu.
53 Oath.
54 The slaying of Jayadratha.
55 The slaying of Ghatotkacha.
56 Named after Karna.
57 Named after Shalya.
58 Duel of the clubs.
59 The word souptika means something connected with sleep and the name is a reference to the fact that the
protagonists were asleep and the incidents took place at night.
60 Named after the aishika weapon.
61 Offering of water.
62 Women.
63Shraddha means funeral rites.
64 Peace.
65 Concerning clubs.
66 The great departure.
67 Ascent to heaven.
68 The lineage of Hari.
69 Concerning the future. The Harivamsha is usually accepted as an appendix to the Mahabharata, but not what
is referred to as Bhavishya parva. Bhavishya parva is what is known as Bhavishya Purana, one of the eighteen major Puranas. Barring this reference, Bhavishya parva is not part of the Mahabharata. Consequently, it doesn’t ﬁnd a
mention in Section 1’s listing either.
70 Indra’s horse, which emerged as a result of the churning of the ocean.
71 This is the sixth parva, listed as the descent of the ﬁrst generation. After this, one loses the matching between
the eighteen-parva classiﬁcation and the 100-parva classiﬁcation, since the text now sticks to the eighteen-parva
classiﬁcation.
72 One may loosely use the word demon for both daitya and danava, but daityas are descendants of Diti and
danavas are descendants of Danu.

73 Nagas are not snakes. Snakes are sarpas. Nagas can perhaps be translated as serpents. Unlike snakes, nagas
can assume other forms (such as human) and live in separate geographical regions, not earth. They are also sometimes semi-divine. Sarpas live on earth.
74 Vichitravirya.
75 Arjuna.
76 A chataka or a peacock.
77 The critical version has 225 chapters.
78 Assembly hall.
79 Jarasandha was the king of Magadha and he had imprisoned the kings in his capital, Girivraja.
80 Yudhishthira.
81 Concerning the forest.
82 The ﬂower of the coral tree, one of the ﬁve trees in heaven.
83 Kartyavirya was the king of the Haihayas. This Rama is Parashurama, son of Jamadagni. Kartyavirya was
killed by Parashurama because he abducted Jamadagni’s sacred cow.
84 Nectar, beverage of the gods.
85 Arjuna.
86 Arjuna.
87 Arjuna.
88 Sacker of cities, Indra’s name.
89 The critical edition has 298 chapters.
90 A large tree that was believed to contain ﬁre inside it.
91 Bhima.
92 Arjuna.
93 Duryodhana.
94 The critical edition has 197 chapters.
95 In that parva.
96 Arjuna.
97 Arjuna’s name is Kiriti, meaning the diademed one.
98 Bhurishrava.
99 Vyasa.
100 The critical edition has 173 chapters.
101 Shalya. Shalya was Karna’s charioteer.
102 The critical edition has sixty-four chapters.
103 Pritha is Kunti’s name and the sons of Pritha are the Pandavas.
104 Ashvatthama.
105 Yadava warrior.
106 Dronacharya was sage Bharadvaja’s son and was the preceptor, while Ashvatthama was Dronacharya’s son.
Because he was Bharadvaja’s son, Dronacharya was known as Bhaaradvaja. The absence of diacritical marks
makes distinction between Bharadvaja (the father) and Bhaaradvaja (the son) difﬁcult, especially when we write
Bhaaradvaja as Bharadvaja to make the translation smooth. However, the context should make it clear whether
Bharadvaja or Bhaaradvaja is meant.

107 Arjuna. Phalguni and Phalguna are used synonymously.
108 Kunti.
109 Bhishma was on a bed of arrows when he told this.
110 The critical edition has 353 chapters.
111 The critical edition has 154 chapters.
112 By the Pandavas.
113 Arjuna’s.
114 Babhruvahana.
115 The critical edition has ninety-six chapters.
116 Kunti.
117 Vedavyasa.
118 The critical edition has forty-seven chapters.
119 Concerning clubs.
120 The men of the Vrishni lineage.
121 A kind of reed.
122 Balarama.
123 Krishna.
124 Krishna’s father. Vasudeva is Krishna’s father and therefore, Krishna is known as Vaasudeva. The absence
of diacritical marks makes distinction between Vasudeva and Vaasudeva difﬁcult, especially because Vaasudeva is
written as Vasudeva to make the translation smooth. However, the context should make it clear whether Vasudeva
(the father) or Vaasudeva (the son) is meant.
125 Krishna.
126 Balarama.
127 The genealogy of Hari.
128 The book of the future.
129 The Vedangas.
130 Earth, water, energy, wind and sky.
131 Those born alive from wombs, those born from eggs, those that are plants and those that are born from
sweat (insects).
132 Purana means ancient account or tale and there are eighteen great Puranas, each describing creation, destruction, different eras, genealogies and the histories of the solar and lunar dynasties.
133 Vedavyasa or Vyasadeva.
134 Place of pilgrimage near Ajmer.

1 The dog is referred to as sarameya, meaning progeny of Sarama. Sarama was the dog of the gods and the ancestor of all dogs.
2 An epithet signifying reverence.
3 Shrutashrava.
4 The sun-plant, more like a bush.
5 The twin physicians of the gods. They were sons of the sun.
6 Upamanyu.
7 Three hundred and sixty days.
8 The year.
9 The nave of the wheel is the year and the sum of 720 is obtained by adding 360 days and 360 nights.
10 The meaning is not clear and the number twenty probably represents the gap between solar days and lunar
days.
11 Twelve months or twelve signs of the zodiac.
12 The six seasons.
13 The ten cardinal points, including zenith (above) and nadir (below).
14 Upamanyu.
15 Ayoda-Dhoumya.
16 Upamanyu’s.
17 That is, the preceptor must receive payment (dakshina) after the successful completion of training and the
disciple must give it.
18 Funeral oblation.
19 Poushya.
20 By saying that it was unclean.
21 The word used is kshapanaka, which means not just any mendicant, but a Buddhist or a Jain one.
22 The word used now is sarpa, not naga. That is, these two words are being used synonymously here.
23 Airavata is Indra’s elephant. But this Airavata is a king of the nagas.
24 This is a different Dhritarashtra; another name for Airavata.
25 Takshaka’s son. Arjuna killed Ashvasena’s mother. In his search for revenge, Ashvasena entered Karna’s
weapon in an attempt to kill Arjuna, an attempt that failed.
26 Not to be confused with Janamejaya’s brother, who had the same name.
27 All these are salutations to Indra.
28 Demon killed by Indra.
29 Demon killed by Indra.
30 This is Indra’s horse Ucchaihshrava, which emerged from the churning of the ocean.
31 One of Indra’s names.
32 Utanka.
33 The god of rain, also Indra.
34 The god of ﬁre.
35 Takshaka killed Janamejaya’s father Parikshit. That was the reason Janamejaya undertook a sacriﬁce to destroy all serpents.
36 The sage Kashyapa, who tried to restrain Takshaka from killing Parikshit.

1 The numbering of chapters is sequential throughout the translation, instead of separate numbering of chapters
within sections. This is also the pattern followed in the critical edition.
2 Shounaka was descended from Bhrigu.
3 Wind-gods.
4 Agni.
5 The word means to be deprived of, or perishing.
6 That is, would devour anything.
7 Maintenance of the special ﬁre (Agni) and the offering of oblations to it.
8 Sacriﬁces or oblations in general.
9 Sacriﬁces on the day of the new moon.
10 Sacriﬁces on the day of the full moon.
11 There were originally thirty-three gods—eleven in heaven, eleven in the sky and eleven on earth. Another
way of getting the number is by adding twelve adityas, eleven rudras and ten vishvadevas.
12 Exclamations made at the time of offering oblations.
13 Oblations offered to ancestors.
14 Exclamations made at the time of offering oblations.
15 Brahma’s epithet.
16 An apsara. Apsaras are celestial maidens associated with Indra’s court. They are sometimes regarded as
wives of gandharvas.
17 Literally, the most beautiful.
18 Sthulakesha.
19 Star.
20 Better known as Uttaraphalguni.
21 Yama, who rules over death.
22 A snake that is not poisonous.
23 That is, non-poisonous.

1 The word prajapati means lord of the world and has different nuances. It is a name for Brahma. However,
those who were appointed by Brahma to rule over the worlds are also known as Prajapati. Accordingly, Daksha is
also known as Prajapati and the reference here is to Daksha.
2 The word used is yayavaras, an expression also used by Jaratkaru’s ancestors.
3 Vasuki is a great naga or serpent and is the king of the nagas. Vasuki was the rope when the ocean was
churned by the gods and the demons.
4 Kadru and Vinata were daughters of Daksha and were married to the sage Kashyapa. Kadru was the mother of
the snakes and as the story unfolds, we will learn that Kadru cursed her offspring because they did not side with
her in her rivalry with Vinata.
5 That is, Agni.
6 Vasuki.
7 Jaratkaru.
8 Janamejaya.
9 Daksha.
10 The son. Aruna is the red sky of dawn and is also the sun’s charioteer.
11 Vishnu.
12 The ocean.
13 Mythical beings with human bodies and heads of horses.
14 A yojana is a measure of distance and is equal to four kroshas. A yojana is between 13 and 15 kilometres.
15 Ananta literally means without end and is a name for the naga Shesha, on whom Vishnu rests, and who is Vasuki’s elder brother. Instructed by Vishnu or Narayana, Ananta uprooted Mandara.
16 Mandara.
17 In a loose sense, asuras and danavas are both demons. But asura is more of a general term and means the antithesis of suras or gods. Danavas are more speciﬁc demons, in the sense that they are the offspring of Danu.
Daityas are also speciﬁc demons, in the sense that they are the offspring of Diti.
18 Ucchaihshrava.
19 The sun.
20 The physician of the gods.
21 Mercury.
22 Narayana.
23 Rahu.
24 A discus.
25 The eclipses.
26 Vishnu.
27 The heads were adorned with gold ornaments.
28 Weapons had to be summoned with the power of the mind.
29 Vishnu’s discus.
30 Vishnu.
31 Vishnu.
32 Indra. Indra had killed a demon named Bala.
33 Someone wearing a crown or diadem. Kiriti is another name for Arjuna. In this context, it probably means
the god Nara.

34 Ucchaihshrava.
35 This should not cause confusion. The word Kourava is often used as opposite to Pandava. The Pandavas had
Pandu as their father. However, Kuru was a common ancestor to both brothers. Hence any Pandava, and anyone
descended from the Pandavas, can also be called Kourava.
36 Brahma.
37 Brahma.
38 The word used is timingila. A whale is a timi, a timingila is that which swallows whales.
39 The word used is makara. Since a makara is a mythical being, it is impossible to translate it satisfactorily.
But shark or crocodile is close enough.
40 Krishna’s conch.
41 Vishnu. This is a reference to Vishnu’s boar (varaha) incarnation.
42 Vishnu.
43 As will be evident, this really means the gods.
44 Agni.
45 Another name for Garuda, meaning the one with beautiful feathers.
46 Indra.
47 Indra’s wife.
48 The word means destroyer of cities.
49 The wind-god.
50 Drink of the gods.
51Muhurta.
52 Lunar days.
53 A kshana is a small interval of time, the time it takes for a twinkling of the eye and is equal to four-ﬁfths of a
second. A lava is even smaller, because it is one-sixth of a kshana.
54 The bright half of the lunar month.
55 The dark half of the lunar month. The term used in the text is bahula.
56 The daily increase or decrease in the size of the moon. A kala is the span of a zodiac sign divided by 1800.
So it is roughly around 1 minute, as in minutes and degrees. Measured in time, a kala is variously deﬁned as 1
minute, 48 seconds or 8 seconds.
57 One-thirtieth of a kala.
58 Very small interval of time, equal to half of a lava.
59 Timi.
60 Timingila.
61 Makara. However, a makara is actually a mythical being.
62 Indra.
63 Indra.
64 The Malaya mountains are in south India, adjoining Malabar. The Malaya mountains had several sandalwood
trees. Thus, an alternative translation is that the island had many sandalwood trees, since malaya also means a sandalwood tree.
65 Synonym for nagas.
66 Garuda.
67Amrita is nectar or ambrosia and was produced when the ocean was churned.

68 Hunters, ﬁshermen. Usually, they are described as dwelling in the mountains.
69 Kashyapa.
70 Supratika is a common name for an elephant and this elephant should not be confused with Bhagadatta’s elephant Supratika.
71 A yojana is between 13 and 15 kilometres.
72 Sacred place of pilgrimage.
73 Alternatively, ﬁg tree.
74 Garuda.
75 Rishis who number 60,000 and were generated from the creator’s body. They are the size of a thumb and precede the sun’s chariot.
76Maya.
77 Garuda.
78 Garuda’s epithet.
79 Garuda.
80 The performer of a hundred sacriﬁces, Indra.
81 Great sage and preceptor of the gods.
82 Indra.
83 The son, Garuda.
84 Indra.
85 A tree with large, fragrant and orange-coloured ﬂowers, the Butea frondosa.
86 On the road.
87 Indra.
88 A sacriﬁce.
89 Indra.
90 Daksha’s daughter.
91 Marichi was Kashyapa’s father.
92 Kashyapa.
93 Indra.
94 Aruna is the dawn and also the sun’s charioteer.
95 Vishvakarma is the architect of the gods and Bhouvana (or Bhoumana) is one of his names.
96 Indra has a thousand eyes.
97 The wind-god.
98 The Ashvins.
99 Shiva.
100 That is, enter the place where the amrita was.
101 Suparna, another name for Garuda.
102 That is, Vishnu.
103Vahana or mount.
104 The one with beautiful feathers.
105 Dhritarashtra is also the name of a naga and this should not be confused with the Dhritarashtra who was
Duryodhana’s father.

106Prayuta.
107Arbuda is 100 million.
108 This can also be translated as the forest of Pushkara.
109 Brahma.
110 Indra.
111 Another name for Shesha.
112 A reference to Brahma.
113 The fee.
114 These words are being addressed to Vasuki.
115 The ocean.
116 Vasuki.
117 Souti’s name.
118 The great-grandfather was Pandu.
119 From their mothers.
120 The hermit’s.
121 The hermit.
122 Hastinapura.
123 Vaivasvata is one of Yama’s names.
124 This refers to Shamika’s message, not the curse. The curse was levied by Shamika’s son, Shringi.
125 Shamika.
126 Shamika.
127 The name used in the text is Nagasahnya.
128 The ministers and advisers.
129 Yudhishthira, who in a sense was also the great-grandfather, though not as directly as Arjuna.
130 Janamejaya.
131 An ancient king of the lunar dynasty and therefore an ancestor of the Kouravas and the Pandavas. Pururava
married the apsara Urvashi.
132 That is, the merit obtained through these austerities.
133 A brahmachari, usually translated as celibate. However, a brahmachari is strictly someone who treads the
path of the brahman.
134 Time.
135Shvetakakiya. This is an unhappy translation, though white crow is right. However, the sense is that the dedication has the watchfulness of a dog, the timidity of a deer and the instinct of a crow.
136 Vasuki’s sister.
137 Agnihotra is a sacriﬁcial ﬁre. The text means that the time for making offerings to the sacriﬁcial ﬁre has
arrived.
138Asti can be translated as ‘it is there’. Jaratkaru meant that an embryo was there in the womb.
139 Shiva, the one with a trident in his hand.
140 Dhanur Veda. This is about the science of ﬁghting and weaponry.
141 Krishna.

142 Soubhadra means Subhadra’s son, that is, Abhimanyu. Parikshit was Abhimanyu’s son. Parikshina means
to become weak, thin, lean, emaciated. Since this is what had happened to the Kuru lineage, he came to be known
as Parikshit.
143Kama (desire), krodha (anger), lobha (greed), mada (ego), moha (delusion) and matsarya (envy).
144 The Pandavas.
145 Takshaka had assumed the disguise of a Brahmana.
146 This is now a reference to Kashyapa.
147 Takshaka.
148 Superintending or assisting priests; probably means assisting here.
149 Ofﬁciating priests. Usually, there were four types of ritvijas—hotar (one who recited prayers, identiﬁed
with Rig Veda), udgatar (one who chanted or sang prayers, identiﬁed with Sama Veda), adhvaryu (one who ofﬁciated, identiﬁed with Yajur Veda) and brahman (chief priest, identiﬁed with Atharva Veda).
150 Indra.
151 Brahma.
152 Indra.
153 Send the sacriﬁce up to the gods.
154 That is, dying.
155 Brahma.
156 The brother is Vasuki.
157 The snake-sacriﬁce.
158 That is, bless him.
159 The text should literally be translated as the staff of a Brahmana.
160 Indra.
161 Rama.
162 Vyasa.
163 Indra.
164 The ﬁre. Vibhavasu is also a name for the sun.
165 The ﬁre. Chitrabhanu is also a name for the sun.
166 Indra.
167 Parashurama.
168 Semi-divine species.
169 Takshaka.
170 Astika.
171 Takshaka.
172 Lohitaksha.
173 Names of great sages.
174 The snake-sacriﬁce.

1 Satyavati, who was dark in colour.
2 Itihasa.
3 Shantanu was Bhishma’s father and also the father of Chitrangada and Vichitravirya. The Kouravas and the
Pandavas were descended from Vichitravirya.
4 Sadasyas.
5 Indra.
6 Indra.
7 The preceptor of the gods.
8 Divine sages.
9 Krishna Dvaipayana.
10 The word in the original is pitamaha, which means paternal grandfather, as well as being a name for Brahma.
But it is also generically used for all ancestors.
11 Exile of the Pandavas.
12 The Pandavas.
13 Shakuni.
14 Bhima.
15 Indra.
16 Duryodhana.
17 Karna.
18 The Pandavas.
19 Bhishma.
20 Kunti.
21 Literally, winner of riches and one of Arjuna’s names.
22 Krishna.
23 Indra’s wife.
24 Lakshmi.
25 The forest Khandava. The story about why Agni was allowed to burn Khandava forest will be told later. The
ﬁre-god had been suffering from indigestion and this was a cure.
26 Arjuna’s name.
27 Maya.
28 Shakuni.
29 The Pandavas.
30Ayuta, meaning many in general, and ten thousand in particular.
31 Bhima and Arjuna.
32 Nakula and Sahadeva.
33 Krishna Dvaipayana’s.
34 This can also speciﬁcally be translated as Himalaya.
35 Days of the full moon and days of the new moon.
36 That is, is freed from the desire of attaining heaven.
37 In the morning.
38 Indra.

39 Beyond death.
40Vimana.
41 Literally, that which produces victory.
42 Uparichara.
43 An epithet of Indra’s.
44 Vasu.
45Maharatha can loosely be translated as great warrior. However, more speciﬁcally, a maharatha was a warrior
who could take on 10,000 warriors single-handed.
46 Other sons.
47 Literally, someone who travels through the upper regions.
48 The mountain lusted for the river.
49 Uparichara.
50 Lakshmi.
51 After swallowing the semen.
52 The ﬁshermen.
53 Brahma.
54 Semi-divine, pure and holy species.
55 Celestial singers.
56 Parashara.
57Gandha means smell.
58 Dharma has four legs in Satya Yuga, three in Treta Yuga, two in Dvapara Yuga and one in Kali Yuga. The
word leg (pada) is used metaphorically and the word also means one quarter. Thus, completion has four quarters,
which is what one has in Satya Yuga. Therefore, it becomes 75% in Treta Yuga, 50% in Dvapara Yuga and 25% in
Kali Yuga.
59 The word vyasa means to distribute or divide.
60 Yama, the god of death and justice.
61Shakuntika in the original text. Shakuntika also means bird, but given the context, locust or cricket seems
more appropriate.
62 The sin of killing Animandavya.
63 Sanjaya was a suta, that is, a charioteer-cum-raconteur. He was an aide to Dhritarashtra, who was blind, and
Sanjaya has become famous because he was granted divine sight so that he could describe the incidents occurring
in the Kurukshetra war to Dhritarashtra from a distance. Sanjaya’s father was Gavalgana.
64Kavacha in the original text. A charm that works like armour is another possible translation.
65Kundala.
66 Son of Sharadvata, also known as Kripacharya.
67 Kripi.
68 Droupadi.
69 Subala was the king of Gandhara.
70 Gandhari, Subala’s daughter and Shakuni’s sister.
71 Shakuni and Duryodhana.
72 The god of wind.

73 Yuyutsu had a Vaishya mother.
74 Droupadi.
75 This Shrutasena should not be confused with Janamejaya’s brother.
76 The king of Panchala and the father of Dhrishtadyumna and Droupadi.
77 Parashurama.
78 Indra.
79 This is a reference to Shesha naga.
80 The earth.
81 Conﬂicts with the demons.
82 Indra.
83 Club.
84 Vishnu.

1 Indra.
2 Brahma.
3 One should not expect consistency in accounts of creation. In some accounts, Marichi was born from Brahma
and Marichi’s son was Kashyapa, from whom all humans are descended through Manu. In other accounts, Brahma
had seven sons born from his mental powers, with Vashishtha added to the list of six that is given in the text. These
seven (or six) are prajapatis or rulers of the world. In other accounts, ten prajapatis were born from Brahma’s right
thumb and one of these was Daksha. Daksha had several daughters, thirteen were married to Kashyapa and twentyseven were married to the moon or Chandra. Section 1 states that Daksha had seven sons and that Daksha was born
from an ancient sage named Prachetas. But this is a rare reference. Daksha’s birth from Brahma is more common.
4 The world was being populated by offspring of the gods, and the demons are also descended from Daksha’s
daughters. In fact, every living species is descended from Daksha’s daughters.
5 The sun.
6 The moon.
7 One of Shukra’s names.
8 Tarkshya is also a name for both Garuda and Garuda’s elder brother Aruna. The text suggests that Garuda and
Aruna had another brother named Tarkshya.
9 Kashyapa.
10 Obviously, they were Prava’s progeny.
11 There is an inconsistency with what the text has just said about Prava’s progeny, the gandharvas and the
apsaras.
12 One of Shiva’s names.
13 Mythical beings with human bodies and heads of horses.
14 This is a little confusing, because there doesn’t seem to be any difference between kinnaras and kimpurushas.
15 These were the valakhilya sages, 60,000 in number. Generated from the creator’s body, they are the size of a
thumb and precede the sun’s chariot.
16 Daksha’s.
17 Daksha. Prajapati is also one of Brahma’s names.
18 The daughters effectively become sons in one of two ways. Either, the daughter, since she is regarded as a
son, returns to her father’s house after marriage, or the daughter’s son is adopted as a son by his maternal
grandfather.
19 The moon, or Chandra.
20 Brahma.
21 The moon, or Chandra.
22 Constellations or stars.
23 Brahma.
24 Ruler of the worlds.
25 The word son doesn’t always mean son in a literal sense. It can also mean progeny.
26 The wind, or Anila.
27 Anala, or Hutashana.
28 That is, Anala.
29 There are twenty-seven lunar mansions (nakshatras) and krittika is the third, identiﬁed with the Pleiades.
However, there are actually six stars in the Pleiades. Hence the use of the plural krittikas, and the krittikas reared
Kumara, which is why he is known as Kartikeya.

30 Of Agni.
31 Famous sage, preceptor of the gods.
32 Vivasvat’s son. Identiﬁed with Vishvakarma, architect of the gods.
33 Daughter of the sun.
34 Indra.
35Paksha.
36Kula.
37Gana.
38 A class of demi-gods; a semi-divine species, Kubera’s attendants.
39 Brahma.
40 Brahma.
41 That is, set her free from her pregnancy.
42 Shukra’s.
43 Ourva is another name for Chyavana. He was thus named because he was born through splitting open the
thigh (uru).
44 Parashurama.
45 Not to be confused with Richika’s son Jamadagni. Richika’s son is the more famous Jamadagni.
46 Jamadagni.
47 The goddess of liquor.
48 Her sons.
49 Fear.
50 Great fear.
51 Death.
52 Monkeys with tails like those of cows, with dark bodies and red cheeks.
53 The cardinal points are guarded by elephants.
54 Snakes or serpents.
55 There were probably two Surasas, one who was Kadru’s daughter and another who was Krodha’s daughter.
56 A shyena is a hawk or falcon, Shyeni is the feminine. So Shyeni could have been married to Vinata’s son
Aruna, though the text doesn’t make it clear if the two Arunas were the same.
57 The moon.
58 Mayura’s.
59 Rahu.
60 Vritra’s.
61 Indra.
62 This was the seventh.
63 Literally, those who are slaves to anger.
64 This is known as Dhanur Veda.
65 Destruction.
66 Desire.
67 Anger.

68 Indra.
69 The eight vasus, sons of Manu, were reborn on earth as Shantanu’s sons.
70 Maharatha.
71 The maruts.
72 The rakshasas.
73 A class of gods often described as ten in number. Their mother was Vishva.
74 Goddess Lakshmi.
75Vaiduryamani.
76 Gandhari.
77 Also spelt Dushyanta.
78 Barbarians, non-Aryans, those who did not speak Sanskrit.
79 The god of rain. That is, Indra.
80 Large mountain.
81 Indra.
82 That is, Garuda. The speed was like that of Garuda.
83 Indra’s garden.
84 The word used in the text is shatapada, one with six legs. This is a word for a bee.
85 That is, a tree.
86 Duhshanta.
87 Sacriﬁcial ﬁres.
88 A yati is speciﬁcally an ascetic.
89 The word used in the text is kaccha. This is usually the word used for a marsh. But a marsh does not seem
right, given the context.
90 The ruddy goose.
91 The king of the gandharvas.
92 This is probably a reference to the Yajur Veda. The critical edition jumps from the Rig Veda to the Atharva
Veda, at least by name. The Yajur Veda is not explicitly mentioned. Some regional variations mention the Yajur
Veda explicitly and there are shlokas, missing in the critical edition, that mention the Sama Veda.
93 Kanva.
94 Kanva.
95 Goddess Lakshmi.
96 Kanva.
97 Indra.
98 Indra.
99 Vishvamitra’s name is Koushika.
100 Vishvamitra.
101 A nakshatra, that is, a star or constellation.
102 The wind-god. Vayu is another one of his names.
103 The god of love. Kama is another one of his names.
104 She is actually repeating Kanva’s words.
105 Indra.

106 The word used is shakuna. In a general sense, this means bird. But in a speciﬁc sense, it means vultures or
kites.
107 This is Kanva speaking.
108 One of the eight forms of marriage. In this form, there are no ceremonies and no relatives are present. The
bride and the groom willingly marry each other in what is a marriage of love.
109 Brahma.
110 It is not clear what this number ﬁve refers to, probably the last ﬁve of the eight mentioned forms.
111 With infantry, cavalry, elephants and chariots.
112 Kanva.
113 A wheel, the sign of a king.
114Sarva is everything and damana is to subjugate.
115 The word used is yuvaraja, which can be translated as prince or young king. However, this appellation also
signiﬁes the person becoming an heir apparent.
116 That is, paternal relatives.
117 Literally, the city of the elephant and another name for Hastinapura, Duhshanta’s capital.
118 From the word for ‘being born’.
119 Brahma.
120 Dharma, artha and kama.
121 There are three kinds of sacriﬁcial ﬁres—ahavaniya, garhapatya and dakshina. The garhapatya ﬁre burns in
the household, the ahavaniya ﬁre is the one into which sacriﬁcial offerings are placed and the dakshina ﬁre is the
one that faces the south.
122 There were originally thirty or thirty-three gods —eleven in heaven, eleven in the sky and eleven on earth.
Another way of getting the number is by adding twelve adityas, eleven rudras and ten vishvadevas.
123 Alternatively, wise instead of aged.
124 That is, the gift of a pond.
125 Bharata means to maintain.
126 A universal monarch or sovereign of the world. Sarvabhouma has the same meaning.
127 It is not clear what this means. A padma is a lotus. But this doesn’t quite ﬁt the requirement. Were one thousand lotuses given? A padma is also one trillion. In that case, one trillion of what is left unsaid. Perhaps a padma
simply connotes a large number and a large number of cows were given.
128 In this context, Brahma.
129 One of six schools of philosophy, attributed to the sage Kapila.
130 The word for men is manava.
131 Manu is not the name of a single person. There were fourteen Manus, each presiding over the interval between a round of destruction and recreation. The ﬁrst Manu (Svayambhuva) produced the ﬁrst round of human beings. However, the present round of human beings is descended from the seventh Manu (Vaivasvata).
132Nagas or serpents.
133 Robbers or dacoits. The word also means evil beings or demons that were enemies of gods and men. It can
also mean outcasts or outcastes.
134 Yayati.
135 Devayani.
136 Brihaspati, the preceptor of the gods.

137 The demons. That is, the demons also had a priest for the same purpose.
138 Ushanas is another name for Shukra or Shukracharya, the preceptor of the demons. The text has the word
kavya, which has been translated as wise. However, Kavya is also another name for Shukra and Kavya is the son
of Kavi.
139 The knowledge of bringing the dead back to life.
140 The king of the demons.
141 Sacriﬁcial ﬁre kindled in the evening. Presumably, this was Kacha’s task.
142 Shukra.
143 The brighter half of the lunar month.
144 Shukra.
145 Angirasa was Shukra’s preceptor.
146 Indra. Literally, the performer of a hundred sacriﬁces.
147 Indra. Literally, the destroyer of cities.
148 Indra.
149 Meaning that the forest or the wood was beautiful. Chitraratha was the king of the gandharvas.
150 The text actually has Devayani addressing Sharmishtha as her disciple. This is because Devayani’s father
(Shukra) was the preceptor to Sharmishtha’s father (Vrishaparva).
151 One of Devayani’s companions or maids.
152 Before the quarrel, Devayani and Sharmishtha were friends.
153 There is a break in continuity in the critical edition. Other editions have a shloka where Shukra goes and
tells Devayani what has occurred.
154 That of giving birth to a child.
155 Devayani.
156 Indra.
157 This isn’t clear at all. There was a kingdom of Bhoja in the Vidarbha or Malwa region. But why should that
be a curse? Or is this appellation a reference to people who were addicted to food (bhojana)?
158 Usually there is reference to three sacriﬁcial ﬁres—ahavaniya, garhapatya and dakshina. The other two sacred ﬁres are samya and avasadhya.
159 Indra.
160 Clearly, not material prosperity, but riches obtained through righteousness.
161 The text should literally be translated as those born from sweat.
162 Another name for Indra.
163 Meaning Vishnu.
164 From an earlier reference, one knows that Ashtaka was a king. Yayati was his maternal grandfather.
165 The ﬁrst of the four yugas, also known as Satya Yuga.
166 The word used is shitikantha, which means white in the neck. This means a peacock, though some kind of
vulture with a white neck is also possible.
167 That is, through the merits of one’s earlier deeds.
168 As enumerated in what immediately follows, the ﬁve sense organs and mind.
169 That is, ritualistic deeds.
170 None of this is to be interpreted in a literal sense. For instance, the teeth are clean because he lives on pure
food, the nails are clipped because he does not hurt anyone, he is always bathed and without dirt because his ac-

tions are pure and his deeds are white because they are good.
171 Pain and pleasure, happiness and unhappiness, and so on.
172 Cattle and other animals eat to survive, without making eating the end object.
173 The ascetic and the householder who has learning.
174 As mentioned earlier, Pratardana was also a king.
175 Accept gifts.
176 An arbuda is one hundred million.
177 The apsara’s name.
178 Earth, water, energy, air and the sky.
179 The suggestion is that the son was actually Bharadvaja’s.
180 Fourfold armies include elephants, horses, chariots and infantry.
181 Indus.
182 Samvarana.
183 The word used is vishana, which means both horn (as in trumpet) and tusk.
184Jangala is an arid plain.
185 Different from Janamejaya, Parikshit’s son.
186 Not to be confused with Parikshit, Arjuna’s grandson.
187 Not to be confused with the horse.
188 Designed to ensure conquest (jita) of the world (vishva).
189 The word prach means eastern or easterly.
190 An ayuta is 10,000.
191 The word used is bhastra, which is a leather bag or pouch, usually used for storing water.
192 By giving birth to offspring.
193 The word shanta means to appease, calm, satisy, pacify, cure or alleviate.
194 That is, die.
195 Bhima.
196 Ceremony where the bride chooses her own groom.
197Shulka is price, but this not a marriage where a bride price is paid. Virya means valour, so this is a marriage
where the bride is married to the person who exhibits the most valour.
198 Kunti.
199 The word parikshina means diminished, decayed, thin. In this context, even extinct can be used.
200 There doesn’t seem to be much point in telling Janamejaya this. Perhaps the intention is to make the account complete.
201 A sacriﬁce where offerings of food and water were made.
202 Celestial, terrestrial and subterranean. The river Ganga ﬂows in all three regions.
203 As mentioned earlier, the word shanta means to appease, calm, satisy, pacify, cure or alleviate. With the
same etymological root, earlier, a slightly different twist has been given to the name Shantanu, concerning Shantanu’s traits and not those of his father.
204 Lakshmi.
205 Vasishtha.
206 Meaning, one given by Ganga.

207 Ganga. Jahnavi is Ganga’s name because Ganga is Jahnu’s daughter.
208 Indra.
209 Dyou was her husband.
210 Dyou.
211 The moon-god.
212 Indra. Literally, one who sacks cities.
213 Shukra.
214 Brihaspati.
215 Parashurama.
216 Indra.
217 The maintenance of the sacred ﬁre.
218 The word three here accordingly refers to the ﬁrst three Vedas.
219 The three Vedas.
220 Indra, the performer of a hundred sacriﬁces.
221 The marriage.
222 Devavrata.
223 The terrible or fearsome one, because of the vow he took. The word bhishma means terrible or fearssome.
224 The gandharva was also named Chitrangada.
225 Maya.
226 That is, through a system of bride price being paid.
227 The eight forms of marriage actually are brahma, daiva, arsha, prajapatya, asura, gandharva, rakshasa and
paishacha.
228 Garuda.
229 Vichitravirya.
230 Ganga.
231 Soubha is the name of the kingdom. The king’s name is Shalva.
232 Brihaspati.
233 Indra.
234 Parashurama.
235 The king of the Haihayas was Kartavirya Arjuna.
236 That is, the person who married the mother, not the one who begot the son.
237 The critical edition has eliminated shlokas that tell us Dirghatama was born blind. Hence, the long period of
darkness is left unexplained.
238 Dirghatama. One now knows that Dirghatama was blind.
239 This bull among men is Janamejaya. Although Bhishma is now telling the story to Satyavati, it is being retold by Vaishampayana. However, this reference to Janamejaya shouldn’t have been here, since it is Bhishma who
is speaking.
240 Vichitravirya’s wives.
241 The word vyasa means to divide or distribute.
242 Satyavati’s name. She was so called because she was dark.

243 Both Ambika and Ambalika, who were princesses from the kingdom of Kashi. Kousalya means a princess
of Kosala.
244 Satyavati.
245 The word pandu means pale or white.
246 Satyavati.
247 The word ani means point, usually of a needle.
248 Animandavya was a child when he pierced the insect.
249 Krita Yuga or Satya Yuga, the ﬁrst of the four yugas and a time when dharma was at its best. The incidents
of the Mahabharata occurred during Dvapara Yuga, the third of the yugas.
250 Hastinapura.
251 The word used is kripana. It can also be translated as miserly.
252 Hastinapura.
253 Because he was born of a Shudra woman.
254 Vedavyasa.
255 Bhishma was speaking to Vidura in particular.
256 Bhishma.
257 This is a reference to an incident when the gods refused to give Shiva (Hara) a share in the sacriﬁcial offerings. Shiva ripped out the god Bhaga’s eyes.
258 The adopted father, Kuntibhoja.
259 She would face a difﬁculty in having sons.
260 The sun-god.
261 The sun-god.
262 Once she was reared by Kuntibhoja, Pritha obtained the name Kunti.
263 His name was Adhiratha.
264Vasu means riches and the riches he was born with were the natural armour and earrings.
265 Indra. Indra was attempting to protect and help Arjuna.
266 A shakti is a spear or lance. But this one was divine.
267 Vikartana is the sun, so Vaikartana means the sun’s son. Karna means the ear.
268 Indra is Maghavan. His wife is Shachi. Since Shachi was Puloma’s daughter, she is Poulomi.
269 Pandu.
270 Hastinapura. Nagapura is another name for Hastinapura, the city of the elephant. The word naga means
elephant.
271 Another name for Hastinapura.
272 There are two Kousalyas, Ambika and Ambalika. This one is Ambalika.
273 In this case, father means Bhishma.
274 Ambika and Ambalika.
275 Ambalika.
276 Jayanta is the son of Indra and Shachi.
277 Purandara is Indra and Indra’s elephant is Airavata.
278 Bhishma.

279 The word used is parashava. This means offspring born of a Brahmana father and a Shudra mother. While
the word also means bastard, it couldn’t have been used in that sense. Because in that sense of bastard or mixed
breed, Dhritarashtra and Pandu were no different.
280 There is a problem with the numbers, since there were only 100 pots.
281 This is a reference to Section 6, Adi-vamshavatarana Parva.
282 Meaning that the enemy was unprepared.
283 Dharma, artha and kama.
284 That is, a different tree for every night.
285 Not beg from more than seven families.
286 A name for Vidura, a man born from a Kshatriya woman and a Shudra man.
287 The four ashramas—brahmacharya, garhasthya, vanaprastha and sannyasa.
288 There is a problem of translation here. What has been translated as superior residents should literally be
translated as residents of families. And inferior residents should literally be translated as residents of villages. This
doesn’t quite seem right. Hence village is probably being used in an inferior and normative sense.
289 Hastinapura.
290 Alternatively, the primary elements.
291 Mountain with a hundred peaks.
292 Krishna Dvaipayana.
293 These are both heirs and relatives.
294 These are neither heirs, nor relatives. As listed, the number adds up to seven and not six. Nor are the differences very clear. For instance, purchased/bought or gifted/presented occur in both categories. In the ﬁrst list, the
word for purchased is parikrita. In the second list, the word for purchased is krita. The text doesn’t enable us to
deduce the difference and is this also the case with gifted/presented.
295 Meaning those of non-human birth.
296 Kalmashapada was Sudasa’s son.
297 Lunar day.
298 A nakshatra.
299 The wind-god.
300 Bhima.
301 Indra.
302 Indra.
303 Agni, or ﬁre. Speciﬁcally havya is sacriﬁcial offerings and vahana is the one who bears. Havyavahana is
therefore the sacriﬁcial ﬁre into which offerings are placed.
304 Parashurama.
305 Pritha’s son, Arjuna.
306 Bibhatsu is one of Arjuna’s names and means the terrible one.
307 Meaning that she was superior in birth to Kunti.
308 By obtaining more sons than Kunti.
309 Mango.
310 That is, he did not succumb to desire with Kunti.
311 Hastinapura.

312 There were parts of the bodies that had not been burnt. Having said this, there is some contradiction about
when the bodies were burnt.
313 The word used is vardhaman, which means increasing. This has been translated as the chief gate. But it is
perfectly possible for this to have been the proper name for the gate.
314 Another name for Hastinapura.
315 Dhritarashtra.
316 Another name for Vayu.
317 Indra.
318 This is yet another name for Hastinapura. The word varana means elephant.
319 Ambalika.
320 Duryodhana.
321 Kunti’s son. In this case, Bhima.
322 Duryodhana.
323 Bhima.
324 The word used is sarathi, which usually means charioteer, but also means companion. Charioteer doesn’t
make any sense here, companion makes more sense. The companions are Bhima’s brothers.
325 Vidura. It could also mean Yuyutsu.
326 There is a break of continuity in the critical edition and Kripa appears out of the blue. In other editions, we
are told that Dhritarashtra wanted to ﬁnd a teacher for the princes, since they were getting out of control. Kripa,
descended from Goutama, was chosen to teach the art of ﬁghting.
327 The word shara means arrow and Sharadvat is one with arrows.
328 The science or knowledge of weapons.
329 The word kripa means compassion. One of the twins was a boy and he was named Kripa. The other one was
a girl and she was named Kripi.
330 Kripa.
331 There are four upavedas or minor vedas, of which, dhanurveda is one. Each upaveda is attached to one of
the main vedas. The other three upavedas are ayurveda (medicine), gandharvaveda (music) and sthapatyaveda
(architecture).
332 There is a break in continuity in the critical edition. Bharadvaja had gone to the Ganga for a bath before
making the offerings into the ﬁre.
333Drona. This is usually a wooden vessel.
334 Agniveshya.
335Ashva means horse and sthaman means strength or stamina.
336 Parashurama.
337 Drona.
338 Parashurama.
339 The word used is shrotriya, which can also be translated as a learned Brahmana.
340 Drupada, the king of Panchala.
341 Hastinapura.
342 The word used is vita. I have translated this as ball. But there is no evidence to suggest that this was spherical. In all probability, this was a short piece of wood struck with another long piece of wood, something like a bat.
Guli-danda may be the closest approximation.

343 The word used is ishika and means reed. In recounting this particular anecdote, renderings invariably interpret this as reed or grass. However, ishika also means arrow and Drona could have used arrows instead of reeds.
There is nothing in the text to counter the arrow interpretation.
344 Radha’s son, Karna.
345 Implying weapons that were held in the hand.
346 Hunter or ﬁsherman. Usually, described as dwelling in the mountains and forests.
347 The text uses the word shabdabheda, which is the art of shooting with the aid of sound alone, without seeing the object. Earlier, there was no suggestion that Ekalavya had not seen the dog when he was shooting the arrows. From the use of this word here, it seems that he had not seen the dog and had only heard it bark.
348 Arjuna.
349 Arjuna.
350 A maharatha is a warrior who can take on 10,000 warriors single-handed. An atiratha can take on 60,000.
351 Kunti’s son. In this case, Yudhishthira.
352 Arjuna.
353 Arjuna.

1 Bhishma.
2 Drona was the sage Bharadvaja’s son.
3 Vidura.
4Vaidurya.
5 Drona.
6 The princes.
7 Some spectators.
8 Duryodhana’s name.
9 Over a female elephant.
10 Kunti.
11 Duryodhana.
12 Name for Arjuna. Phalguna and Phalguni are used synonymously.
13 The arm guard is called a godha. It was made out of leather and fastened to the left arm, to guard against injury from the string of the bow, since most archers were right-handed. A godha is also an alligator or lizard. The
ﬁnger protector is called angulitrana. It was also used to protect against injury from the bowstring. It resembled a
thimble and was usually used on the thumb. But it could also be used on other ﬁngers.
14 Arjuna.
15 Indra.
16 That is, tied to his waist.
17 Paka was a demon and Paka’s punisher is Indra. Arjuna was Indra’s son.
18 The rainbow is called Indra’s bow.
19 Indra. There is a suggestion that is left implicit, but becomes a bit more explicit in the next sentence. Indra
was looking down fondly not on the arena in general, but on his son, Arjuna. And the sun especially dispersed the
clouds so as to favour his son, Karna.
20 Drona.
21 Kunti.
22 Because the sons of kings do not ﬁght with those who are of an inferior lineage.
23 Karna.
24 With the umbrella, this forms the royal insignia and these whisks were usually made out of yak tails.
25 Duryodhana.
26 Duryodhana’s name.
27 Karna.
28 One of Kartikeya’s epithets.
29 One of the twenty-seven nakshatras, actually consisting of six stars, the Pleiades. The Krittikas reared Kartikeya. Hence, the name.
30 Karna.
31Dakshina, the preceptor’s fee that has to be paid at the end of the learning process.
32 Drupada.
33 Vidura.
34 Kripa.
35 In case the banishing idea was implemented.

36 Ashvatthama.
37 Bhishma, Drona and Kripa.
38 Ashvatthama.
39 The Pandavas.
40 Shiva’s.
41 Dhritarashtra.
42 Ashvatthama.
43 Dhritarashtra.
44 As a sign of respect.
45 Keep them secret.
46 Duryodhana.
47 The word ‘mothers’ is used in a general sense, to indicate all the women who were elderly.
48 Yudhishthira.
49 Pandu.
50 Dhritarashtra.
51 Vidura.
52 Yudhishthira.
53 That is, in a riddle, so that no one else could understand. But Vidura and Yudhishthira were both learned, so
Yudhishthira understood what Vidura said. Indeed, the text is such that it is difﬁcult to understand what is being
obliquely said, except that a sense of danger is being communicated. But since this was a riddle, that’s probably
understandable.
54 The ﬁve senses.
55 Yudhishthira.
56 Vidura.
57 A nakshatra.
58 Victory.
59 Indra.
60 Meaning the Kshatriyas.
61 As will become clear, this was not the house Purochana had built.
62 Pritha’s son. In this context, Bhimasena.
63 Duryodhana.
64 Purochana.
65Khanaka. Miner is more accurate as a translation. But in this context, digger seems more appropriate.
66 Yudhishthira.
67 The lunar month’s darker fortnight.
68 A non-Aryan or barbarian. However, a mleccha was actually someone who spoke in a language other than
Sanskrit. There is a problem with the critical edition here. In other editions, Vidura spoke to Yudhishthira in mleccha language, so this reference makes sense. However, in the critical edition, Vidura speaking to Yudhishthira in
the mleccha language has been excised and what has been left is Vidura speaking to Yudhishthira in a riddle. So
this reference doesn’t quite ﬁt.
69 Purochana.

70 Kunti.
71 Purochana.
72 Purochana.
73 Yudhishthira and Arjuna.
74 Bhishma.
75 Dhritarashtra.
76Shukra and shuchi mean the summer season. Speciﬁcally, shukra is the month of Jyeshtha. Shuchi is a general
term for the hot season, the months of Jyeshtha and Ashada.
77 The word used for large tree is vanaspati, which means lord of the forest.
78 That is, the others.
79 Duryodhana.
80Nyagrodha. Can also be translated as banyan tree.
81 He was speaking to Yudhishthira.
82 Arjuna.

1 The Pandavas.
2 A very tall and stately tree.
3 Kunti.
4 From the tree.
5 This is the sister, not named thus far. The avoidance of diacritical marks makes it difﬁcult to differentiate the
brother from the sister. The brother is Hidimba, while the sister is Hidimbaa. In the translation, Hidimba will be
used for both, since the context will make it clear which one is meant, and Hidimbaa seems forced.
6 Kama, the god of love. He has no body because he was burnt to ashes by Shiva.
7 The god of love.
8 His sister.
9 The Pandavas.
10 The Pandavas.
11 The god of love.
12 Arjuna.
13 Bhima. As a son of Pritha, Bhima is also Partha.
14 The time of daybreak.
15 Maya.
16 Bhima.
17 Bhima.
18 Duryodhana.
19 The Pandavas.
20 Maya.
21 The god of love.
22 The implication of this statement is that Hidimba would not survive if she did not get Bhima.
23 Sacred lake near Mount Kailasha.
24Ghata.
25 This probably means that Hidimba made the kind of agreement that Ghatotkacha did, that she would return
whenever they needed her.
26 Indra. Indra gave Karna a weapon that was later used to kill Ghatotkacha and could therefore not be used
against Arjuna, since the weapon could only be used once.
27 The Pandavas.
28 They hastened when their disguise was threatened and travelled slowly when there was no danger.
29 Texts about morals and ethics.
30 Vedavyasa.
31 The Pandavas.
32 The sons of Pritha, that is, the Pandavas.
33 Vyasa.
34 Royal sacriﬁce.
35 Horse-sacriﬁce.
36 The eldest, Yudhishthira.

1 Kunti.
2 Kunti.
3 The distress, caused by the terror of a rakshasa.
4 The name of a famous cow, in particular the cow which grants all that one desires (kamadhenu).
5 The Brahmana’s wife.
6 The wife, the son or the daughter.
7 There is a hell (naraka) named punnama. Those who do not have offspring are destined to go there. It is because a child (son) saves the ancestors from going to punnama that the name putra is given.
8 To the rakshasa.
9 The ancestors. That is, by surviving.
10 In this context, relatives means the immediate family.
11 This is an argument to explain why the Brahmana did not go and live somewhere else.
12 Wishing to learn the secret of the power.
13 Kunti.
14 In the sense of restoring life.
15 Bhima. Anila is the wind-god.
16 The other Pandavas had gone out, in search of alms. From the subsequent conversation, Yudhishthira had not
gone out either. It was only Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva who were absent.
17 Bhima’s.
18 Bhima.
19 Bhima.
20 Ayuta; can also be translated as many.
21 Indra’s weapon.
22 The rakshasa.
23 The rakshasa’s.
24 Baka.
25 Yudhishthira.

1 Ceremony where the bride chooses her own groom. He told them that the svayamvara was being planned.
2 Yajnasena is one of Drupada’s names.
3 Droupadi.
4 The Pandavas.
5 The visiting Brahmana.
6 Dhrishtadyumna.
7 Drona and Drupada.
8 A brahmachari. Because he had been a brahmachari, he had immense powers.
9Drona. A drona was used to carry water and can also be translated as a vessel, rather than cup.
10 The son of Prishata, hence Drupada.
11 Parashurama.
12 That is, going away to the forest after giving away all his wealth.
13 Parashurama.
14 Drona.
15 Another name for Hastinapura.
16 Chhatravati is another name for Ahichhatra, which was the capital of the kingdom of Panchala.
17 Drupada.
18 As will become evident later, Drupada’s wife accompanied him on his travels.
19 That is, his sons.
20 The word snataka has many nuances. Here it means a Brahmana who has completed his ﬁrst course of study.
21 Drupada.
22 Arbuda, which means 100 million.
23 Jamadagni’s son is Parashurama.
24 This inconsistency in the number of cows offered to Yaja exists in the text.
25 Drupada.
26 A qualiﬁcation is needed for this translation. The word used is mithuna, and what seems to be suggested is an
act of intercourse between the queen and Yaja. One can also translate this sentence as, ‘The time for the twins has
arrived’, meaning the births of Droupadi and Dhrishtadyumna, but this doesn’t seem to be very natural as a
translation.
27 Krosha, a little over 2 miles.
28Dhrishtata means courage and conﬁdence, and dyumna means splendour, glory or lustre.
29 Drona.
30 In an earlier life.
31 Another name for Shankara.
32 Vyasa.
33 Arjuna.
34 The sound of their footsteps.
35 Muhurta.
36 Of the night.
37Kunapa. This can also mean those who smell like corpses and is therefore also used as a contemptuous term
for those who are alive.

38 Shatakratu is a performer of 100 sacriﬁces and is one of Indra’s names.
39 There was no danger from this revelation of identity, since it wouldn’t have reached the Kouravas.
40 One with an adorned chariot; ratha is chariot.
41 One whose chariot has been burnt.
42Chakshu means eye. That is the reason the knowledge is called chakshushi.
43 The word used in the text is yaviyasa, which means Shudra.
44 The word vadava means a mare.
45 This is now a reference to the horses the gandharva is giving.
46 Bibhatsu is one of Arjuna’s names.
47 An explanation is needed about the giving of a weapon. This act of giving doesn’t involve the physical act of
giving something and has more to do with teaching the mantras required to release and withdraw a weapon. Therefore, giving a weapon away did not mean that the giver ceased to possess it. What was being given was the
knowledge.
48 Keep ﬁre burning in the household.
49 Indra.
50 Descendant of Tapati’s lineage.
51 The next sentence makes it clear that this is the sun-god.
52 The sun.
53 The one with many rays; a name for the sun.
54 A name for the sun.
55 Another name for Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth.
56 The word used is rambha, which means a plantain tree. Thus, one with thighs like a plantain tree. However,
Rambha is also the name of a beautiful apsara and one can also translate this as one with thighs like those of
Rambha.
57 A name for the sun.
58 This can mean different things. It can mean a rainbow, described as Indra’s bow (Shakra is another name for
Indra), when the time is right for a rainbow. Alternatively, it can mean a ﬂag erected when the time is right for Indra’s festival.
59 Vashishtha.
60 The sun.
61 A name for the sun.
62 A name for the sun.
63 A name for the sun.
64 A name for the sun.
65 Gopati means lord of cows and is another name for the sun.
66 Samvarana.
67 Indra.
68 Samvarana.
69 Indra.
70 Indra.
71 Vashishtha’s.

72 Vishvamitra and his sons are known as the Kushikas. Kushika was Vishvamitra’s grandfather. According to
some accounts, Kushika was Vishvamitra’s father.
73 The six different tastes are katu (pungent), amla (sour), madhur (sweet), lavana (salty), tikta (bitter) and
kashaya (astringent).
74 Vishvamitra.
75 In this shloka, the cow’s name is given as Nandi. However, Nandini is more common and subsequent shlokas
say Nandini.
76 Vishvamitra.
77 Vashishtha.
78 The vow of being forgiving.
79 Often used as a term for the Persians.
80 Mountain-dwelling barbarians.
81 Often identiﬁed with Scythians.
82 Often identiﬁed with Greeks.
83 Mountainous tribes who lived through hunting.
84 Inhabitants from the south.
85 Identiﬁed with the inhabitants of Sri Lanka.
86 Barbarians.
87 Inhabitants of a country to the north.
88 Barbarians, non-Aryans, those who did not speak Sanskrit.
89 Vishvamitra.
90 Nectar, ambrosia, the beverage of the gods.
91 In the sense that the king should have yielded the way to a Brahmana.
92 Ofﬁciating priest to King Kalmashapada.
93 Vishvamitra.
94 Shakti.
95 Kalmashapada.
96Mitrasaha can also be translated as ‘with his friends’. However, no friends have been mentioned. So Mitrasaha is more likely to be one of Kalmashapada’s names.
97Pasha means noose or bond and Vipasha is something that frees one from a bond. Vipasha is identiﬁed with
the river Beas.
98 Himavati can be the speciﬁc name for a river. Alternatively, it can also be a general term for any river descending from the Himalayas.
99 Shatadru is a river with a hundred streams and is identiﬁed as the river Sutlej.
100 This is a reference to the six Vedangas.
101 To his hermitage. The unblemished one is Vashishtha.
102 Vashishtha.
103 Kalmashapada.
104 Rahu.
105 The word used is sandhya, which can mean dawn, as well as dusk.
106 This story is taken up later, and we learn why Kalmashapada requested Vashishtha to impregnate the queen.

107 The king.
108 Meaning the king, who had now been freed from the curse of the rakshasa.
109 One of the twenty-seven nakshatras.
110 Indra’s capital.
111Parasu means lifeless or dead.
112 Shakti’s son Parashara.
113 The Brahmanas.
114 There are fourteen lokas (worlds). Seven are above the ground and seven are below. This is a reference to
the seven that are above the ground—bhurloka, bhuvarloka, svarloka, maharloka, janarloka, taparloka and brahmaloka (satyaloka).
115 That is, unless something is done about the anger.
116 Of dharma, artha and kama.
117 A horse is vadava and a horse’s head is called vadavamukha, mukha meaning face. This submarine ﬁre is
thus called vadavamukha. Since anala means ﬁre, it is also called vadavanala.
118 Shakti’s son Parashara.
119 Because they had nothing to do with Shakti’s death.
120 Kalmashapada.

1 Victory interpreted as winning Droupadi’s hand.
2 Droupadi.
3 One of Arjuna’s names.
4Yantra.
5 Agallochum, a soft, resinous wood with an aromatic smell burnt as perfume.
6 That is, those of the lunar dynasty, an epithet for the Panchalas.
7 Kandarpa, one of the names of the god of love.
8 Droupadi.
9 Kubera.
10 The giant birds in general.
11 The nagas.
12 Semi-divine species.
13 Celestial singers.
14 Halayudha is one of Balarama’s names. Hala means plough, ayudha means weapon. Halayudha is one with
the plough as one’s weapon.
15 Krishna.
16 Krishna.
17 Balarama.
18 Another name of Arjuna’s.
19 Therefore, they did not notice the Pandavas.
20 Pritha is Kunti’s name and only Yudhishthira, Bhima and Arjuna were Kunti’s sons. Nakula and Sahadeva
were Madri’s sons.
21Dundubhi.
22 The science of archery. In general, the knowledge of arms.
23 Varnas; the Shudras are not mentioned here.
24 Indra.
25 Bhima and Arjuna, who had not left the assembly. Arjuna had only left the arena.
26 Krishna.
27 Bhima.
28 Usually a name used for Krishna, but here used for Balarama.
29Karaka, more speciﬁcally, water pots made out of coconut shells.
30 One of Karna’s names.
31 Radha’s son, that is, Karna.
32 In the shower of arrows, because they were swiftly shooting arrows at each other.
33 Parashurama.
34 Dhanur Veda.
35 Indra.
36 Indra.
37 Arjuna.
38 Arjuna.

39 Purandara is Indra’s name. Hence, Indra’s weapon.
40 With this wonderful feat.
41 Kripa was Sharadvata’s son.
42 It is not very clear who this Brahmana leading the way is, and must be a reference to Dhoumya.
43 Krishna.
44 Balarama.
45 One without enemies, Yudhishthira’s epithet.
46 One of Yudhishthira’s names.
47 Kunti.
48 Meaning, the south. This is a reference to the sage Agastya’s journey to the south.
49 In the morning.
50 The own varna means a Kshatriya. The higher varna means a Brahmana.
51 The word used is vama, which means left, as well as lower being. In this context, lower being seems best.
52 The word ‘sons’ is used here in the sense of descendants.
53 The daityas. Although the word Indra isn’t directly used, the suggestion is clearly that he resembled Indra.
54 The kings.
55 Yudhishthira, Nakula and Sahadeva, who had returned earlier.
56 Synonym for kusha grass.
57 Yudhishthira.
58 The priest.
59Shulka.
60 Tribe, family or race, for want of a better word.

1 The messenger.
2 The Pandavas.
3 Drupada.
4 That is, to ﬁnd out the caste they belonged to.
5 Drupada.
6 Semi-divine species.
7 Droupadi.
8 The arrangement for the marriage would depend on what caste the Pandavas came from.
9 Drupada.
10 Drupada.
11 The Pandavas. Drupada assured them that he would help them get back their kingdom.
12 Varanavata.
13 Yudhishthira.
14 Drupada.
15 The Pandavas.
16 Arjuna.
17 Arjuna.
18 Dhrishtadyumna. The text is such that it could also mean Drupada, ruler of Panchala.
19 Krishna Dvaipayana.
20 The text actually says bipeds.
21 Meaning probably Drupada. Parshata is a family name, used for both Drupada and Dhrishtadyumna.
22 Kunti’s son, Yudhishthira.
23 Drupada’s.
24 Yama.
25 Meaning, human beings.
26 Indra.
27 Brahma.
28 The gods.
29Pundarika, usually a white lotus.
30 The river Ganga.
31 Indra, the vajra is Indra’s weapon.
32 Indra.
33 Indra.
34 The king of mountains (giriraja) means high and lofty mountains, but is also a name for the Himalayas.
35 Indra.
36 The other god. As will become clear, this other god was none other than Shiva or Mahadeva.
37 Indra.
38 Shiva or Mahadeva; literally the lord of the mountains.
39 One of Indra’s names; literally the performer of a hundred sacriﬁces.
40 Indra.

41 Shiva.
42 Indra.
43 Shiva.
44 Lakshmi.
45 The ﬁve Indras.
46 Shiva.
47 Narayana.
48 Narayana.
49 The white hair.
50 Arjuna.
51 Shiva.
52 Shiva.
53 Parshata is one of Drupada’s names.
54 Brahma.
55 Of many husbands.
56 Vyasa.
57 Drupada.
58 Dhoumya.
59 Yudhishthira.
60 That is, Bhima got married on the next day, Arjuna on the next, and so on.
61 Vyasa.
62 That is, she regained her virginity after the earlier day’s marriage.
63 Drupada.
64 The Pandavas.
65 Around her wrists.
66 Indra’s wife.
67 Indra.
68 The ﬁre-god’s wife.
69 The ﬁre-god.
70 The moon-god’s wife.
71 The moon-god.
72 Kubera’s wife.
73 Kubera, the god of wealth.
74 Yudhishthira.
75 Krishna.
76 Krishna.
77 Krishna.
78 Krishna.

1 The Pandavas.
2 Shakuni.
3 Arjuna.
4 Kunti.
5 That is, the Pandavas.
6 Droupadi.
7 Karna.
8 The Pandavas.
9 Duryodhana.
10 Son of Radha, that is, Karna.
11 The Pandavas.
12 Hastinapura.
13 Panchala.
14 Kunti.
15 Those employed by the Kouravas to sow seeds of dissension and jealousy in the minds of the Pandavas.
16 Droupadi.
17 Because Droupadi has many husbands.
18 Bhima.
19 Arjuna.
20 Karna.
21 Droupadi.
22 Droupadi.
23 Drupada.
24 Dhrishtadyumna.
25 Descendant of Vrishni, meaning Krishna.
26 A distant ancestor of both the Kouravas and the Pandavas; the son of Dushyanta and Shakuntala and the origin of the name Bharatavarsha.
27 The slayer of Paka, a demon, is Indra.
28 A complete army had four components (chaturanga)—elephants, chariots, cavalry and infantry.
29 Dhritarashtra.
30 That is, the Pandavas.
31 Indra.
32 Drupada.
33 To Hastinapura.
34 One of Duryodhana’s brothers.
35 Bhishma and Drona.
36 The minister, Mahakarni.
37 The king, Ambuvicha.
38 The king, Ambuvicha.
39 Bhishma and Drona.

40 A famous king who performed many sacriﬁces.
41 For your own sons.
42 The Pandavas’.
43 Arjuna.
44 Indra.
45 Nakula and Sahadeva.
46 Balarama.
47 Krishna.
48 The Yadavas.
49 Kunti’s.
50 Vidura.
51 The Pandavas.
52 Droupadi.
53 Drupada.
54 Drupada.
55 Vidura.
56 Krishna.
57 Krishna.
58 Hastinapura.

1 Nakula and Sahadeva.
2 Balarama.
3 Balarama and Krishna.
4 The Pandavas.
5 Krishna.
6 The word used here for Hastinapura is Nagasahrya.
7 The Pandavas.
8 Yudhishthira.
9 The Pandavas.
10 Bhishma.
11 Yudhishthira.
12 Indra.
13 The capital of the nagas.
14 Weapons that could kill a hundred warriors at a time.
15 The Pandavas were also descended from Kuru.
16 Kubera.
17 Mango trees.
18 Hog plums.
19 The kadamba tree.
20 Tree with red blossoms.
21 Tree with yellow fragrant ﬂowers.
22 Variety of tree, another name for the champaka.
23 Variety of champaka.
24 Breadfruit tree.
25 Breadfruit tree.
26 A tall tree.
27 Palm tree.
28 Fragrant tree that buds at the time of rains.
29 Tree with fragrant ﬂowers.
30 Tree with fragrant ﬂowers.
31 Myrobalan.
32 Tree with red or white ﬂowers.
33 Name of a tree.
34 Rose apple.
35 The red trumpet ﬂower.
36 Name of a tree.
37 Creeper that surrounds mango trees.
38 Oleanders.
39 Coral tree.
40 The ruddy goose.

41 Dhritarashtra.
42 The Pandavas.
43 Balarama.
44 Dwaraka or Dwarika, in today’s Gujarat. Sometimes, Dvarvati is used instead of Dvaravati. Literally, the
place with gates or doors.

PENGUIN BOOKS
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Books India Pvt. Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi 110 017, India
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, M4P 2Y3, Canada
(a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.)
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Ireland, 25 St. Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd)
Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division
of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd)
Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore 0632, New Zealand (a division of
Pearson New Zealand Ltd)
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, Block D, Rosebank Ofﬁce Park, 181 Jan Smuts Avenue,
Parktown North, Gauteng 2193, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Ofﬁces: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
First published by Penguin Books India 2010
Translation copyright © Bibek Debroy 2010
Cover design by Nitish Mohanty
All rights reserved
ISBN: 978-01-4310-013-3
This digital edition published in 2012.
e-ISBN: 978-81-8475-388-2
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent,
resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher’s prior written consent in any form of
binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including this
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser and without limiting the rights under copyright
reserved above. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording
or otherwise), without the prior written permission of both the copyright owner and the above-mentioned publisher of this book.

The Mahabharata
Volume 2
(Sections 16 to 32)
Translated By
BIBEK DEBROY

PENGUIN BOOKS

Contents
About the Translator
Dedication
Family Tree
Map of Bharatavarsha
Introduction
SECTION SIXTEEN
ARJUNA-VANAVASA PARVA
Arjuna’s sojourn in the forest; begins with the reasons for his banishment
SECTION SEVENTEEN
SUBHADRA-HARANA PARVA
Subhadra’s abduction
SECTION EIGHTEEN
HARANA HARIKA PARVA
The giving of gifts that followed Subhadra’s abduction
SECTION NINETEEN
KHANDAVA-DAHA PARVA
The burning of the Khandava forest by Arjuna and Krishna
SABHA PARVA
SECTION TWENTY
SABHA PARVA
The building of the assembly hall
SECTION TWENTY-ONE
MANTRA PARVA
Consultation prior to the royal sacriﬁce
SECTION TWENTY-TWO
JARASANDHA-VADHA PARVA
The killing of Jarasandha
SECTION TWENTY-THREE
DIGVIJAYA PARVA
The conquest of the world by the Pandavas
SECTION TWENTY-FOUR
RAJASUYA PARVA
The royal sacriﬁce
SECTION TWENTY-FIVE
ARGHABHIHARANA PARVA
The offering of a gift and the consequent dispute
SECTION TWENTY-SIX
SHISHUPALA-VADHA PARVA
The killing of Shishupala
SECTION TWENTY-SEVEN
DYUTA PARVA

The gambling with dice
SECTION TWENTY-EIGHT
ANUDYUTA PARVA
The aftermath of the gambling match
ARANYAKA PARVA
SECTION TWENTY-NINE
ARANYAKA PARVA
Pandavas’ sojourn in the forest
SECTION THIRTY
KIRMIRA-VADHA PARVA
The killing of Kirmira
SECTION THIRTY-ONE
KAIRATA PARVA
The story of Shiva assuming the role of a mountain-dweller to ﬁght with Arjuna
SECTION THIRTY-TWO
INDRALOKABHIGAMANA PARVA
Arjuna’s visit to Indra’s world and the Nala–Damayanti story
Acknowledgements
Copyright Page

About the Translator
Bibek Debroy is an economist and is Research Professor (Centre of Policy
Research) and Contributing Editor (Indian Express group). He has worked
in universities, research institutes, industry and for the government. He has
published books, papers and popular articles in economics. But he has also
published in Indology and translated (into English) the Vedas, the Puranas,
the Upanishads and the Gita (Penguin India, 2005). His book Sarama and
her Children: The Dog in Indian Myth (Penguin India, 2008) splices his interest in Hinduism with his love for dogs. He is currently translating the remaining volumes of the unabridged Mahabharata.

For Suparna
Ardha bhāryā manuṣyasya bhāryā śreṣṭhatamaḥ sakhā
Bhāryā mulam trivargasya bhāryā mitram mariṣyataḥ

Mahabharata (1/68/40)

Family Tree
Bharata/Puru Lineage

Map of Bharatavarsha
BHARATAVARSHA (SIXTH CENTURY BCE)

Introduction
The Hindu tradition has an amazingly large corpus of religious texts, spanning Vedas, Vedanta (brahmanas,1
aranyakas,2 Upanishads,), Vedangas,3 smritis, Puranas, dharmashastras and itihasa. For most of these texts, especially if one excludes classical Sanskrit literature, we don’t quite know when they were composed and by whom,
not that one is looking for single authors. Some of the minor Puranas (Upa Purana) are of later vintage. For instance, the Bhavishya Purana (which is often listed as a major Purana or Maha Purana) mentions Queen Victoria.
In the listing of the corpus above ﬁgures itihasa, translated into English as history. History doesn’t entirely capture the nuance of itihasa, which is better translated as ‘this is indeed what happened’. Itihasa isn’t myth or ﬁction.
It is a chronicle of what happened; it is fact. Or so runs the belief. And itihasa consists of India’s two major epics,
the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. The former is believed to have been composed as poetry and the latter as
prose. This isn’t quite correct. The Ramayana has segments in prose and the Mahabharata has segments in poetry.
Itihasa doesn’t quite belong to the category of religious texts in a way that the Vedas and Vedanta are religious.
However, the dividing line between what is religious and what is not is fuzzy. After all, itihasa is also about attaining the objectives of dharma,4 artha,5 kama6 and moksha7 and the Mahabharata includes Hinduism’s most important spiritual text—the Bhagavad Gita.
The epics are not part of the shruti tradition. That tradition is like revelation, without any composer. The epics
are part of the smriti tradition. At the time they were composed, there was no question of texts being written down.
They were recited, heard, memorized and passed down through the generations. But the smriti tradition had composers. The Ramayana was composed by Valmiki, regarded as the ﬁrst poet or kavi. The word kavi has a secondary
meaning as poet or rhymer. The primary meaning of kavi is someone who is wise. And in that sense, the composer
of the Mahabharata was no less wise. This was Vedavyasa or Vyasadeva. He was so named because he classiﬁed
(vyasa) the Vedas. Vedavyasa or Vyasadeva isn’t a proper name. It is a title. Once in a while, in accordance with
the needs of the era, the Vedas need to be classiﬁed. Each such person obtains the title and there have been twentyeight Vyasadevas so far.
At one level, the question about who composed the Mahabharata is pointless. According to popular belief and
according to what the Mahabharata itself states, it was composed by Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa (Vyasadeva).
But the text was not composed and cast in stone at a single point in time. Multiple authors kept adding layers and
embellishing it. Sections just kept getting added and it is no one’s suggestion that Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa
composed the text of the Mahabharata as it stands today.
Consequently, the Mahabharata is far more unstructured than the Ramayana. The major sections of the Ramayana are known as kandas and one meaning of the word kanda is the stem or trunk of a tree, suggesting solidity.
The major sections of the Mahabharata are known as parvas and while one meaning of the word parva is limb or
member or joint, in its nuance there is greater ﬂuidity in the word parva than in kanda.
The Vyasadeva we are concerned with had a proper name of Krishna Dvaipayana. He was born on an island
(dvipa). That explains the Dvaipayana part of the name. He was dark. That explains the Krishna part of the name.
(It wasn’t only the incarnation of Vishnu who had the name of Krishna.) Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa was also
related to the protagonists of the Mahabharata story. To go back to the origins, the Ramayana is about the solar dynasty, while the Mahabharata is about the lunar dynasty. As is to be expected, the lunar dynasty begins with Soma
(the moon) and goes down through Pururava (who married the famous apsara Urvashi), Nahusha and Yayati. Yayati became old, but wasn’t ready to give up the pleasures of life. He asked his sons to temporarily loan him their

youth. All but one refused. The ones who refused were cursed that they would never be kings, and this includes the
Yadavas (descended from Yadu). The one who agreed was Puru and the lunar dynasty continued through him.
Puru’s son Duhshanta was made famous by Kalidasa in the Duhshanta–Shakuntala story and their son was Bharata, contributing to the name of Bharatavarsha. Bharata’s grandson was Kuru. We often tend to think of the
Kouravas as the evil protagonists in the Mahabharata story and the Pandavas as the good protagonists. Since Kuru
was a common ancestor, the appellation Kourava applies equally to Yudhishthira and his brothers and Duryodhana
and his brothers. Kuru’s grandson was Shantanu. Through Satyavati, Shantanu fathered Chitrangada and Vichitravirya. However, the sage Parashara had already fathered Krishna Dvaipayana through Satyavati. And Shantanu
had already fathered Bhishma through Ganga. Dhritarasthra and Pandu were fathered on Vichitravirya’s wives by
Krishna Dvaipayana.
The story of the epic is also about these antecedents and consequents. The core Mahabharata story is known to
every Indian and is normally understood as a dispute between the Kouravas (descended from Dhritarashtra) and
the Pandavas (descended from Pandu). However, this is a distilled version, which really begins with Shantanu. The
non-distilled version takes us to the roots of the genealogical tree and at several points along this tree we confront
a problem with impotence/sterility/death, resulting in offspring through a surrogate father. Such sons were accepted in that day and age. Nor was this a lunar dynasty problem alone. In the Ramayana, Dasharatha of the solar dynasty also had an infertility problem, corrected through a sacriﬁce. To return to the genealogical tree, the Pandavas
won the Kurukshetra war. However, their ﬁve sons through Droupadi were killed. So was Bhima’s son Ghatotkacha, fathered on Hidimba. As was Arjuna’s son Abhimanyu, fathered on Subhadra. Abhimanyu’s son Parikshit inherited the throne in Hastinapura, but was killed by a serpent. Parikshit’s son was Janamejaya.
Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa’s powers of composition were remarkable. Having classiﬁed the Vedas, he composed the Mahabharata in 100,000 shlokas or couplets. Today’s Mahabharata text doesn’t have that many shlokas,
even if the Hari Vamsha (regarded as the epilogue to the Mahabharata) is included. One reaches around 90,000
shlokas. That too, is a gigantic number. (The Mahabharata is almost four times the size of the Ramayana and is
longer than any other epic anywhere in the world.) For a count of 90,000 Sanskrit shlokas, we are talking about
something in the neighbourhood of two million words. The text of the Mahabharata tells us that Krishna Dvaipayana ﬁnished this composition in three years. This doesn’t necessarily mean that he composed 90,000 shlokas.
The text also tells us that there are three versions to the Mahabharata. The original version was called Jaya and had
8,800 shlokas. This was expanded to 24,000 shlokas and called Bharata. Finally, it was expanded to 90,000 (or
100,000) shlokas and called Mahabharata.
Krishna Dvaipayana didn’t rest even after that. He composed the eighteen Maha Puranas, adding another
400,000 shlokas. Having composed the Mahabharata, he taught it to his disciple Vaishampayana. When Parikshit
was killed by a serpent, Janamejaya organized a snake-sacriﬁce to destroy the serpents. With all the sages assembled there, Vaishampayana turned up and the assembled sages wanted to know the story of the Mahabharata, as
composed by Krishna Dvaipayana. Janamejaya also wanted to know why Parikshit had been killed by the serpent.
That’s the background against which the epic is recited. However, there is another round of recounting too. Much
later, the sages assembled for a sacriﬁce in Naimisharanya and asked Lomaharshana (alternatively, Romaharshana)
to recite what he had heard at Janamejaya’s snake-sacriﬁce. Lomaharshana was a suta, the sutas being charioteers
and bards or raconteurs. As the son of a suta, Lomaharshana is also referred to as Souti. But Souti or Lomaharshana aren’t quite his proper names. His proper name is Ugrashrava. Souti refers to his birth. He owes the name
Lomaharshana to the fact that the body-hair (loma or roma) stood up (harshana) on hearing his tales. Within the
text therefore, two people are telling the tale. Sometimes it is Vaishampayana and sometimes it is Lomaharshana.
Incidentally, the stories of the Puranas are recounted by Lomaharshana, without Vaishampayana intruding. Having
composed the Puranas, Krishna Dvaipayana taught them to his disciple Lomaharshana. For what it is worth, there
are scholars who have used statistical tests to try and identify the multiple authors of the Mahabharata.
As we are certain there were multiple authors rather than a single one, the question of when the Mahabharata
was composed is somewhat pointless. It wasn’t composed on a single date. It was composed over a span of more
than 1000 years, perhaps between 800 BCE and 400 ACE. It is impossible to be more accurate than that. There is a
difference between dating the composition and dating the incidents, such as the date of the Kurukshetra war. Dat-

ing the incidents is both subjective and controversial and irrelevant for the purposes of this translation. A timeline
of 1000 years isn’t short. But even then, the size of the corpus is nothing short of amazing.

Familiarity with Sanskrit is dying out. The ﬁrst decades of the twenty-ﬁrst century are quite unlike the ﬁrst decades
of the twentieth. Lamentation over what is inevitable serves no purpose. English is increasingly becoming the
global language, courtesy colonies (North America, South Asia, East Asia, Australia, New Zealand, Africa) rather
than the former colonizer. If familiarity with the corpus is not to die out, it needs to be accessible in English.
There are many different versions or recensions of the Mahabharata. However, between 1919 and 1966, the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (BORI) in Pune produced what has come to be known as the critical
edition. This is an authenticated text produced by a board of scholars and seeks to eliminate later interpolations,
unifying the text across the various regional versions. This is the text followed in this translation. One should also
mention that the critical edition’s text is not invariably smooth. Sometimes, the transition from one shloka to another is abrupt, because the intervening shloka has been weeded out. With the intervening shloka included, a noncritical version of the text sometimes makes better sense. On a few occasions, I have had the temerity to point this
out in the notes which I have included in my translation.
It took a long time for this critical edition to be put together. The exercise began in 1919. Without the Hari
Vamsha, the complete critical edition became available in 1966. And with the Hari Vamsha, the complete critical
edition became available in 1970. Before this, there were regional variations in the text and the main versions were
available from Bengal, Bombay and the south. However, now, one should stick to the critical edition, though there
are occasional instances where there are reasons for dissatisfaction with what the scholars of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute have accomplished. But in all fairness, there are two published versions of the critical
edition. The ﬁrst one has the bare bones of the critical edition’s text. The second has all the regional versions collated, with copious notes. The former is for the ordinary reader, assuming he/she knows Sanskrit. And the latter is
for the scholar. Consequently, some popular beliefs no longer ﬁnd a place in the critical edition’s text. For example, it is believed that Vedavyasa dictated the text to Ganesha, who wrote it down. But Ganesha had a condition before accepting. Vedavyasa would have to dictate continuously, without stopping. Vedavyasa threw in a countercondition. Ganesha would have to understand each couplet before he wrote it down. To ﬂummox Ganesha and give
himself time to think, Vedavyasa threw in some cryptic verses. This attractive anecdote has been excised from the
critical edition’s text. Barring material that is completely religious (speciﬁc hymns or the Bhagavad Gita), the Sanskrit text is reasonably easy to understand. Oddly, I have had the most difﬁculty with things that Vidura has sometimes said. Arya has today come to connote ethnicity. Originally, it meant language. That is, those who spoke Sanskrit were Aryas. Those who did not speak Sanskrit were mlecchas. Vidura is supposed to have been skilled in the
mlechha language. Is that the reason why some of Vidura’s statements seem obscure? In similar vein, in popular
renderings, when Droupadi is being disrobed, she prays to Krishna. Krishna provides the never-ending stream of
garments that stump Duhshasana. The critical edition has excised the prayer to Krishna. The never-ending stream
of garments is given as an extraordinary event. However, there is no intervention from Krishna.
How is the Mahabharata classiﬁed? The core component is the couplet or shloka. Several such shlokas form a
chapter or adhyaya. Several adhyayas form a parva. Most people probably think that the Mahabharata has eighteen
parvas. This is true, but there is another 100-parva classiﬁcation that is indicated in the text itself. That is, the adhyayas can be classiﬁed either according to eighteen parvas or according to 100 parvas. The table (given on pp.
xxiii–xxvi), based on the critical edition, should make this clear. As the table shows, the present critical edition
only has ninety-eight parvas of the 100-parva classiﬁcation, though the 100 parvas are named in the text.

Thus, interpreted in terms of BORI’s critical edition, the Mahabharata no longer possesses the 100,000 shlokas it
is supposed to have. The ﬁgure is a little short of 75,000 (73,787 to be precise). Should the Hari Vamsha be includ-

ed in a translation of the Mahabharata? It doesn’t quite belong. Yet, it is described as a khila or supplement to the
Mahabharata and BORI includes it as part of the critical edition, though in a separate volume. Hence, I have included the Hari Vamsha in this translation as well. With the Hari Vamsha, the number of shlokas increases to a
shade less than 80,000 (79,860 to be precise). However, in some of the regional versions the text of the Mahabharata proper is closer to 85,000 shlokas and with the Hari Vamsha included, one approaches 95,000, though one
doesn’t quite touch 100,000.
Why should there be another translation of the Mahabharata? Surely, it must have been translated innumerable
times. Contrary to popular impression, unabridged translations of the Mahabharata in English are extremely rare.
One should not confuse abridged translations with unabridged versions. There are only ﬁve unabridged translations
—by Kisori Mohan Ganguly (1883–96), by Manmatha Nath Dutt (1895–1905), by the University of Chicago and
J.A.B. van Buitenen (1973 onwards), by P. Lal and Writers Workshop (2005 onwards) and the Clay Sanskrit Library edition (2005 onwards). Of these, P. Lal is more a poetic trans-creation than a translation. The Clay Sanskrit
Library edition is not based on the critical edition, deliberately so. In the days of Ganguly and Dutt, the critical
edition didn’t exist. The language in these two versions is now archaic and there are some shlokas that these two
translators decided not to include, believing them to be untranslatable in that day and age. Almost three decades
later, the Chicago version is still not complete, and the Clay edition, not being translated in sequence, is still in
progress. However, the primary reason for venturing into yet another translation is not just the vacuum that exists,
but also reason for dissatisfaction with other attempts. Stated more explicitly, this translation, I believe, is better
and more authentic—but I leave it to the reader to be the ﬁnal judge. (While translating 80,000 shlokas is a hazardous venture, since Ganguly, Dutt and Lal are Bengalis, surely a fourth Bengali must also be preeminently qualiﬁed to embark on this venture!)
A few comments on the translation are now in order. First, there is the vexed question of diacritical marks—
should they be used or not? Diacritical marks make the translation and pronunciation more accurate, but often put
readers off. Sacriﬁcing academic purity, there is thus a conscious decision to avoid diacritical marks. Second, since
diacritical marks are not being used, Sanskrit words and proper names are written in what seems to be phonetically
natural and the closest—such as, Droupadi rather than Draupadi. There are rare instances where avoidance of diacritical marks can cause minor confusion, for example, between Krishna (Krishnaa) as in Droupadi9 and Krishna
as in Vaasudeva. However, such instances are extremely rare and the context should make these differences, which
are mostly of the gender kind, clear. Third, there are some words that simply cannot be translated. One such word
is dharma. More accurately, such words are translated the ﬁrst time they occur. But on subsequent occasions, they
are romanized in the text. Fourth, the translation sticks to the Sanskrit text as closely as possible. If the text uses
the word Kounteya, this translation will leave it as Kounteya or Kunti’s son and not attempt to replace it with Arjuna. Instead, there will be a note explaining that in that speciﬁc context Kounteya refers to Arjuna or, somewhat
more rarely, Yudhishthira or Bhima. This is also the case in the structure of the English sentences. To cite an instance, if a metaphor occurs towards the beginning of the Sanskrit shloka, the English sentence attempts to retain it
at the beginning too. Had this not been done, the English might have read smoother. But to the extent there is a
trade-off, one has stuck to what is most accurate, rather than attempting to make the English smooth and less
stilted.
As the table shows, the parvas (in the eighteen-parva classiﬁcation) vary widely in length. The gigantic Aranyaka or Shanti Parva can be contrasted with the slim Mousala Parva. Breaking up the translation into separate volumes based on this eighteen-parva classiﬁcation therefore doesn’t work. The volumes will not be remotely similar
in size. Most translators seem to keep a target of ten to twelve volumes when translating all the parvas. Assuming
ten volumes, 10 per cent means roughly 200 chapters and 7000 shlokas. This works rather well for Adi Parva, but
collapses thereafter. Most translators therefore have Adi Parva as the ﬁrst volume and then handle the heterogeneity across the eighteen parvas in subsequent volumes. This translation approaches the break-up of volumes somewhat differently, in the sense that roughly 10 per cent of the text is covered in each volume. The complete text, as
explained earlier, is roughly 200 chapters and 7,000 shlokas per volume. For example, then, this ﬁrst volume has
been cut off at 199 chapters and a little less than 6,500 shlokas. It includes 90 per cent of Adi Parva, but not all of
it and covers the ﬁrst ﬁfteen parvas of the 100-(or 98-) parva classiﬁcation.

The Mahabharata is one of the greatest stories ever told. It has plots and subplots and meanderings and digressions.
It is much more than the core story of a war between the Kouravas and the Pandavas, which everyone is familiar
with, the culmination of which was the battle in Kurukshetra. In the Adi Parva, there is a lot more which happens
before the Kouravas and the Pandavas actually arrive on the scene. In the 100-parva classiﬁcation, the Kouravas
and the Pandavas don’t arrive on the scene until Section 6.
From the Vedas and Vedanta literature, we know that Janamejaya and Parikshit were historical persons. From
Patanjali’s grammar and other contemporary texts, we know that the Mahabharata text existed by around 400 BCE.
This need not of course be the ﬁnal text of Mahabharata, but could have been the original text of Jaya. The Hindu
eras or yugas are four in number—Satya (or Krita) Yuga, Treta Yuga, Dvapara Yuga and Kali Yuga. This cycle
then repeats itself, with another Satya Yuga following Kali Yuga. The events of the Ramayana occurred in Treta
Yuga. The events of the Mahabharata occurred in Dvapara Yuga. This is in line with Rama being Vishnu’s seventh
incarnation and Krishna being the eighth. (The ninth is Buddha and the tenth is Kalki.) We are now in Kali Yuga.
Kali Yuga didn’t begin with the Kurukshetra war. It began with Krishna’s death, an event that occurred thirty-six
years after the Kurukshetra war. Astronomical data do exist in the epic. These can be used to date the Kurukshetra
war, or the advent of Kali Yuga. However, if the text was composed at different points in time, with additions and
interpolations, internal consistency in astronomical data is unlikely. In popular belief, following two alternative astronomers, the Kurukshetra war has been dated to 3102 BCE (following Aryabhatta) and 2449 BCE (following
Varahamihira). This doesn’t mesh with the timelines of Indian history. Mahapadma Nanda ascended the throne in
382 BCE, a historical fact on which there is no dispute. The Puranas have genealogical lists. Some of these state
that 1050 years elapsed between Parikshit’s birth and Mahapadma Nanda’s ascension. Others state that 1015 years
elapsed. (When numerals are written in words, it is easy to confuse 15 with 50.) This takes Parikshit’s birth and the
Kurukshetra war to around 1400 BCE. This is probably the best we can do, since we also know that the Kuru kingdom ﬂourished between 1200 BCE and 800 BCE. To keep the record straight, archaeological material has been
used to bring forward the date of the Kurukshetra war to around 900 BCE, the period of the Iron Age.
As was mentioned, in popular belief, the incidents of the Ramayana took place before the incidents of the Mahabharata. The Ramayana story also ﬁgures in the Mahabharata. However, there is no reference to any signiﬁcant
Mahabharata detail in the Ramayana. Nevertheless, from reading the text, one gets the sense that the Mahabharata
represents a more primitive society than the Ramayana. The ﬁghting in the Ramayana is more genteel and civilized. You don’t have people hurling rocks and stones at each other, or ﬁghting with trees and bare arms. Nor do
people rip apart the enemy’s chest and drink blood. The geographical knowledge in the Mahabharata is also more
limited than in the Ramayana, both towards the east and towards the south. In popular belief, the Kurukshetra war
occurred as a result of a dispute over land and the kingdom. That is true, in so far as the present text is concerned.
However, another ﬁght over cattle took place in the Virata Parva and the Pandavas were victorious in that too. This
is not the place to expand on the argument. But it is possible to construct a plausible hypothesis that this was the
core dispute. Everything else was added as later embellishments. The property dispute was over cattle and not
land. In human evolution, cattle represents a more primitive form of property than land. In that stage, humankind is
still partly nomadic and not completely settled. If this hypothesis is true, the Mahabharata again represents an earlier period compared to the Ramayana. This leads to the following kind of proposition. In its ﬁnal form, the Mahabharata was indeed composed after the Ramayana. But the earliest version of the Mahabharata was composed before the earliest version of the Ramayana. And the events of the Mahabharata occurred before the events of the Ramayana, despite popular belief. The proposition about the feud ending with Virata Parva illustrates the endless
speculation that is possible with the Mahabharata material. Did Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva ever exist? Nakula
and Sahadeva have limited roles to play in the story. Arjuna’s induction could have been an attempt to assert Indra’s supremacy. Arjuna represents such an integral strand in the story (and of the Bhagavad Gita), that such a suggestion is likely to be dismissed out of hand. But consider the following. Droupadi loved Arjuna a little bit more
than the others. That’s the reason she was denied admission to heaven. Throughout the text, there are innumerable
instances where Droupadi faces difﬁculties. Does she ever summon Arjuna for help on such occasions? No, she
does not. She summons Bhima. Therefore, did Arjuna exist at all? Or were there simply two original Pandava

brothers—one powerful and strong, and the other weak and useless in physical terms. Incidentally, the eighteenparva classiﬁcation is clearly something that was done much later. The 100-parva classiﬁcation seems to be older.
The Mahabharata is much more real than the Ramayana. And, therefore, much more fascinating. Every conceivable human emotion ﬁgures in it, which is the reason why it is possible to identify with it even today. The text itself states that what is not found in the Mahabharata, will not be found anywhere else. Unlike the Ramayana, India
is littered with real places that have identiﬁcations with the Mahabharata. (Ayodhya or Lanka or Chitrakuta are
identiﬁcations that are less certain.) Kurukshetra, Hastinapura, Indraprastha, Karnal, Mathura, Dvaraka, Gurgaon,
Girivraja are real places: the list is endless. In all kinds of unlikely places, one comes across temples erected by the
Pandavas when they were exiled to the forest. In some of these places, archaeological excavations have substantiated the stories. The war for regional supremacy in the Ganga–Yamuna belt is also a plausible one. The Vrishnis
and the Shurasenas (the Yadavas) are isolated, they have no clear alliance (before the Pandavas) with the powerful
Kurus. There is the powerful Magadha kingdom under Jarasandha and Jarasandha had made life difﬁcult for the
Yadavas. He chased them away from Mathura to Dvaraka. Shishupala of the Chedi kingdom doesn’t like Krishna
and the Yadavas either. Through Kunti, Krishna has a matrimonial alliance with the Pandavas. Through Subhadra,
the Yadavas have another matrimonial alliance with the Pandavas. Through another matrimonial alliance, the Pandavas obtain Drupada of Panchala as an ally. In the course of the royal sacriﬁce, Shishupala and Jarasandha are
eliminated. Finally, there is yet another matrimonial alliance with Virata of the Matsya kingdom, through Abhimanyu. When the two sides face each other on the ﬁeld of battle, they are more than evenly matched. Other than
the Yadavas, the Pandavas have Panchala, Kashi, Magadha, Matsya and Chedi on their side. The Kouravas have
Pragjyotisha, Anga, Kekaya, Sindhu, Avanti, Gandhara, Shalva, Bahlika and Kamboja as allies. At the end of the
war, all these kings are slain and the entire geographical expanse comes under the control of the Pandavas and the
Yadavas. Only Kripacharya, Ashvatthama and Kritavarma survive on the Kourava side.
Reading the Mahabharata, one forms the impression that it is based on some real incidents. That does not mean
that a war on the scale that is described took place. Or that miraculous weapons and chariots were the norm. But
there is such a lot of trivia, unconnected with the main story, that their inclusion seems to serve no purpose unless
they were true depictions. For instance, what does the physical description of Kripa’s sister and Drona’s wife,
Kripi, have to do with the main story? It is also more real than the Ramayana because nothing, especially the treatment of human emotions and behaviour, exists in black and white. Everything is in shades of grey. The Uttara
Kanda of the Ramayana is believed to have been a later interpolation. If one excludes the Uttara Kanda, we generally know what is good. We know who is good. We know what is bad. We know who is bad. The Ramayana is like
a clichéd Bollywood ﬁlm. This is never the case with the Mahabharata. However, a qualiﬁcation is necessary. Most
of us are aware of the Mahabharata story because we have read some version or the other, typically an abridged
one. Every abridged version simpliﬁes and condenses, distills out the core story. And in doing that, it tends to paint
things in black and white, ﬁtting everything into the mould of good and bad. The Kouravas are bad. The Pandavas
are good. And good eventually triumphs. The unabridged Mahabharata is anything but that. It is much more nuanced. Duryodhana isn’t invariably bad. He is referred to as Suyodhana as well, and not just by his father. History
is always written from the point of view of the victors. While the Mahabharata is generally laudatory towards the
Pandavas, there are several places where the text has a pro-Kourava stance. There are several places where the text
has an anti-Krishna stance. That’s yet another reason why one should read an unabridged version, so as not to miss
out on these nuances. Take the simple point about inheritance of the kingdom. Dhritarashtra was blind. Consequently, the king was Pandu. On Pandu’s death, who should inherit the kingdom? Yudhishthira was the eldest
among the brothers. (Actually, Karna was, though it didn’t become known until later.) We thus tend to assume that
the kingdom was Yudhishthira’s by right, because he was the eldest. (The division of the kingdom into two, Hastinapura and Indraprastha, is a separate matter.) But such primogeniture was not universally clear. A case can also be
established for Duryodhana, because he was Dhritarashtra’s son. If primogeniture was the rule, the eldest son of
the Pandavas was Ghatotkacha, not Abhimanyu. Before both were killed, Ghatotkacha should have had a claim to
the throne. However, there is no such suggestion anywhere. The argument that Ghatotkacha was the son of a rakshasa or demon will not wash. He never exhibited any demonic qualities and was a dutiful and loving son. Karna

saved up a weapon for Arjuna and this was eventually used to kill Ghatotkacha. At that time, we have the unseemly sight of Krishna dancing around in glee at Ghatotkacha being killed.
In the Mahabharata, because it is nuanced, we never quite know what is good and what is bad, who is good and
who is bad. Yes, there are degrees along a continuum. But there are no watertight and neat compartments. The four
objectives of human existence are dharma, artha, kama and moksha. Etymologically, dharma is that which upholds. If one goes by the Bhagavad Gita, pursuit of these four are also transient diversions. Because the fundamental objective is to transcend these four, even moksha. Within these four, the Mahabharata is about a conﬂict of
dharma. Dharma has been reduced to varnashrama dharma, according to the four classes (varnas) and four stages
of life (ashramas). However, these are collective interpretations of dharma, in the sense that a Kshatriya in the
garhasthya (householder) stage has certain duties. Dharma in the Mahabharata is individual too. Given an identical
situation, a Kshatriya in the garhasthya stage might adopt a course of action that is different from that adopted by
another Kshatriya in the garhasthya stage, and who is to judge what is wrong and what is right? Bhishma adopted a
life of celibacy. So did Arjuna, for a limited period. In that stage of celibacy, both were approached by women who
had fallen in love with them. And if those desires were not satisﬁed, the respective women would face difﬁculties,
even death. Bhishma spurned the advance, but Arjuna accepted it. The conﬂict over dharma is not only the law
versus morality conﬂict made famous by Krishna and Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gita. It pervades the Mahabharata,
in terms of a conﬂict over two different notions of dharma. Having collectively married Droupadi, the Pandavas
have agreed that when one of them is closeted with Droupadi, the other four will not intrude. And if there is such
an instance of intrusion, they will go into self-exile. Along comes a Brahmana whose cattle have been stolen by
thieves. Arjuna’s weapons are in the room where Droupadi and Yudhishthira are. Which is the higher dharma? Providing succour to the Brahmana or adhering to the oath? Throughout the Mahabharata, we have such conﬂicts,
with no clear normative indications of what is wrong and what is right, because there are indeed no absolute answers. Depending on one’s decisions, one faces the consequences and this brings in the unsolvable riddle of the
tension between free will and determinism, the so-called karma concept. The boundaries of philosophy and religion blur.
These conﬂicts over dharma are easy to identify with. It is easy to empathize with the protagonists, because we
face such conﬂicts every day. That is precisely the reason why the Mahabharata is read even today. And the reason
one says every conceivable human emotion ﬁgures in the story. Everyone familiar with the Mahabharata has
thought about the decisions taken and about the characters. Why was life so unfair to Karna? Why was Krishna
partial to the Pandavas? Why didn’t he prevent the war? Why was Abhimanyu killed so unfairly? Why did the
spirited and dark Droupadi, so unlike the Sita of the Ramayana, have to be humiliated publicly?

It is impossible to pinpoint when and how my interest in the Mahabharata started. As a mere toddler, my maternal
grandmother used to tell me stories from Chandi, part of the Markandeya Purana. I still vividly recollect pictures
from her copy of Chandi: Kali licking the demon Raktavija’s blood. Much later, in my early teens, at school in Ramakrishna Mission, Narendrapur, I ﬁrst read the Bhagavad Gita, without understanding much of what I read. The
alliteration and poetry in the ﬁrst chapter was attractive enough for me to learn it by heart. Perhaps the seeds were
sown there. In my late teens, I stumbled upon Bankimchandra Chattopadhyay’s Krishna Charitra, written in 1886.
Bankimchandra was not only a famous novelist, he was a brilliant essayist. For a long time, Krishna Charitra was
not available other than in Bengali. It has now been translated into English, but deserves better dissemination. A
little later, when in college, I encountered Buddhadeb Bose’s Mahabharater Katha. That was another brilliant collection of essays, ﬁrst serialized in a magazine and then published as a book in 1974. This too was originally in
Bengali, but is now available in English. Unlike my sons, my ﬁrst exposure to the Mahabharata story came not
through television serials but comic books. Upendrakishore Raychowdhury’s Mahabharata (and Ramayana) for
children was staple diet, later supplanted by Rajshekhar Basu’s abridged versions of both epics, written for adults.
Both were in Bengali. In English, there was Chakravarti Rajagopalachari’s abridged translation, still a perennial
favourite. Later, Chakravarthi Narasimhan’s selective unabridged translation gave a ﬂavour of what the Mahabharata actually contained. In Bengal, the Kashiram Das version of the Mahabharata, written in the seventeenth century, was quite popular. I never found this appealing. But in the late 1970s, I stumbled upon a treasure. Kolkata’s

famous College Street was a storehouse of old and second-hand books in those days. You never knew what you
would discover when browsing. In the nineteenth century, an unabridged translation of the Mahabharata had been
done in Bengali under the editorship of Kaliprasanna Singha (1840–70). I picked this up for the princely sum of Rs
5. The year may have been 1979, but Rs 5 was still amazing. This was my ﬁrst complete reading of the unabridged
version of the Mahabharata. This particular copy probably had antiquarian value. The pages would crumble in my
hands and I soon replaced my treasured possession with a republished reprint. Not longer after, I acquired the
Aryashastra version of the Mahabharata, with both the Sanskrit and the Bengali together. In the early 1980s, I was
also exposed to three Marathi writers writing on the Mahabharata. There was Iravati Karve’s Yuganta. This was
available in both English and in Marathi. I read the English one ﬁrst, followed by the Marathi. The English version
isn’t an exact translation of the Marathi and the Marathi version is far superior. Then there was Durga Bhagwat’s
Vyas Parva. This was in Marathi and I am not aware of an English translation. Finally, there was Shivaji Sawant’s
Mritunjaya, a kind of autobiography for Karna. This was available both in English and in Marathi.
In the early 1980s, quite by chance, I encountered two shlokas, one from Valmiki’s Ramayana, the other from
Kalidasa’s Meghadutam. These were two poets separated by anything between 500 to 1,000 years, the exact period
being an uncertain one. The shloka in Meghadutam is right towards the beginning, the second shloka to be precise.
It is the ﬁrst day in the month of Ashada. The yaksha has been cursed and has been separated from his beloved.
The mountains are covered with clouds. These clouds are like elephants, bent down as if in play. The shloka in the
Valmiki Ramayana occurs in Sundara Kanda. Rama now knows that Sita is in Lanka. But the monsoon stands in
the way of the invasion. The clouds are streaked with ﬂags of lightning and garlanded with geese. They are like
mountain peaks and are thundering, like elephants ﬁghting. At that time, I did not know that elephants were a standard metaphor for clouds in Sanskrit literature. I found it amazing that two different poets separated by time had
thought of elephants. And because the yaksha was pining for his beloved, the elephants were playing. But because
Rama was impatient to ﬁght, the elephants were ﬁghting. I resolved that I must read all this in the original. It was a
resolution I have never regretted. I think that anyone who has not read Meghadutam in Sanskrit has missed out on
a thing of beauty that will continue to be a joy for generations to come.
In the early 1980s, Professor Ashok Rudra was a professor of economics in Visva-Bharati, Santiniketan. I used
to teach in Presidency College, Kolkata, and we sometimes met. Professor Rudra was a left-wing economist and
didn’t think much of my economics. I dare say the feeling was reciprocated. By tacit agreement, we never discussed economics. Instead, we discussed Indological subjects. At that point, Professor Rudra used to write essays
on such subjects in Bengali. I casually remarked, ‘I want to do a statistical test on the frequency with which the
ﬁve Pandavas used various weapons in the Kurukshetra war.’ Most sensible men would have dismissed the thought
as crazy. But Professor Rudra wasn’t sensible by usual norms of behaviour and he was also a trained statistician.
He encouraged me to do the paper, written and published in Bengali, using the Aryashastra edition. Several similar
papers followed, written in Bengali. In 1983, I moved to Pune, to the Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics,
a stone’s throw away from BORI. Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (ABORI) is one of the
most respected journals in Indology. Professor G.B. Palsule was then the editor of ABORI and later went on to become Director of BORI. I translated one of the Bengali essays into English and went and met Professor Palsule,
hoping to get it published in ABORI. To Professor Palsule’s eternal credit, he didn’t throw the dilettante out. Instead, he said he would get the paper refereed. The referee’s substantive criticism was that the paper should have
been based on the critical edition, which is how I came to know about it. Eventually, this paper (and a few more)
were published in ABORI. In 1989, these became a book titled Essays on the Ramayana and the Mahabharata,
published when the Mahabharata frenzy had reached a peak on television. The book got excellent reviews, but
hardly sold. It is now out of print. As an aside, the book was jointly dedicated to Professor Rudra and Professor
Palsule, a famous economist and a famous Indologist respectively. Both were ﬂattered. However, when I gave him
a copy, Professor Rudra said, ‘Thank you very much. But who is Professor Palsule?’ And Professor Palsule remarked, ‘Thank you very much. But who is Professor Rudra?’
While the research interest in the Mahabharata remained, I got sidetracked into translating. Through the 1990s,
there were abridged translations of the Maha Puranas, the Vedas and the eleven major Upanishads. I found that I
enjoyed translating from the Sanskrit to English and since these volumes were well received, perhaps I did do a

good job. With Penguin as publisher, I did a translation of the Bhagavad Gita, something I had always wanted to
do. Sarama and Her Children, a book on attitudes towards dogs in India, also with Penguin, followed. I kept thinking about doing an unabridged translation of the Mahabharata and waited to muster up the courage. That courage
now exists, though the task is daunting. With something like two million words and ten volumes expected, the exercise seems open-ended. But why translate the Mahabharata? In 1924, George Mallory, with his fellow climber
Andrew Irvine, may or may not have climbed Mount Everest. They were last seen a few hundred metres from the
summit, before they died. Mallory was once asked why he wanted to climb Everest and he answered, ‘Because it’s
there.’ Taken out of context, there is no better reason for wanting to translate the Mahabharata. There is a steep
mountain to climb. And I would not have dared had I not been able to stand of the shoulders of the three intellectual giants who have preceded me—Kisori Mohan Ganguli, Manmatha Nath Dutt and J.A.B. van Buitenen.
Bibek Debroy

In the second volume, we cover Sections 16 to 32 of the 100-parva classiﬁcation. This completes Adi Parva (the origins), Sabha Parva (the assembly
hall) and begins Aranyaka Parva (the sojourn in the forest). Arjuna is banished and the story of Sunda and Upasunda is recounted. He is married to
Subhadra. Krishna and Arjuna burn down the Khandava forest. The assembly hall is built. After killing Jarasandha, the Pandavas conquer the world.
Shishupala is also killed. The two games with the dice lead to the Pandavas
being exiled in the forest. Kirmira is killed and Arjuna encounters Shiva. As
a side story, we are told about Krishna’s destruction of Soubha. Arjuna goes
to Indra’s abode in search of celestial weapons. The volume ends with the
story of Nala and Damayanti.

Section Sixteen
Arjuna-vanavasa Parva
This parva has 298 shlokas.
Chapter 200: 23 shlokas
Chapter 201: 32 shlokas
Chapter 202: 27 shlokas
Chapter 203: 30 shlokas
Chapter 204: 30 shlokas
Chapter 205: 30 shlokas
Chapter 206: 34 shlokas
Chapter 207: 26 shlokas
Chapter 208: 21 shlokas
Chapter 209: 24 shlokas
Chapter 210: 21 shlokas
This parva has 11 chapters, Chapters 200 through 210. The word vana means forest and the word vasa means to live. So this parva is about Arjuna’s sojourn in the forest and begins with the reasons for his banishment. It recounts his marriage to Ulupi and Chitrangada. This parva also has
the Sunda and Upasunda story.
200

Janamejaya said, ‘O one blessed with the power of austerities! All those great-souled Pandavas are my ancestors.
After obtaining the kingdom of Indraprastha, what did those great-souled ones do? Those ﬁve rulers of men had a
common wife in Krishna.1 How did their lawful wife Droupadi follow their wishes? How did they, the immensely
fortunate ones, prevent dissension among themselves? How did they behave with one another after they had united
with Krishna? O one blessed with the power of austerities! I wish to hear all this in detail.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘With Dhritarashtra’s permission, the Pandavas, tigers among men and scorchers of enemies, obtained the kingdom and sported in pleasure with Krishna. Having obtained the kingdom, the immensely
energetic and truthful Yudhishthira ruled over the earth in accordance with dharma,2 together with his brothers.
Having defeated their enemies, the immensely wise sons of Pandu, always devoted to truth and dharma, lived there
in supreme happiness. Seated on extremely expensive royal thrones, those bulls among men performed all the duties towards the citizens.
‘When those great-souled ones were thus seated together, devarshi3 Narada,4 who was travelling as he willed,
happened to come there. Yudhishthira offered him his own excellent seat. As is prescribed, the wise Yudhishthira
himself gave him offerings5 and once the devarshi was seated, reported the state of the kingdom. The rishi6 happily accepted the homage and blessing him, asked him to be seated. Thus instructed, King Yudhishthira sat down. He
sent word to Krishna that the illustrious one had arrived. Hearing this, Droupadi carefully puriﬁed herself and went
to the place where Narada and the Pandavas were assembled. That follower of dharma, Drupada’s daughter, paid
homage at the devarshi’s feet and stood before him with joined palms, appropriately covered. The illustrious Narada, supreme among rishis, always truthful and with dharma in his heart, pronounced his blessings on the unblemished princess and then asked her to leave.

‘When Krishna had left, the illustrious rishi told the Pandavas, with Yudhishthira at their head, “The immensely
famous daughter of Panchala7 is a single wife to all of you, in accordance with dharma. You must lay down a rule
among yourselves, lest there be dissension. In ancient times, there were two asura8 brothers named Sunda and Upasunda who were famous in the three worlds.9 They were always together and were incapable of being killed by
anyone else, except each other. They ruled over the same kingdom. They lived in the same house. They slept on
the same bed. They sat in the same seat. They ate off the same plate. But they killed each other over Tilottama. O
Yudhishthira! Therefore, seek to protect the friendship you have for each other and act so that there is no dissension amongst you.”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “O great sage! Whose sons were the asuras Sunda and Upasunda? How did the dissension
originate? Why did they kill each other? They killed each other over desire for Tilottama. Whose apsara,10 daughter of the gods, was she? O one blessed with the power of austerities! O Brahmana! We are greatly curious and
wish to hear everything in detail. Please tell us.”’
201

‘Narada said, “O Yudhishthira, son of Pritha!11 Then together with your brothers, listen to this ancient account,
exactly as it happened. In ancient times, in the great asura Hiranyakashipu’s12 lineage, there was a powerful and
energetic lord of the daityas13 named Nikumba. He had two immensely valorous sons who were terrible in their
prowess. They never ate unless they were together and never went anywhere without each other. They always did
what was pleasurable to the other and always spoke pleasantly to the other. They were similar in behaviour and
conduct; like one divided into two. Similar in action and inclination, they grew up as immensely valorous and
adopted the identical resolution of conquering the three worlds. After consecration, they went to the Vindhya
mountains and practised terrible austerities there. They were exhausted with hunger and thirst. Their hair was matted and they were dressed in the bark of trees. But they continued to perform austerities until they acquired powers.
They covered all their limbs with ﬁlth and lived on air. They offered their own ﬂesh into the ﬁre. They stood on the
tips of their toes. Raising their arms and without blinking, they observed their vows for a long period. Heated by
the power of the length of their austerities, an extraordinary incident occurred. The Vindhya began to belch out
smoke.
‘“On seeing the terrible power of their austerities, the gods were frightened. The gods created various obstacles
to prevent them from attaining their vows. They repeatedly tempted them with jewels and beautiful women. But
the two of them stood ﬁrm against these temptations. Then the gods used the power of Maya14 on the two greatsouls, wherein their sisters, mothers, wives and relatives, trembling and frightened, were oppressed by a
rakshasa15 who chased them with a spear. Their hair and ornaments were dishevelled and their garments fell
loose. The women seemed to be running towards them, exclaiming, ‘Save us!’ But even this could not break the
vows of the ones who were great in their vows. When they were not shocked or grieved at this, the women and the
demon all vanished.
‘“Then Brahma himself appeared before the great asuras. He who is the grandfather of all the worlds asked them
to seek a boon. On seeing the god and grandfather, Sunda and Upasunda, those two brothers who were ﬁrm in their
valour, stood before him with their hands joined. Together, they then spoke to the illustrious god. ‘O grandfather!
If you are pleased with our austerities, then may we possess the knowledge of delusion and the knowledge of all
weapons. May we be strong and may we have the power to change our form at will. If the illustrious lord is
pleased with us, may we be immortal.’ Brahma replied, ‘Except for being immortal, everything else will be the
way you wish. Choose a means of death that will make you the equal of the immortals. Since you have performed
these austerities with an objective in mind, the boon of immortality cannot be granted to you. You have undertaken
these austerities with a view to conquering the three worlds. O, lords of the daityas! For this reason, I cannot grant
you the boon that you desire.’ Sunda and Upasunda said, ‘O, grandfather! Then let us not face any fear from any
being, anything mobile or immobile, any object in the three worlds, other than each other.’ The grandfather
replied, ‘I can grant you this boon, the way you have wished it. Your deaths will occur the way you have

indicated.’ Having then granted them this boon, Brahma then asked them to refrain from austerities and returned to
his world.
‘“Having obtained those boons, the two brothers, the lords of the daityas, who could no longer be slain by anyone in the worlds, then returned to their home. On seeing that the great asuras had obtained the boons and were
successful in getting what they desired, all their well-wishers were extremely happy. The two great asuras cut off
their matted locks. They wore crowns and dressed themselves in expensive ornaments and unblemished garments.
Though it was not the right season, they observed the koumudi16 festival. The lords of the daityas and their wellwishers happily enjoyed themselves in the festivities. In house after house were heard the words, ‘eat’, ‘feed’,
‘pleasure’, ‘sing’, ‘drink’ and ‘give’. There were great bouts of drinking. A roar arose from the clapping of hands.
The entire city of the daityas went wild with joy. As the daityas, who could assume any form at will, sported themselves in varied amusements, many years passed. But it seemed like a single day.”’
202

‘Narada said, “When the festivities ended, the two great ones wished to conquer the three worlds. Having obtained
the permission of their well-wishers and elders among the daityas, arranging their army and having sought counsel
and performed the required rites, they set out in the night, when the constellation Magha17 was in the ascendant. A
large army of daityas went with them, carrying clubs, pikes, spears, all following the same dharma.18 Charanas19
sung their praises in auspicious songs that wished them victory. They set out with happiness in their hearts. The
two daityas could assume any form at will and were intoxicated at the prospect of war. They rose into the sky and
went to the habitation of the gods. Knowing that they were coming and aware of the boon that they had obtained
from the illustrious one, the gods ﬂed heaven20 and went to Brahma’s world. With their terrible valour, they conquered Indra’s world and defeated masses of yakshas21 and rakshas22 and beings that frequent the sky. The two
great asuras then vanquished the nagas23 who dwell in the interior regions of the earth, all those who live in the
oceans and all the mleccha24 races.
‘“The two who were terrible in their rule, wished to subjugate the entire earth. They summoned their soldiers
and uttered these harsh words. ‘With their great sacriﬁces and offerings, the rajarshis25 and brahmanas increase
the energy, strength and prosperity of the gods. Because of these acts, they cause injury to the asuras. Together, we
must attack and completely destroy them.’ Having thus ordered them on the eastern shores of the great ocean, they
set out in all directions with this cruel resolution in mind. The two powerful ones killed those who sacriﬁced and
brahmanas who ofﬁciated at sacriﬁces, wherever they were seen. In hermitages of rishis who had controlled their
souls, their soldiers grasped the sacriﬁcial ﬁres and ﬂung them irreverently away. Because of the boon granted to
them, the curses of the great-souled and angry ascetics had no effect. When the brahmanas saw that their curses
had no effect, like when arrows strike stone, they gave up their vows and ﬂed in all directions. Like snakes ﬂeeing
at the approach of Vinata’s son,26 those on earth who were successful in austerities and were self-controlled and
calm, ran away. All the hermitages were destroyed, the pots and ladles were broken and scattered. The entire universe was empty, as if it was the time of ﬁnal destruction.
‘“When the rajarshis and rishis disappeared into hiding, the great asuras united in their decision to kill. They
changed their forms and assumed ones of mad, rutting elephants with their temples oozing, and sent those who
were in inaccessible regions to Yama’s abode. Sometimes they became lions and yet again, tigers. They also became invisible. With these forms, they slaughtered the rishis wherever they found them. Sacriﬁces and studying
ceased and the brahmanas were exterminated. The earth bereft of festivals and sacriﬁces cried out in fear. All buying and selling ended. The worship of the gods was stopped. Sacred rites and marriages were not observed. Agriculture and the tending of cattle ended. Cities and hermitages were destroyed. Strewn with bones and skeletons,
the earth was terrible to behold. Ceremonies for the ancestors were no longer observed. The sacred chants ceased.
The universe was terrible and loathsome to behold. On witnessing these acts of Sunda and Upasunda, the moon,
the sun, the planets, the stars, the constellations and the dwellers of heaven were depressed. Thus subjugating all
the directions with their terrible acts, the two daityas lived in Kurukshetra, after vanquishing every enemy.”’

203

‘Narada said, “On witnessing this great destruction, all the devarshis, the siddhas27 and the supreme rishis were
extremely distressed. They were ones who had conquered anger, mastered their souls and senses. Stirred by compassion for the universe, they went to the grandfather’s abode. There they saw the grandfather seated with the
gods, surrounded by siddhas and brahmarshis.28 The god Mahadeva29 was there, with Agni30 and Vayu.31 The
moon32 and the sun33 were there and Dharma and Parameshthi34 and Budha.35 The vaikhanasas36 were there
and the valakhilyas,37 those who had resorted to the forest, the marichipas,38 the unborn ones, those who were
not deluded and other ascetics who were born from energy. All these rishis were paying homage to the grandfather.
All the maharshis39 went there and recounted the deeds of Sunda and Upasunda—what they had done, how they
had done it, and in what order. Having recounted everything to the grandfather, all the masses of gods and the
supreme rishis pressed him to act.
‘“On hearing all their words, the grandfather thought for an instant, trying to decide what should be done. Determining how they might be killed, he summoned Vishvakarma.40 When he saw Vishvakarma, the grandfather ordered, ‘O, great ascetic! Create a lady who will be desired.’ Paying homage to the grandfather and listening attentively to his words, he thought about it and carefully created a divine damsel. First he carefully collected whatever
was beautiful in the three worlds, mobile or immobile. He placed millions of gems on her body. The divine beauty
that he created was the essence of gems. She was created by Vishvakarma with a great deal of diligence and was
unmatched in beauty among all the women in the three worlds. There wasn’t the tiniest part of her body that
wasn’t perfect in the wealth of its beauty and that failed to attract the gaze of the beholder. She was like Shri41
herself, beautiful and desirable. She captivated the eyes and the hearts of all beings. Because she had been created
bit by bit from the essence of all gems, the grandfather gave her the name of Tilottama.42 The grandfather said, ‘O
Tilottama! Go to the asuras Sunda and Upasunda. O fortunate one! Seduce them with your desirable beauty. Act in
a way so that you create dissension among the two of them, when they see how perfect your beauty is.’ She agreed
to do this.
‘“Paying homage to the grandfather, she circumabulated the gods assembled there. The illustrious one43 faced
the east, Maheshvara44 faced the south. The other gods faced the north, while all the rishis faced various directions. But while she was thus circumabulating the gods, only Indra and the illustrious god Sthanu45 managed to
maintain their composure. But so great was his46 desire to see her as she passed by his side, that another face with
eyes having curved lashes emerged from the southern side. When she went behind him, another face emerged from
the western side and when she went north, another face emerged on the northern side. For the great Indra too, one
thousand large and red-tinted eyes appeared everywhere, on his back and on his sides. Thus, in ancient times, Mahadeva Sthanu came to possess four faces and the slayer of Bala47 came to possess a thousand eyes. As Tilottama
walked around, all the masses of gods and the rishis turned their faces in the direction that she followed. But for
the god who was the grandfather, the eyes of all the great-souled ones were on her body. When the one with richness of beauty left for her appointed task, all the gods and the supreme rishis thought that the act had already been
accomplished. After Tilottama had departed, the one with the welfare of the worlds in his mind,48 asked all the
gods and the rishis to leave.”’
204

‘Narada said, “After conquering the earth, the two daityas had no other enemies or concerns. Having subjugated
the three worlds, their desire had been attained. They were delighted at having robbed the gods, the gandharvas,49
yakshas, nagas, kings and rakshas of all their gems and when they saw that they had not a single rival left, they
were supremely content. Like the immortals, they gave up all endeavours and spent their time in pleasures, with
women, garlands, fragrances, food, and delicacies in copious quantities, drink and various other objects that give
rise to enjoyment. Like the immortals, they sported in their inner quarters, gardens, mountains and groves and in
whatever region that struck their fancy.

‘“One day, they went to sport in a rocky plain on the Vindhya Mountains that was dense with shala50 trees
crested with blossoming ﬂowers. After every divine object of desire had been brought, the two contentedly sat on
supreme seats, with beautiful women around them. Wishing to please the two, the women danced to the sound of
music and delighted them with songs sung in their praise.
‘“It was then that Tilottama appeared, plucking ﬂowers in the forest. She was dressed in a single red garment, an
attire that was very seductive. Gathering karnikara ﬂowers along the banks of the river, she slowly approached the
place where the two great asuras were. They had drunk the best of wine and their eyes were red. On seeing the one
with the beautiful hips, they were struck by desire. They instantly left their seats and went to where she was. Filled
with desire, they both asked for her favours. Sunda grasped the right hand of the one with the beautiful brows. Upasunda grasped Tilottama’s left hand. They were intoxicated with the boon they had received, with their physical
strength, with the riches and gems they possessed and with the wine they had drunk. Intoxicated with this madness
and with the madness of desire, they contracted their brows and spoke to each other. ‘She is my wife and your superior,’ said Sunda. ‘She is my wife and your sister-in-law,’ replied Upasunda. In their anger, they shouted at each
other, ‘She is mine, not yours.’ Overcome by desire for her, they grasped their terrible clubs. Uttering the words, ‘I
was the ﬁrst,’51 they attacked each other. Struck by those terrible clubs, both of them fell down on the ground.
With blood streaming from their bodies, they looked like two suns dislodged from the sky. Then the women and
the masses of daityas ﬂed. Miserable and shuddering with fright, all of them took refuge in the nether regions.
‘“Then the pure-souled grandfather arrived, with the gods and the maharshis and praised Tilottama. Brahma was
pleased to grant her a boon. Delighted with her, the grandfather said, ‘O, fortunate one! You will roam in the world
of the adityas.52 Your energy will be so great that no one will be able to look at you for a long time.’ Having
granted this boon to her, the grandfather of all the worlds, instated Indra in the three worlds. The illustrious one
then departed for Brahma’s world.
‘“Those two were always together, they were always united with the same objective. But in their anger, they
killed each other over Tilottama. O, supreme among the Bharata lineage! Out of my affection for you, I am telling
you, so that there is no dissension among you because of Droupadi. O, fortunate ones! If you wish to please me,
act accordingly.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O, king! Having been thus addressed by the great-souled maharshi Narada, they consulted
with each other and arrived at a rule, in the inﬁnitely energetic devarshi Narada’s presence. If any one of them set
eyes on Droupadi when she was lying with any one of the others, he would retire to the forest and live the life of a
brahmachari53 for twelve years. After the Pandavas, who always followed dharma, had established this rule, the
great sage Narada was happy and went where he wished to go. O, descendant of the Bharata lineage! In earlier
times, thus requested by Narada, they established a rule and no dissension arose between them.’
205

Vaishampayana said, ‘After having established an agreement in this way, the Pandavas lived there. With the
strength of their weapons, they brought under their sovereignty many kings. Krishna followed the wishes of all the
ﬁve sons of Pritha, who were lions among men and immeasurable in their energy. She was extremely happy with
the ﬁve valourous ones as her husbands, like Sarasvati54 with her elephants,55 and they were also delighted with
her. Since the great-souled Pandavas abided by dharma, all the Kurus56 increased in prosperity, were bereft of sin
and were happy.
‘O, lord of the earth! O, supreme among kings! After a long time had passed, thieves robbed a brahmana’s cattle. When his wealth was thus stolen, the brahmana lost his senses in anger. He went to Khandavaprastha and angrily reproved the Pandavas. “O Pandavas! Mean, cruel and mindless thieves are forcibly robbing me of my wealth
of cattle in your kingdom. Pursue them. The sacriﬁcial offerings of a peaceful brahmana are being carried away by
crows. The inferior jackal has invaded the deserted cave of a tiger. A brahmana’s riches are being taken away by
thieves. Dharma and artha57 will be destroyed. I am crying for help. Take up your arms.” As the miserable brahmana cried out to the Pandavas, Kunti’s son Dhananjaya58 heard his words.

‘On hearing the words, the mighty-armed one told the brahmana not to fear. But Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was
then lying with Krishna in the room where the great-souled Pandavas kept their weapons. The Pandava59 was unable to enter the room. But he was also unable to go away as the wailing brahmana repeatedly urged him with his
words. Kunti’s son reﬂected in sorrow, “This ascetic brahmana’s riches are being robbed. It is certainly my duty to
dry his tears. If I do not protect someone who is weeping at our door, the great adharma of negligence will taint
the king.60 If I fail to protect, the adharma of our failing to protect will certainly be established in all the worlds.
But it is also certain that if I enter the room without the permission of King Ajatashatru,61 I will do him a great injury and I must be banished to the forest. There will either be great adharma or death in the forest. But dharma
must be upheld, even if there is destruction of the body.” O lord of the earth! Having thus resolved, Kunti’s son
Dhananjaya entered the room and took the king’s permission.
‘Grasping his bow, he happily told the brahmana, “O brahmana! Let us go quickly, so that those mean thieves do
not go too far away and I can return your riches to you, from the hands of the robbers.” The mighty-armed one,
with bow and armour and riding a chariot with ﬂags, pierced the thieves with arrows and recovered the riches.
Thus helping the brahmana and returning his riches of cattle to him, the Pandava obtained fame. The valorous
Savyasachi,62 scorcher of enemies, returned to the city. He paid his homage to all his superiors and was in turn
praised by them. He then told Dharmaraja, “O, lord! Grant me permission to observe my vow. On seeing you, I
have violated the rule and I must go and dwell in the forest, because that is the rule we made.” On suddenly hearing these unpleasant words, Dharmaraja was afﬂicted by grief and in a sorrowful voice, asked, “Why?” Yudhisthira
told his brother Gudakesha,63 a brother who never suffered from decay, “O unblemised one! If I am one with authority, listen to my words. O brave one! I know all the reasons why you entered the room and caused me displeasure and I have not felt any injury. There is no sin if a younger brother enters where the elder brother is lying with
his wife. However, if an elder brother enters a room where the younger brother is lying with his wife, that is improper. O mighty-armed one! Refrain, listen to my words and do as I say. Your dharma has not suffered and no injury has been done to me.” Arjuna replied, “I have also heard from you that dharma must not be observed through
pretences. I will not waver from the truth. The truth is my weapon.” With the king’s permission, he was consecrated in the rites of brahmacharya and went away to live in the forest for twelve years.’
206

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the mighty-armed one who extended the fame of the Kuru lineage departed, greatsouled brahmanas who knew the Vedas, were knowledgeable in the vedangas,64 those who were devoted to contemplation of the supreme being, those who were immersed in the supreme lord and bards who knew the ancient
tales followed him. O king! There were also raconteurs, ascetics, those who dwelt in the forests and brahmanas
who read divine tales in melodious voices. Surrounded by these and many others who were skilled in recounting
stories, Pandu’s son travelled like Vasava65 surrounded by the Maruts.66 O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
The bull among Bharatas saw beautiful and colourful woods, lakes, rivers, oceans, countries and sacred places of
pilgrimage. Reaching the source of the Ganga, the lord began to live there. O Janamejaya! Now listen, as I tell you,
about the wonderful act that the pure-souled charioteer, who was foremost among the Pandus, performed.
‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Kunti’s son lived there with the brahmanas, the brahmanas performed many agnihotras.67 O king! The ﬁres were kindled and blazed as offerings were made into them. Offerings of ﬂowers were made on both sides of the river by the learned and great-souled ones who were always unwavering in their vows and they successfully consecrated there. As a result of this, the source of the Ganga became
extremely beautiful.
‘One day, when this was going on, the son of Kunti and Pandu entered the Ganga to have a bath. O king! He
performed his ablutions and offered water to his grandfathers. He was about to climb out of the water, wishing to
perform rites to the ﬁre. O great king! The mighty-armed one was grasped and pulled into the water by Ulupi,
daughter of the king of the nagas, who could travel where she willed. There, in the revered palace of the naga

named Kouravya,68 the Pandava saw a ﬁre that had been built up well. Kunti’s son Dhananjaya performed his rites
in that ﬁre. Witnessing the unhesitating offering of oblations, Hutashana69 was satisﬁed.
‘After having performed his rites before the ﬁre, Kunti’s son smilingly uttered these words to the daughter of the
naga king. “O beautiful one! O timid one! How did you perform such a courageous act? What beautiful land is
this? Whom do you belong to and whose daughter are you?” Ulupi replied, “O Partha! The serpent Kouravya is
descended from the lineage of Airavata. I am his daughter and a serpent named Ulupi. O Kounteya!70 I saw you
descend into the water to have a bath and was robbed of my senses by the god of love.71 O descendant of the Kuru
lineage! The god of love is churning me. I am yet a maiden. Please me today by giving yourself to me.” Arjuna
said, “O fortunate one! I have been commanded by Dharmaraja72 to observe brahmacharya for twelve years and
do not have control over myself. O dweller in the water! I do wish to do that which brings you pleasure. But never
before this have I spoken that which is untrue. O serpent-maiden! How can I bring pleasure to you and yet not do
that which is untrue? How can I not violate dharma?”
‘Ulupi replied, “O Pandava! I know why you are roaming the earth. I know that you are observing brahmacharya on the instructions of your superior. This was the rule you made among yourselves for Drupada’s daughter, that anyone deluded enough to enter would retire to the forest and observe brahmacharya for a period of twelve
years. The exile is therefore for the sake of Droupadi. You are observing that dharma. But in this case, dharma
does not suffer. O large-eyed one! It is your duty to save those who are distressed. By saving me, dharma is not violated. O Arjuna! Even if there is a slight transgression of dharma, by granting me life, you will achieve greater
dharma. O Partha! O lord! I desire you. Desire me in return. That is the view of those who are rigid in their vows.
Know that if you do not do this, I will certainly die. O mighty-armed one! Grant me life and achieve supreme dharma. O supreme among men! I am now seeking refuge with you. O Kounteya! You have always protected those
who are weak and without protectors. I am miserable and weeping and am seeking refuge with you. I am overcome
with desire and am seeking you. Do that which is pleasurable to me. Satisfy my desire by giving yourself to me.”
Hearing these words Kounteya then did what she wanted, accepting dharma to be the reason. The powerful one
spent the night in the palace of the serpent. When the sun rose, he too arose from Kouravya’s abode.’
207

Vaishampayana said, ‘O, descendant of the Bharata lineage! The son of the wielder of the vajra73 told the brahmanas everything and left for the slopes of the Himalayas. He ﬁrst went to Agastya’s banyan tree and then to Vasishtha’s mountain. Kounteya performed his ablutions on Bhrigu’s peak. He donated a thousand cows at sacred
places of pilgrimage. That supreme among Kurus gave houses to brahmanas. That supreme among men then
bathed at the place of pilgrimage known as Hiranyabindu and saw the best of mountains and sacred places. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! That best of men then descended, accompanied by brahmanas. That bull of the
Bharata lineage then left for the eastern direction. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! One after another, the best
of the Kurus saw many places of pilgrimage and the beautiful river Utpalini in the Naimisha forest—and the famous rivers Nanda, Upananda and Koushiki, the great rivers Gaya and Ganga. Having seen all these places of pilgrimage and having puriﬁed himself, he donated riches to the brahmanas. He went to every sacred place of pilgrimage in Anga, Vanga and Kalinga. Having seen them in the proper fashion, he gave away riches. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! When he approached the gates of the kingdom of Kalinga, the brahmanas who had followed the Pandava took their leave and departed. But with their permission, Kunti’s son, the valorous Dhananjaya,
went on as far as the ocean, with only a few companions with him.
‘Passing beyond Kalinga, the lord saw many beautiful countries, and followers of dharma. He went and saw
Mahendra Mountain, adorned with ascetics. Travelling slowly along the shores of the ocean, he arrived in Manalura. Having seen all the sacred places of pilgrimage there, the mighty-armed one went to visit the king who was the
lord of Manalura—King Chitravahana, who was devoted to dharma. He had a beautiful daughter named Chitrangada. When he saw Chitravahana’s daughter of the beautiful hips, roaming around in the city at will, he was struck
by desire. He went to the king and told him what he wished. The king then spoke to him in a placatory voice, “A
king named Prabhamkara was once born in our lineage. He had no sons and performed supreme austerities for the

sake of offspring. On witnessing his terrible austerities and homage, the god Mahadeva Umapati74 Shankara was
satisﬁed. The great lord granted him the boon that only a single offspring would be born in every generation of this
lineage. Since then, in succession, only a single offspring has been born in our lineage. All my ancestors before me
had sons. But a daughter was born to me and it is certain that she will have to carry forward my lineage. O
supreme among men! I have always thought of her as my son. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In accordance
with what is prescribed, I have therefore made her my putrika.75 The son, the perpetuator of this lineage, will be
the bride price. O Pandava! You can take her, as long as you agree to this condition.” Agreeing to this condition, he
accepted the daughter and Kounteya lived in that city for three winters.’
208

Vaishampayana said, ‘The bull of the Bharata lineage then went to the sacred places of pilgrimage to the south,
near the ocean. These sacred places were adorned with ascetics. However, these ascetics stayed away from ﬁve
places of pilgrimage that had been frequented by ascetics in earlier times—Agastyatirtha, Soubhadra, the immensely purifying Poulama, the calm Karandhama that provided the fruits of a horse-sacriﬁce and the great
tirtha76 Bharadvaja, which washes away all sins. On seeing these places of pilgrimage abandoned and shunned by
intelligent sages who were devoted to dharma, the Pandava who was Kuru’s descendant joined his hands in salutation and asked the ascetics, “Why have those who are learned in the brahman abandoned these tirthas?” The ascetics replied, “O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Five crocodiles live in them and drag away those who are
blessed with the power of austerities. That is the reason these tirthas are abandoned.” On hearing this, the mightyarmed and valorous one, supreme among men, went to see these tirthas, though the ascetics tried to restrain him.
‘He went to Soubhadra, named after a maharshi, and supreme among tirthas. The brave one, scorcher of enemies, swiftly immersed himself to have a bath. At that, a giant crocodile that lived in the water came and grasped
Kunti’s son Dhananjaya, tiger among men. But the mighty-armed Kounteya, supreme among those who are strong,
seized the aquatic creature which began to struggle and got out of the water. O king! As soon as the famous Arjuna
dragged the crocodile out, it turned into a beautiful woman, adorned in every ornament, radiant, charming, divine
of form and alluring. On witnessing this great and extraordinary event, Kunti’s son Dhananjaya was extremely
pleased and asked the lady, “O, fortunate one! Who are you and how did you come to live in the water? Why have
you been committing such great sins earlier?”
‘The lady replied, “O mighty-armed one! I am an apsara who used to roam in the forests of the gods. I am the
extremely powerful Varga, always the favourite of the lord of riches.77 I had four beautiful friends, all capable of
going anywhere at will. With them, I was once going to the abode of the protector of the worlds.78 On our way, all
of us saw a brahmana who was rigid in his vows. He was extremely handsome and was studying alone, in his solitude. O king! That entire forest was radiant with the energy of his austerities. Like the sun, he seemed to have illuminated that entire region. On witnessing the extraordinary sight of his terrible austerities, we descended in that
region, so as to bring impediments to his pursuit of austerities. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I, Sourabheyi,
Samichi, Budbuda and Lata went to the brahmana at the same time. We sang and laughed and sought to tempt the
brahmana. O brave one! But he did not pay any attention to us, even for an instant. The immensely energetic and
pure one did not waver and was ﬁxed in his austerities. O bull among kshatriyas! But the brahmana was angered
and cursed us that we would become crocodiles and live in the water for a hundred years.”’
209

‘Varga said, “O supreme among those of the Bharata lineage! We were all extremely distressed and sought the
refuge of the brahmana, who was blessed with the power of austerities and never decayed. We said, ‘O brahmana!
The god of love made us arrogant because of our youth and beauty. We did what should not be done. Please forgive us. That we had come to tempt a self-controlled one blessed with the power of austerities, who is rigid in his
vows, is sufﬁcient death for us. Those who think about dharma are of the view that women should not be slain.
You are learned in dharma and because of that dharma, do not kill us. O you who are learned in dharma! It is said

that a brahmana is a friend to all beings. Let this saying of the learned come true and bring welfare. Those who are
good protect those who seek their refuge. We have sought refuge with you. You should therefore forgive us.’”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O brave one! At these words the brahmana, the performer of good deeds and with dharma
in his soul, and as resplendent as the sun and the moon, was paciﬁed. The brahmana said, “The words hundreds,
thousands and forever are always used to indicate eternity. But the word hundred used by me should be understood
as a limited period and not as eternity. Becoming crocodiles, you will seize and drag men down into the water. But
a supreme man will drag you out of the water and onto land and you will then regain your earlier forms. Never before have I uttered a falsehood, not even in jest. From now on, all these tirthas will be famous everywhere as the
tirthas of women. Those who are learned will know them to be sacred and the cleansers of all sins.”
‘Varga said, “We then paid our homages to the brahmana and circumambulated him. We left that region in misery, thinking, ‘When and how soon will we meet the man who will return our earlier forms?’ O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! While we were thus thinking, the immensely fortunate devarshi Narada appeared instantly before
us. O Partha! On seeing the devarshi whose radiance is inﬁnite, all of us were ﬁlled with joy. Paying our homages
to him, we stood there, with misery on our faces. He asked us the reason for our sorrow and we told him everything. Having heard exactly what had happened, he spoke to us. ‘There are ﬁve tirthas in the southern marshes of
the ocean. They are sacred and beautiful. Go there immediately and live there. Pandava Dhananjaya, tiger among
men, pure of soul, will certainly arrive there soon and free you from your misery.’ O brave one! On hearing these
words, all of us came here. O unblemished one! It is true that you have set me free today. But my four friends are
still there in the other waters. O brave one! Perform a good deed and set them all free.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O lord of the earth! Then the brave one, the best of the Pandavas, happily freed them all
from that curse. O king! On ascending from the waters, the apsaras regained their own forms and looked as they
had earlier. Purifying those tirthas and permitting them to leave, the lord went to the city of Manalura to see Chitrangada again. Through her, he had given birth to a son named King Babhruvahana. O king! Having seen him, the
Pandava left for Gokarna.’
210

Vaishampayana said, ‘Then, one after another, the immensely powerful one visited all the other tirthas that were to
the west and all those that were on the shores of the western ocean. Having visited them, he reached Prabhasa.
When Madhusudana79 heard that the invincible Bibhatsu80 had reached the region of Prabhasa after visiting all
the tirthas, Madhava81 went to meet him, unknown to Kounteya. Krishna and Pandava saw each other in Prabhasa.
They embraced each other and asked about each other’s welfare. Then the beloved friends, who were like the rishis
Nara and Narayana of yore,82 sat down in the forest.
‘Then Vasudeva asked Arjuna about what he had been up to and about why the Pandava was visiting all the
tirthas. Thereupon, Arjuna recounted to him exactly what had happened. On hearing this, the lord Varshneya83 approved. As they desired, Krishna and Pandava sported themselves in Prabhasa. They then went to the mountain
Raivataka, to live there for some time. On Krishna’s instructions, men had already decorated the mountain and
stored it with a lot of food. Accepting everything that was offered, Pandava Arjuna, together with Vasudeva,
watched the actors and dancers. Having given them permission to leave in accordance with the proper form, the
immensely radiant Pandava went to sleep on a well-made and divine bed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He
told Satvata84 about the tirthas, mountains, rivers and forests he had seen. O Janamejaya! As he was thus speaking, lying on a bed that was like heaven, sleep crept up on Kounteya. He was awakened in the morning, with the
sweet sounds of singing and the sounds of the veena,85 chants and blessings. After he had performed the necessary
acts, Varshneya greeted him happily.
‘Riding on a golden chariot, they set off for Dvaraka. O Janamejaya! In order to pay homage to Kunti’s son,
even the huts of Dvaraka had been decorated. The citizens of Dvaraka were eager to see Kounteya and came out in
hundreds and thousands onto the road followed by kings. There was a great common assemblage of Bhojas, Vrishnis and Andhakas and hundreds and thousands of their women looked on. Having been respectfully worshipped by
all the Bhojas, Vrishnis and Andhakas, he returned homage to those who deserved it, and was welcomed by every-

one. All the young men paid their respects to the brave one, in the proper form. Those who were of his own age,
embraced him again and again. With Krishna, he spent many nights in Krishna’s beautiful home, full of jewels and
every object of pleasure.’

Section Seventeen
Subhadra-harana Parva
This parva has ﬁfty-seven shlokas and two chapters.
Chapter 211: 25 shlokas
Chapter 212: 32 shlokas
The word harana means abduction. So this parva is about Subhadra’s abduction. This is a very short parva.
211

Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! After a few days, the great festival of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas was held on
Mount Raivataka. The warriors gave away gifts to thousands of brahmanas in that festival of the Bhojas, Vrishnis
and Andhakas on that mountain. O king! The region all around the mountain was adorned with palaces full of jewels. Every tree there was decorated with lamps. Together, all the musicians played their musical instruments, the
dancers danced, and the singers sang songs. All the immensely energetic Vrishni youth were adorned with ornaments, as they rode on their colourful and golden chariots. Hundreds and thousands of citizens went there with
their wives, some on excellent chariots and others on foot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With Revati, the
lord Haladhara1 was intoxicated and was followed by many gandharvas.2 The powerful Ugrasena, king of the Vrishnis, was there with his one thousand wives and was praised by the musicians. Rukmini’s son3 and Samba, always invincible in battle, were intoxicated and wore divine garlands and garments, sporting themselves like the
gods. Akrura, Sarana, Gada, Bhanu, Viduratha, Nishatha, Charudeshna, Prithu, Viprithu, Satyaka, Satyaki,
Bhangakara, Sahachara, Hardikya, Kritavarma and others not mentioned were there, surrounded by their respective
wives and musicians. They then adorned Raivataka at the time of the festival.
‘While this greatly wonderful commotion was going on, Vasudeva roamed around, Partha4 with him. As they
wandered, they saw Vasudeva’s5 beautiful daughter Bhadra, ornamented, and with her friends. On seeing her, Arjuna was struck by the god of love and Krishna noticed the signs that Partha’s mind was intently riveted on her. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! The one with the eyes of a lotus smilingly spoke these words, “How is it that
the mind of one who lives in the forest is agitated by desire? O Partha! She is my sister and from the same womb
as Sarana.6 If your mind is set on her, I can speak to my father myself.” Arjuna replied, “She is Vasudeva’s daughter and Vasudeva’s sister. She is beautiful. How can I not be captivated? If this daughter of the Vrishni lineage,
your sister, becomes my wife, I must certainly have performed only good deeds. O Janardana!7 Tell me how I can
obtain her. I will do everything that any man can.” Vasudeva said, “O bull among men! A svayamvara8 is the form
of marriage for kshatriyas. O Partha! But that is uncertain if one doesn’t know the inclination. Those who are
learned in the ways of dharma say that for kshatriyas, who are warriors, abduction for marriage is permissible. O
Arjuna! Therefore, abduct my beautiful sister. Who knows what she might do in a svayamvara?”
‘O king! Having thus decided on the course of action, Arjuna and Krishna then sent off swift men as messengers, to inform Dharmaraja in Indraprastha of everything. On hearing, the mighty-armed Pandava9 agreed.’
212

Vaishampayana said, ‘O Janamejaya! Dhananjaya10 learnt that the lady had gone to Raivataka. Having learnt of
the sanction11 and after obtaining Vasudeva’s permission, the bull of the Bharata lineage discussed and got
Krishna’s sanction about the course of action. He mounted a golden chariot that had been constructed in the proper
fashion. It was yoked with Sainya and Sugriva12 and decorated with nets of small bells. Its roar was like that of a
thundering cloud and it was stocked with every weapon. Its radiance was like the blazing ﬁre and it struck terror in
the hearts of enemies. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Prepared, armoured with a sword and with guards on
his elbows and ﬁngers, he set out as if on a hunt.
‘Having worshipped Raivata, king of the mountains, and obtained the blessings of the gods and all the brahmanas, Subhadra circumambulated the mountain and set out for Dvaraka. Kunti’s son rushed at her and forced her
onto his chariot. Abducting the sweet-smiling one, that tiger among men set out for his own city on his chariot, as
if on air. On seeing Subhadra thus carried away, all the armed soldiers who were with her raised an alarm and
dashed towards the city of Dvaraka. They arrived at the assembly hall named Sudharma and recounted the story of
Partha’s valour to the presiding ofﬁcer.13 On hearing this, the presiding ofﬁcer sounded his war drum, one that was
ornamented with gold and had a terrible roar. On hearing that sound, the Bhojas, Vrishnis and Andhakas then gave
up their food and drink and came to the assembly hall.
‘Those tigers among men, the Vrishni and Andhaka maharathas14 ascended their thrones, decorated with gold,
covered with excellent cushions and adorned with gems and corals, with the radiance of blazing ﬁres, like a hundred ﬁres on their sacriﬁcial altars. When they were seated like an assembly of gods, the presiding ofﬁcer and his
companions told them about Jishnu’s15 conduct. On hearing this, the warriors among the Vrishnis, their eyes red
with drinking, were intolerant of Partha and arrogantly stood up. “Quickly yoke the chariots, bring our lances,
fetch the best bows and large armour.” Some asked their charioteers to yoke their chariots. Others themselves
fetched their horses, harnessed in gold. As the chariots, armour and ﬂags were brought, there was then a tumultuous uproar from those warriors among men.
‘At that time, Vanamali,16 who was as tall as Mount Kailasha, who was intoxicated with wine and was dressed
in blue, spoke, “O you who are not wise! What are you doing when Janardana is quiet? Without knowing what his
thoughts are, why are you roaring in anger? Let the immensely wise one say what he intends to do. Whatever he
proposes should be unhesitatingly done.” On hearing Halayudha’s17 words, which deserved to be accepted, all of
them exclaimed “excellent” and fell silent. Silence having been restored through the wise Baladeva’s calm words,
all of them again took their seats in the assembly hall. Then Kamapala18 spoke to Vasudeva, the scorcher of enemies. “O Janardana! Why are you seated here and looking on without a word? O Achyuta!19 It was for your sake
that we honoured Arjuna. It now seems that evil-minded one, the deﬁler of his lineage, did not deserve the homage
and honour. Will any man who regards himself as having been born in a good lineage break the plate that he has
eaten from? Even if one has wished for such an alliance, should a supplicant who desires happiness have the
courage to act thus, forgetting earlier favours? By insulting us and disregarding Keshava,20 he has forcibly abducted Subhadra, summoning his own death. O Govinda!21 Like a serpent that has been trodden on, how can I bear
him who has placed his feet on my head? Today, I will alone rid the earth of all Kouravas. I cannot tolerate this
transgression of Arjuna’s.” At this, all the assembled Bhojas, Vrishnis and Andhakas applauded the thundering
one, whose voice was like the clouds and a war drum.’

Section Eighteen
Harana Harika Parva
This parva has eighty-two shlokas and only one chapter. The word harana means abduction. It also means gifts. Harika means conveying or giving. So this parva is about Subhadra’s abduction and the giving of gifts that followed.
213

Vaishampayana said, ‘When all the Vrishnis began to repeat words of this nature, Vasudeva uttered words that
were full of dharma and artha. “Gudakesha1 has not brought dishonour to our lineage through his actions. There is
no doubt that he has increased it.2 Partha3 knows that the Satvatas4 never lust after riches. The Pandava also
knows that the results of a svayamvara are uncertain. Who can contemplate the giving away of a daughter, as if she
were an animal? Which man on earth would like to sell his daughter? I think Kunti’s son saw these blemishes in
the other methods. Therefore, in accordance with dharma, the Pandava abducted the lady. This alliance is appropriate. Subhadra is illustrious, Partha is equally so. Hence he abducted her by force. Who will not want Arjuna? He is
born in the lineage of Bharata and the great-souled Shantanu. He is the son of Kuntibhoja’s daughter. In all the
worlds, with their Indras and Rudras, I do not see anyone who can vanquish Partha with valour, with that chariot to
which my horses have now been yoked. As a warrior, Partha is swift in the use of weapons. Who is his equal? Go
to Dhananjaya with a happy mind. Pacify him with extremely gentle words and make him come back. That is my
view. If Partha goes to his city after forcibly vanquishing us, our fame will be destroyed. But there is no defeat in
appeasement.” O ruler of men! On hearing Vasudeva’s words, they acted accordingly.
‘Restrained by them, Arjuna returned and married Subhadra. Kunti’s son lived there for a year and the lord spent
the last part of his period5 in Pushkara.
‘After the twelve years were over, he went to Khandavaprastha. He went to the king6 and humbly paid his respects. Partha worshipped the brahmanas and went to Droupadi. Then, out of love,7 Droupadi told Kuru’s descendant, “O Kunti’s son! Go to the daughter of the Satvatas. A second load always loosens the ﬁrst tie, however
strong.” Krishna8 thus lamented in many ways. Dhananjaya paciﬁed her a lot and asked for forgiveness. He quickly went to Subhadra, who was dressed in red silk. Partha sent her away to dress in garments worn by a cowherd
lady. But the illustrious one looked beautiful even in that attire. Arriving in the best of houses, the famous and
beautiful Bhadra, wife of a warrior, with copper-red eyes, paid homage to Pritha. Then, with a face as radiant as
the full moon, Bhadra quickly went and paid homage to Droupadi, saying, “I am your maid.” Then Krishna arose
and embraced Madhava’s9 sister and lovingly said, “Let your husband not have a rival.” With a happy heart,
Bhadra replied, “May it be that way.” O Janamejaya! The maharatha Pandavas were then happy in their hearts.
Kunti was also extremely delighted.
‘Having heard that Arjuna, the best of the Pandavas, had reached Indraprastha, supreme among cities, the puresouled Pundarikaksha10 Madhava went there with Rama11 and all the other warriors and maharathas from among
the Vrishnis and the Andhakas. Shouri, scorcher of enemies, went with a large army, surrounded by hundreds of
soldiers and his brothers and sons. The immensely famous and wise Akrura, lord of donations of alms, vanquisher
of enemies and general of the Vrishni warriors, went there. So did the immensely energetic Anadhrishti and the im-

mensely famous Uddhava, the greatly intelligent and famous disciple of Brihaspati himself. Satyaka, Satyaki, the
Satvata Kritavarma, Pradyumna, Samba, Nishatha, Shanku, the valorous Charudeshna, Jhilli, Viprithu, mightyarmed Sarana and Gada, supreme among those who are learned—these and many other Vrishnis, Bhojas and Andhakas went to Khandavaprastha, carrying many gifts with them. On hearing that Madhava had come, King Yudhishthira sent the twins12 to receive Krishna. Having been received by them, the prosperous Vrishnis entered
Khandavaprastha, which was adorned with ﬂags and pennants. The roads were cleaned and sprinkled with water
and decorated with many ﬂowers. Cool sandalwood and the fragrance of other pure perfumes and the burning of
aloe made every part of the city fragrant. The entire city was crowded with merchants and with people who had
cleansed themselves.
‘The mighty-armed Keshava, supreme among men, arrived with Rama, surrounded by Vrishnis, Andhakas and
the great Bhojas. He was worshipped by thousands of citizens and brahmanas. He then entered the king’s palace,
which was like Purandara’s13 abode. Yudhishthira welcomed Rama in the prescribed fashion. He kissed Keshava
on the head14 and embraced him in his arms. Extremely pleased, Krishna humbly paid homage and duly paid his
respects to Bhima, tiger among men.15 In accordance with the prescribed rites, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira welcomed the best of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas. He worshipped some as his superiors. He greeted some as his
equals. He welcomed some others with affection and was paid homage to by others.16
‘Then the immensely famous Vasudeva presented the best of riches to the groom’s party and as dowry to Subhadra from her relatives, one thousand golden chariots with nets of bells, each yoked to four horses and driven by
skilled charioteers. From the land of Mathura, Krishna gave one thousand auspiciously coloured cows that were
productive in yielding milk. As a sign of friendship, Janardana gave one thousand horses that were white like the
colour of moonbeams and were adorned with gold; two times ﬁve hundred mules, white with black manes, that
were trained and had the speed of the wind; one thousand young and fair women who were well dressed and had
excellent complexions. Each wore a necklace of one hundred gold pieces, was adorned with ornaments and was
skilled in bathing and every kind of service. The lotus-eyed Janardana gave ten man-loads of gold, both worked
and unworked and with the radiance of the ﬁre, from the land of Dasarha. As a mark of respect, the lover of valour,
Rama, gave Partha one thousand supreme elephants in rut. These were as large as mountain peaks and had secretions ﬂowing from their bodies in three streams. They never retreated in battle and were adorned with well-crafted,
golden bells and were supremely saddled. Haladhara was happy and pleased with the alliance. The large quantity
of gems and riches looked like an ocean. The garments and blankets were like the foam, the large elephants were
like large crocodiles and the ﬂags were like aquatic plants. This large river17 entered into the ocean of the Pandus
and ﬁlled it up to the brim, to the great despondency of their enemies.
‘Dharmaraja Yudhishthira accepted all of it and paid homage to the Vrishni and Andhaka maharathas. Then the
assembled great-souled ones, the best of the Kuru, Vrishni and Andhaka lineages, spent their time in pleasure, as
do men of good deeds in the abode of the immortals. The Kurus and the Vrishnis amused themselves as they
wished, with the loud clapping of hands and drinking bouts. Having spent many days in pleasure and being worshipped by the Kurus, the brave ones again returned to the city of Dvaravati. With Rama at their forefront, the maharathas from the Vrishni and Andhaka lineages departed, with the pure jewels given to them by the best of the
Kurus. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But the great-souled Vasudeva remained with Arjuna in the beautiful
city of Shakraprastha.18 He roamed with Partha along the banks of the Yamuna.
‘Then Keshava’s beloved sister Subhadra gave birth to radiant Soubhadra, like Poulomi gave birth to Jayanta.19
He was long-armed, of great strength, with the eyes of a bull and a vanquisher of enemies. Subhadra’s brave son, a
bull among men, was known as Abhimanyu. Arjuna’s son, a bull among men, was thus known because he was extremely wrathful.20 Dhananjaya gave birth to that atiratha21 from a Satvata lady, like ﬁre is produced at a sacriﬁce from the womb of a shami22 tree. At his birth, Kunti’s son, the mighty-armed Yudhishthira, donated ten thousand cows and several thousand coins to brahmanas. From his childhood, he became a favourite of Vasudeva’s and
was like a moon to all his fathers23 and the subjects. From his birth onwards, Krishna performed all the auspicious
rites. The child began to grow, like the moon in the bright half of the lunar month. That vanquisher of enemies

learned all the vedas from Arjuna, with the four divisions and the ten branches, and the art of archery, everything
known to man and god. That extremely powerful one became skilled in the science of all weapons. He learnt all
the special acts of handling weapons. In acquisition, use and in circular motions, Dhananjaya was pleased that his
son Soubhadra became his equal. He could bear everything from his enemies. He was blessed with all the auspicious marks. He was invincible in battle and had the shoulders of a bull. His wide mouth was like that of a serpent.
The mighty archer was as proud as a lion. His valour was like that of a mad elephant. His voice was like thunderous clouds. His face was like that of the full moon. He was Krishna’s equal in valour, energy, beauty and form.
Bibhatsu24 saw in his son Maghavan25 himself.
‘The auspicious Panchali26 also obtained ﬁve sons through her ﬁve husbands. They were brave and bright, like
ﬁve mountains—Prativindhya was born from Yudhishthira, Sutasoma from Vrikodara,27 Shrutakarman from Arjuna, Shatanika from Nakula and Shrutasena from Sahadeva. They were ﬁve maharathas. Panchali gave birth to ﬁve
heroes, like Aditi gave birth to the Adityas. The brahmanas told Yudhishthira that according to the sacred texts,
Prativindhya would be like the Vindhya mountains in knowledge of the weapons of his enemies and so he should
be thus named.28 The great archer Sutasoma, with energy equal to that of the sun and the moon, was born as a son
from Bhimasena after he had performed one thousand soma29 sacriﬁces.30 Shrutakarman was born as a son after
hearing of the great deeds performed by Kiriti.31 Kourava Nakula, descendant of the Kuru lineage, named his son,
who would extend his fame, after the royal sage Shatanika. Then Krishna gave birth to Sahadeva’s son when the
nakshatra Vahnidaivata was in the ascendant. He was therefore known as Shrutasena.32 Droupadi’s famous sons
were born at intervals of one year. O lord of kings! They were devoted to each other’s welfare. O best of the
Bharata lineage! As is prescribed, from the time of birth, their rituals of birth, tonsure and wearing of the sacred
thread were performed by Dhoumya.33 After having studied the vedas, these observers of rigid vows learnt the use
of all weapons, human and divine, from Arjuna. O tiger among kings! Followed by mighty and broad-chested sons
who were like those born from the wombs of the gods, the Pandavas were extremely delighted.’

Section Nineteen
Khandava-daha Parva
This parva has 344 shlokas and twelve chapters.
Chapter 214: 32 shlokas
Chapter 215: 19 shlokas
Chapter 216: 34 shlokas
Chapter 217: 22 shlokas
Chapter 218: 50 shlokas
Chaper 219: 40 shlokas
Chapter 220: 32 shlokas
Chapter 221: 21 shlokas
Chapter 222: 18 shlokas
Chapter 223: 25 shlokas
Chapter 224: 32 shlokas
Chapter 225: 19 shlokas
The word daha means to burn and, as a noun, also means a ﬁre or a conﬂagration in the forest. So this parva is about the burning of the Khandava
forest by Arjuna and Krishna. It has also stories of the survivors, Ashvasena, Maya and the Sharngaka birds.
214

Vaishampayana said, ‘On the orders of King Dhritarashtra and those of Shantanu’s son,1 they lived in Indraprastha
and brought under their rule many kings. All the people lived happily in Dharmaraja’s refuge, like souls in bodies
that have auspicious marks and perform deeds.2 That bull among Bharatas3 served dharma, artha and kama equally, looking upon the three as relatives, like one’s own self. It was as if dharma, artha and kama had become personiﬁed on earth and with them, the king became like a fourth.4 The vedas found a great student, the sacriﬁces a great
performer and the castes5 a pure protector in this ruler of men. Lakshmi6 was established. Intelligence was
revered. Dharma found a relative everywhere and extended on earth. With his four brothers, the king shone with
radiance, like a great sacriﬁce assisted by the four vedas. Dhoumya and other brahmanas surrounded him and paid
homage, like the chief immortals, each equal to Brihaspati, worshipers of Prajapati.7 In the eyes and the hearts of
the subjects, owing to their great affection, Dharmaraja was equal to the unblemished full moon. The subjects
didn’t love him only because he was their king. They also bore him affection because of his deeds. Pritha’s intelligent son was always sweet in speech. He never uttered words that were improper, untrue, malicious or unpleasant.
The immensely energetic and supreme one of the Bharata lineage found pleasure in devoting himself to the welfare
of all the worlds, treating everyone like his own self. Through their great energy, all the Pandavas lived happily,
devoid of distress, pacifying all the kings.
‘After a few days, Bibhatsu told Krishna, “O Krishna! Warm days are here. Let us go towards the Yamuna. O
Madhusudana! O Janardana! If you agree, let us sport there with our friends and return in the evening.” Vasudeva
replied, “O Kunti’s son! O Pritha’s son! That is my wish too. As long as we desire, let us sport with our friends in
the water.” O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After consulting and obtaining Dharmaraja’s permission, Partha,
Govinda and their friends set out.

‘They reached that beautiful pleasure ground, dotted with many trees and adorned with many tall houses, like
Purandara’s8 abode. Flavoured and expensive food and drinks were spread out and many perfumed garlands were
adorned for Varshneya9 and Partha. They entered the place that was stocked with many pure and brilliant gems. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! All of them began to sport as they pleased. Some women sported in the woods,
others in the water and some others in the houses, wherever it pleased Krishna and Partha. In great intoxication,
Droupadi and Subhadra gave away expensive garments and ornaments to the women. Some danced in great delight, others shouted. Some of the women laughed, others drank the excellent wine. Some began to weep, others
fought among themselves. Some whispered secrets to each other and jested. The woods became the scene of prosperity, ﬁlled all around with the beautiful music of ﬂutes, veenas and drums.
‘While this was going on, the descendants of Kuru and Dasharha10 went to a beautiful region that was not far
off. O king! Having gone there, the two great-souled Krishnas,11 conquerors of enemy cities, seated themselves on
very expensive seats. Partha and Madhava amused themselves by recounting to each other the many deeds of valour and love they had performed earlier. When Vasudeva and Dhananjaya were thus happily seated together, like
the two Ashvins12 in heaven, a brahmana arrived. He was like a tall shala tree and his complexion was like heated
gold. His beard was reddish brown and his limbs were well proportioned. His hair was matted and his attire was
dark. He was radiant like the young sun13 and his eyes were like lotus leaves. His complexion was tawny and he
blazed with energy. On seeing that supreme among brahmanas approach, the two Krishnas, Arjuna and Vasudeva,
quickly stood up.’
215

Vaishampayana said, ‘He then spoke to Arjuna and Vasudeva of the Satvata lineage. “You two, who are now so
near the Khandava tract, are supreme in the world. I am a voracious brahmana who always eats unlimited quantities. O descendants of Vrishni and Pritha! I beg you. Give me enough food to satisfy myself.” Having been thus
addressed, Krishna and Pandava told him, “Tell us what kind of food will satisfy you. We will try to bring it for
you.”
‘Having been thus addressed, the illustrious brahmana then told the warriors, who had asked him about the kind
of food that should be prepared for him, “I do not eat ordinary food. Know me to be the ﬁre. Therefore, seek to
bring me the food that is appropriate for me. This Khandava tract is always protected by Indra. So I am unable to
burn it down because that great-souled one protects it. His friend, the naga Takshaka lives there with his kin and is
protected by the wielder of the vajra and many other beings are also incidentally protected. Though I always wish
to burn it down, I cannot do so because of Shakra’s14 energy. Whenever he sees me ablaze, he pours down ﬂoods
of rain from the clouds. Though I earnestly wish to consume it, I cannot thus burn it down. Since the two of you
are skilled in the use of arms, I have now come to you for help. I will now be able to burn Khandava down and that
is the food I desire from you. You know about supreme weapons. Restrain the showers on all sides. Restrain all the
creatures.”15 On hearing these words, Bibhatsu told the ﬁre, who wished to burn down Khandava, despite being
restrained by Shatakratu.16 “I have many excellent and divine weapons with which I am capable of ﬁghting many
wielders of the vajra. O illustrious one! But I do not possess a bow that can bear the strength of my arms and withstand the strength and speed I bring to battle. Because of my speed, I need arrows that are inexhaustible. My chariot cannot bear all the arrows that I desire. I want divine horses that are white and as swift as the wind. And a chariot that will shine like the sun in its energy and will thunder like the clouds. Nor does Krishna possess a weapon
that can equal his valour and Madhava requires one to kill the nagas and demons17 in battle. O illustrious one! Tell
us the means so that we may be successful and are able to restrain Indra from raining down on this extensive forest. O ﬁre! We are ready to act according to our prowess. O illustrious one! But you should give us the means that
can support us.”’
216

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having been thus addressed, the illustrious ﬁre, with the smoke as his banner, remembered
Varuna, the lord of the worlds, Aditi’s son and the god who lives in the water and is the lord of the waters. Knowing that he had been remembered, he too appeared before the ﬁre. The smoke-crested one paid homage to the lord
of the waters, the fourth lokapala,18 the protector and the great god and said, “Quickly give me the bow, the two
quivers and the chariot bearing the ﬂag of a monkey that were obtained from King Soma. Partha will accomplish a
great task with Gandiva19 and Vasudeva with the chakra.20 For that reason, let those be given to them.” Varuna
told the ﬁre, “I will give them.” Then he gave him that extraordinary gem of a bow, endowed with great valour and
capable of extending fame and deeds. It was incapable of being hurt by any weapon, but could destroy all
weapons. It was the chief of all weapons and was the destroyer of enemy armies. It alone was equal to one hundred
thousand and was the extender of kingdoms. It was radiant, smooth and unblemished everywhere and adorned with
many colours. For an eternity, it had been worshipped by the gods, the danavas and the gandharvas. He also gave
him two inexhaustible quivers and a chariot with divine horses, with a monkey on the banner. The horses were silvery and were from the land of the gandharvas. They were in golden harnesses, as swift as the wind or the mind,
and resembled white clouds. Every weapon was laden onto the chariot and it was incapable of being vanquished by
the gods or the danavas. It was radiant, with a thunderous roar and was enchanting to all beings. Through his ascetic powers, it was created by Prajapati Bhoumana,21 the lord of the worlds. Its form was like that of the sun and
could not be gazed at. It was on this that Lord Soma had ascended when he vanquished the danavas. It was radiant
in its beauty and was gigantic, like an elephant or a cloud. On this supreme of chariots was mounted an excellent
ﬂagpole, golden and resplendent like Shakra’s weapon. On the ﬂagpole was a divine monkey marked with the
signs of the lion and the tiger. It seemed to roar out from that adorned perch. There were many other great beings
on that ﬂag and their roars made enemy soldiers lose their senses.
‘Then Partha circumambulated that supreme chariot, adorned with many pennants. He worshipped all the gods
and attired in armour, with guards for his ﬁngers and wrists, and with a sword slung against his chest, ascended it,
like a virtuous man on a vimana.22 Arjuna was extremely delighted when be grasped the Gandiva, the divine and
supreme of bows, created by Brahma in ancient times. Paying his homage to the ﬁre, the valorous one grasped the
bow with great force and strung it. When the powerful Pandava strung the bow, the hearts of those who heard the
sound trembled. Having obtained the chariot, the bow and the two inexhaustible quivers, Kounteya thought himself to be powerful and accomplished for the task. Then the ﬁre gave Krishna the chakra, with a vajra at its centre.
On receiving this ﬁery and desirable weapon, he too became accomplished. The ﬁre said, “O Madhusudana! There
is no doubt that with this weapon you will be victorious in battle, even over those who are not human. It is certain
that in the destruction of great enemies—humans, gods, rakshasas, pishachas, daityas, nagas—you will be the superior in battle. O Madhava! Whenever you hurl it at an enemy in the course of battle, it will irresistibly kill and
return again to your hand.” The illustrious Varuna also gave Hari a terrible club named Koumadaki,23 the destroyer of daityas, with the roar of the thunder.
‘The delighted Krishna and Arjuna told the ﬁre, “O illustrious one! We are now armed with weapons and know
their use. We are mounted on chariots with ﬂags. We are eager to ﬁght all the gods and demons together, not to
speak of a single wielder of the vajra who wishes to ﬁght for the sake of a naga.” Arjuna said, “O ﬁre! When the
powerful Varshneya releases the chakra in battle, there is nothing in the three worlds that Janardana cannot vanquish. Having obtained the bow Gandiva and these two inexhaustible quivers, I am also capable of vanquishing the
worlds in battle. O lord! Blaze as you wish and encircle this great forest. We are capable of helping you in your
task.” Having been thus addressed by Dasharha and Arjuna, the illustrious one assumed his energetic form and began to consume the forest. He surrounded it from all sides with his seven ﬂames. As terrible as the ﬁre at the end of
a yuga, he began to angrily consume Khandava. O bull among the Bharata lineage! When he surrounded the forest
from all sides, he roared like the clouds and burnt all the beings. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The blazing
forest looked like Meru, king of the mountains, golden in its great radiance.’
217

Vaishampayana said, ‘Those two tigers among men stationed themselves on their chariots on both sides of the forest and a great slaughter of all beings began in every direction. Wherever they saw a creature that dwelt in Khandava trying to escape, those two heroes pursued it. No hole could be seen in the swift power of the chariots.24 Those
two excellent chariots and the two charioteers seemed to be as one. As Khandava blazed, thousands of beings leapt
in the ten25 directions, uttering frightened yells. Some were burnt in one spot. Some were scorched. The eyes burst
out for some. Some withered away. Some lost their minds and scattered. Some clung to their sons, others to their
fathers and mothers. Out of affection, they were unable to let go and perished. Others rose up in their thousands,
their forms distorted. But they were whirled around and again ﬂung into the ﬁre. Some rolled on the ground, their
wings, eyes and feet scorched. They were seen there, their bodies destroyed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
All the waterbodies began to boil. In their thousands, the turtles and the ﬁshes were seen dead. In that destruction
of beings in the forest, the burning bodies seemed like ﬂaming torches. Those that ascended upwards were cut to
pieces by Partha’s arrows, as he laughingly ﬂung them back into the ﬂames. Uttering loud wails, their bodies
pierced everywhere by arrows, from above, they were swiftly ﬂung back again into the ﬁre. Pierced by arrows and
in ﬂames, the sounds made by the forest-dwellers was heard, like the ocean when it was churned. The huge ﬂames
of the delighted ﬁre rose up into the sky and created great consternation among the dwellers of heaven. They
sought refuge with the thousand-eyed Purandara,26 the king of the gods. The gods said, “O lord of the immortals!
Why is the ﬁre burning all these people? Is it the case that the end of the worlds has arrived?” Having heard this,
the slayer of Vritra27 himself looked down.
‘Harivahana28 set out to save Khandava. Covering the sky with a great mass of clouds in many forms, the lord
of the gods and the wielder of the vajra began to pour down rain. The thousand-eyed one showered down rain on
the ﬁre raging in Khandava from hundreds and thousands of clouds, in shafts as thick as the axles.29 But the heat
of the ﬁre dried up these showers before they reached. Not a single one reached the ﬁre. Then the slayer of Namuchi30 became very angry with the ﬁre. He again started to rain down, in many torrents. Then the ﬂames fought
with those showers, mingled with smoke and lightning. With the sound of the roar, that forest became terrible to
look at.’
218

Vaishampayana said, ‘Summoning his splendid weapons, Pandava Bibhatsu, repulsed the shower of rain with a
shower of arrows. Pandava covered every side of Khandava with his arrows and drove away that rain from that
forest. When the sky was covered with Savyasachi’s arrows, not a single being could escape from there.
‘Takshaka, the immensely powerful king of the serpents, wasn’t in the ﬂaming forest then. He had gone to Kurukshetra. But Takshaka’s powerful son Ashvasena was there. He made great efforts to escape from the ﬁre. However, oppressed by Kounteya’s arrows, he didn’t succeed in getting out. But his mother, daughter of the serpents,
tried to save him. She ﬁrst swallowed his head. Then she began to swallow his tail and in her haste to save her son,
the serpent lady rose up. When Pandava saw this, he sliced off her head with a sharp arrow.31 The lord of the gods
saw this. Acting as saviour, the wielder of the vajra unleashed a shower of rain on Pandava and when this dazed
him, Ashvasena instantly escaped. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing this terrible power of maya and
having been deprived by the serpent, he cut down all the serpents into two and three pieces. Angrily, Bibhatsu
cursed the serpent that had escaped and so did the ﬁre and Vasudeva, to the effect that he would never attain fame.
‘Then Jishnu remembered the deception that had been played on him. He was angered and seeking to ﬁght with
the thousand-eyed one, covered the sky with his sharp arrows. On seeing Phalguna’s32 wrath, the king of the gods
unleashed his own blazing missile and it ﬂashed across the entire sky. Then winds with terrible roars churned all
the oceans. Masses of clouds, mingled with torrents of rain, were created. To counter them, Arjuna unleashed his
own supreme weapon. The one who had the knowledge used a mantra to invoke the vayavya weapon. In an instant,
it destroyed the energy and might of Indra’s clouds, rain and thunder. The clouds dried, the lightning died and the
dark sky was paciﬁed. Cool and pleasant winds began to blow and the sun’s orbit returned to normal. Delighted

that there was no opposition any more and with the many offerings being made, the ﬁre blazed up again and ﬁlled
the world with its roar.
‘On seeing that the ﬁre was protected by the two Krishnas, many feathered beings of the Suparna33 lineage, including Garuda, rose up into the sky, eager to attack the warriors Krishna and Pandava with their wings, beaks and
claws, as tough as the vajra. Many serpents also descended near Pandava, spewing terrible and ﬂaming venom
from their mouths. As soon as he saw these sky-dwelling creatures, Partha angrily cut them down with his arrows.
Benumbed, their bodies fell into the ﬂaming ﬁre. At that, the gods, the gandharvas, the yakshas, the rakshasas and
the serpents rose up, uttering loud roars and desiring to ﬁght. They were armed with iron clubs, chakras and
bhushundis,34 with lightning in them. They were intent on killing Krishna and Partha, their great energy benumbed by their anger. Though they unleashed a fearful shower of weapons, Bibhatsu churned their upper limbs
with his sharp arrows. The immensely energetic Krishna, destroyer of enemies, then wrought a great slaughter of
daityas and danavas with his chakra. Pierced by arrows and struck with the force of the chakra, many powerful
ones were paciﬁed, like waves that reach a shore.
‘Then Shakra, the great lord of the thirty gods,35 was angered. Riding a white elephant, he charged at them.
Grasping lightning, he hurled his vajra weapon with great force and the slayer of demons announced to the gods
that the two had been killed. On seeing that the king of the gods was about to hurl the great lightning, the gods
grasped all their respective weapons—King Yama his kaladanda,36 the god of wealth his shibika,37 Varuna his
pasha,38 Shiva his vichakra,39 the two Ashvins luminiscent oshadhi,40 Dhata his dhanu,41 Jaya his musala,42
the immensely strong Tvashta a mountain, Amsha his shakti43 and the god of death44 his parashva.45 Aryaman
grasped a fearful parigha46 and walked around. Mitra stood there, grasping a chakra that was as sharp as a razor.
O lord of the earth! Pusha, Bhaga and Savita grabbed bows and swords and rushed at Krishna and Partha. O
supreme among men! The Rudras, the powerful Maruts, the Vishvadevas, the Sadhyas resplendent in their energy,
and many other gods armed with diverse weapons advanced towards Krishna and Partha, in a desire to kill them. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that great battle, wonderful omens were witnessed, equal to those seen when
all beings were exterminated at the end of a yuga.’
‘The two Achyutas47 saw the angry Shakra and the assemblage of the other gods. Those fearless and invincible
warriors stood there, their bows ready. When they saw the gods advancing from every direction, they angrily repulsed them with arrows that were like the vajra. Repeatedly, the resolutions of the gods were shattered. In fear,
they gave up the battle and sought refuge with Shakra. On seeing the gods repulsed by Madhava and Arjuna, the
sages who dwell in heaven were astonished. Shakra was also extremely pleased at witnessing their constant prowess in battle and engaged in ﬁghting them once again. In an attempt to question Savyasachi’s valour, the chastiser
of Paka48 then cast down a gigantic shower of rocks. But intolerantly, Arjuna countered that shower. On seeing
that his act was unsuccessful, Shatakratu, the king of the gods, increased the strength of his shower. But the son of
the chastiser of Paka brought great pleasure to his father by destroying that shower of rocks with his swift arrows.
Wishing to kill Pandu’s son, Shakra then uprooted with his bare hands a giant peak of Mandara, with all its trees,
and ﬂung it. But Arjuna immediately splintered that peak of the mountain into a thousand pieces with his swift and
straight, ﬁre-tipped arrows. The sight of that mountain splintering was like that of the sky breaking, with the sun,
the moon and the planets. Pieces of that giant mountain fell on the forest and killed many beings who lived in
Khandava.’
219

Vaishampayana said, ‘The inhabitants of Khandava were frightened at the fall of the mountain—danavas, rakshasas, serpents, hyenas, bears, elephants in rut, tigers, lions with manes, deer, buffaloes, hundreds of birds and
other forest-dwellers. In great alarm, they and many other beings slithered away. They saw the raging ﬁre and the
two Krishnas, their weapons ready and the terrible roar scared them. Janardana let ﬂy his chakra, radiant with its
own energy, and small creatures, danavas and nishacharas49 were instantly cut down in hundreds and hurled into
the ﬁre. Mangled by Krishna’s chakra and covered with fat and blood, the rakshasas then seemed to be like twilight

clouds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Varshneya was like destiny, killing pishachas, birds, serpents and animals in their thousands. Released from the hand of Krishna, the slayer of enemies, the chakra repeatedly killed
many beings and returned to his hand. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As he went about killing all the beings, the form of he, who is the soul of all beings, became dreadful.
‘All the assembled gods and danavas could not vanquish Krishna and Pandava in battle. Nor could the gods save
the forest with their strength or quench the ﬁre, so they retreated. On seeing how the masses of gods had been
turned away, Shatakratu was extremely pleased and praised Krishna and Pandava. When the gods were repulsed, a
disembodied voice spoke to Shatakratu in a loud and deep tone. “Your friend Takshaka, supreme among serpents,
is not here. At the time of Khandava’s burning, he had gone to Kurukshetra. O Shakra! Listen to my words. You
cannot defeat Vasudeva and Arjuna when they are steadfast in battle. They are the gods Nara and Narayana, famous in heaven. You yourself know their bravery and their valour. These two supreme and ancient sages are invincible in battle and cannot be conquered in any of the worlds. They deserve the worship of all the gods, asuras, yakshas, rakshas, gandharvas, humans, kinnaras50 and serpents. O, Vasava!51 Therefore, depart from here with the
gods. The destruction of Khandava is destined.” Having heard these words and knowing them to be true, the lord
of the immortals gave up his anger and jealousy and returned to heaven. O king! On seeing the great-souled
Shatakratu leave, all the other dwellers of heaven also departed. When the two warriors, Vasudeva and Arjuna, saw
the king of the gods leave with the other gods, they roared like lions.
‘O king! Krishna and Pandava were delighted that the king of the gods had left. Fearlessly, they continued with
burning the forest. Having vanquished the gods the way the wind scatters the clouds, Arjuna used showers of arrows to kill the beings who lived in Khandava. Not a single being could escape from there, they were cut down by
Savyasachi’s arrows. Even the greatest of beings could not look upon the invincible Arjuna in battle, not to speak
of engaging him in a ﬁght. Like the god of death himself, he pierced one with a hundred arrows and a hundred
with one, and dead, they descended into the ﬂames. They found no refuge along the banks, or in the uneven plains,
or in the abodes of the ancestors and the gods. The heat increased and thousands of herds of beings cried out loudly in pain. Elephants, deer and birds cried out and the sound scared those who lived in the Ganga and the ocean.
No one dared gaze at the mighty-armed Arjuna and the immensely strong Krishna, let alone ﬁghting with them.
With his chakra, Hari slew rakshasas, danavas and nagas and those who ventured along solitary paths. The heads
and trunks sliced with the force of the chakra, the giant bodies fell into the mouth of the blazing ﬁre. Aided by the
ﬂesh, torrents of blood and fat, the ﬂames rose up into the sky, without a trace of smoke. Agni’s eyes blazed, his
tongue blazed and his wide-open mouth also blazed. The hair stood up, drinking up the fat of life, the eyes were
tawny. The ﬁre fed on the nectar that Krishna and Arjuna had provided and was extremely happy, satiated and
contented.
‘Then Madhusudana saw an asura named Maya suddenly attempting to escape from Takshaka’s abode. The
ﬁre’s charioteer was the wind and assuming the form of a hermit with matted hair and roaring like clouds, he pursued him with the intention of consuming him. Vasudeva stood with his chakra raised, ready to kill. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! On seeing the raised chakra and the ﬁre ready to consume him, Maya cried out, “O Arjuna!
Save me.” Hearing these scared words, Arjuna replied, “Do not be frightened.” O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Partha’s words seemed to instil new life into Maya. Maya was Namuchi’s52 brother. When Partha told Maya
he need not fear, Dasharha no longer desired to kill him and the ﬁre did not burn him either. In that ﬂaming forest,
Agni did not burn six beings—Ashvasena, Maya and the four Sharngakas.’53
220

Janamejaya asked, ‘O brahmana! Why did Agni, the ﬁre, not burn the Sharngakas when that forest was blazing?
Tell me at once. O, brahmana! You have recounted the reason why Ashvasena and the danava Maya were not
burnt. But you have not told us the reason for the Sharngakas. O, brahmana! It is extraordinary that the Sharngakas
escaped from destruction. Recount to us why they were not destroyed in the conﬂagaration.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will tell you everything exactly about why Agni
did not consume the Sharngakas. O king! There was a great rishi renowned by the name of Mandapala. He was

learned in dharma, rigid in his vows and chief among ascetics. He followed the path of the rishis who held up their
seed,54 was devoted to studying the sacred texts and dharma, was an ascetic and had achieved control over his
senses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having attained the ﬁnal goal of ascetism, he gave up his human
body and went to the world of the ancestors. But he did not ﬁnd the fruits of his acts there. The dwellers of heaven
were seated around Dharmaraja55 and he asked them, “Why have I not attained the worlds that should have been
the fruit of my asceticism? What have I not done that this should be the fruit of my actions? O dwellers of heaven!
I will do that which will get me the fruits of my asceticism and open that which is now closed. Tell me.” The gods
replied, “O brahmana! Hear about the debts men are undoubtedly born with—to rituals, brahmacharya56 and offspring, and these are respectively discharged through sacriﬁces, austerities and progeny. You are an ascetic and you
have performed sacriﬁces. But you did not have any offspring. Because you did not have offspring, these worlds
are closed to you. Therefore, have progeny and you will enjoy these worlds for an eternity. O sage! A son saves a
father from the hell known as put.57 O supreme among brahmanas! Therefore, try to obtain offspring.” On hearing
these words of the dwellers of heaven, Mandapala began to wonder how he might obtain a large number of offspring swiftly. After thinking about this, he concluded that birds give birth to many offspring.
‘So he became a Sharngaka bird and united with a female Sharngaka bird named Jarita. Through her, he had
four sons who were knowledgable about the brahman. While these young sons were still inside their eggs, the sage
deserted them there in that forest with their mother and went off after Lapita.58 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the immensely illustrious one went off after Lapita, out of affection for her children, Jarita became
very thoughtful and anxious. O king! Those sons, the infant rishis still in their eggs, had undeservedly been abandoned by their father in Khandava forest. But out of love for her sons, Jarita could not discard them and after they
were born, brought them up in her own way.59
‘After some time, the rishi Mandapala was wandering in the forest with Lapita and he saw Agni advance towards Khandava to consume it. Knowing his resolution and knowing his sons were still young, the brahmana sage
prayed to the greatly energetic ﬁre, lord of the world, scared about the protection of his sons. Mandapala said, “O
Agni! You are the mouth of all the gods, you are the one who carries sacriﬁcial offerings. You are the puriﬁer who
dwells invisibly in all living beings. The learned have said that you are one and have again said that you are
three.60 They think of you in eight forms61 and imagine you as the one who carries sacriﬁcial offerings. The
supreme rishis say that you have created the entire universe. O ﬁre! The universe is based on you and without you,
it will be destroyed instantly. It is after paying homage to you that the brahmanas go to the eternal worlds they
have earned through their actions, together with their wives and sons. O Agni! It is said that you are the ﬁre in the
clouds in the sky, in their lightning. The ﬂames that emerge from you burn down all beings. O immensely radiant
one! O Jataveda!62 You have created everything in this universe. Everything, mobile and immobile, every action
and everything that exists is based on you. You have determined the ancient waters, everything in the universe is
based on you. The offerings to the gods and the offerings to the ancestors, as prescribed, are based on you. O Agni!
You are the one who burns down, you are Dhata,63 you are Brihaspati.64 You are the two Ashvins, the two
Yamas,65 Mitra, Soma and Anila.”66 O king! Having been thus prayed to by Mandapala, Agni was satisﬁed with
the immeasurably energetic sage. With happiness in his heart, he asked him, “What good can I do for you?” With
hands joined in salutation, Mandapala told the ﬁre, “When you burn Khandava forest, please spare my sons.” The
illustrious bearer of sacriﬁcial offerings gave him his word and at that time, he blazed into Khandava, wishing to
consume it.’
221

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the ﬁre blazed up, the Sharngakas were extremely distressed, miserable and extremely
anxious, because they could not ﬁnd any means of escaping. O lord of men! Listening to her young sons, their ascetic mother Jarita was stricken with grief and began to lament.
‘Jarita said, “This terrible ﬁre is burning the inside of the forest and advancing towards us. It has blazed up the
entire universe and is increasing my misery. My children still have imperfect understanding; they are without

feathers and feet. Yet they are the ultimate refuge of our ancestors and are tugging at me. The blazing ﬁre is advancing, licking the tall trees with its tongue and creating terror. My sons still do not have strength and are unable
to escape. Nor can I escape somewhere else, taking my sons with me. I cannot abandon them and my heart is distressed. Which one of my sons will I leave and which will I take with me? What should I do? O my sons! What do
you think? Even after thinking a lot, I can ﬁnd no means of escape for you. I will now cover you with my body and
die with you. In earlier times, your cruel father abandoned you, uttering these words, ‘My lineage will be established on Jaritari, because he is the eldest. Sarisrikva will have offspring, extending the lineage of my ancestors.
Stambamitra will practise austerities and Drona will be supreme in knowledge of the brahman.’ Who will I take
with me and leave and who will suffer the greatest of calamities?” She was bereft of judgement because she did
not know what was the right course of action. Through her own thoughts she did not see any means whereby her
sons might escape from the ﬁre.
‘When she had spoken in this way, the four Sharngakas spoke to their mother. “O mother! Give up your love for
us and go to a place where there is no ﬁre. If we are destroyed, you will have other sons. O mother! But if you are
destroyed, there will be no progeny in our lineage. O mother! After taking into consideration these two outcomes,
the time has come for you to do that which is best for our lineage. Out of love for your sons, do not do anything
that will destroy our lineage. The act of our father, who wishes to attain the worlds, must not amount to nothing.”
Jarita replied, “Near this tree, there is a rat hole in the ground. Swiftly enter the hole and you will suffer no fear
from the ﬁre there. O sons! When you have entered it, I will cover the hole with dirt. That is the only means that I
can think of to counter the blazing ﬁre. When the ﬁre has died out, I will return and remove the mass of dirt. If you
wish to escape from the ﬁre, listen to these words of mine.” The Sharngakas said, “We are only masses of ﬂesh,
without feathers, and the carnivorous rat will destroy us. On beholding this fear, we cannot enter. We do not know
how we can escape being burnt by the ﬁre or being eaten by the rat. How can our father attain fulﬁlment and how
can our mother survive? The dwellers of the sky will either be destroyed in the hole by the rat or by the ﬁre. Considering both the possibilities, it is better to be burnt than to be eaten. To die from being eaten by a rat in a hole is a
most miserable death. But destruction of the body by ﬁre has been sanctioned by the learned.”’
222

‘Jarita said, “The rat emerged from this hole. The little creature was seized by a hawk in its claws and carried
away. Therefore, you have nothing to be scared of.”
‘The Sharngakas replied, “We do not know for certain that the rat was carried away by a hawk. There may be
others there and we have every reason to fear them. It is not certain that the ﬁre will reach this place. The wind can
be seen to be turning. O mother! But there is no doubt that the creatures in the hole will kill us. O mother! An uncertain death is superior to one that is certain. Take to the sky as you should. You will have other handsome sons.”
‘Jarita said, “I myself saw the powerful hawk approach the hole, roam around, and then ﬂy away from the hole
with the rat. I swiftly ﬂew after the hawk, pronouncing blessings on it for having taken the rat away from the hole.
‘O king of hawks! Since you are ﬂying away with our hated enemy, may you reside in heaven, golden, and without
any enemies.’ When the hungry bird had ﬁnished eating, with its permission, I returned home. O sons! Enter the
hole conﬁdently, there is nothing you should fear. It is certain that I have seen the hawk carry away the rat.”
‘The Sharngakas replied, “O mother! We do not know whether the rat has really been carried away by the hawk.
Without knowing, we cannot enter the hole.”
‘Jarita said, “I know that the rat has been carried away by the hawk. Therefore, there is no fear and do as I say.”
‘The Sharngakas replied, “It is not that you are trying to free us from our great fear through a falsehood. When a
person’s knowledge is muddled, his acts do not result from intelligence. You have received no favours from us.
You do not even know who we are. Who are we to you that you are trying to save us through so much suffering to
yourself? You are young and beautiful and are capable of ﬁnding a husband. Follow your husband and you will obtain handsome sons. We will enter the ﬁre and attain the beautiful worlds. If the ﬁre does not consume us, you will
come back to us again.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having been thus addressed, the Sharnga left her sons in Khandava and swiftly went to
the regions where there was no ﬁre and no fear. The blazing ﬁre with its piercing ﬂames arrived at the place where

the Sharngakas, Mandapala’s sons, were. The Sharngakas saw the ﬂames blazing in their energy. Jaritari addressed
these words, so that the ﬁre could hear.’
223

‘Jaritari said, “The intelligent man stays awake before difﬁcult times. When the difﬁcult time arrives, there is no
suffering at all. But he who is not intelligent and is not sensible knows nothing and suffers because of difﬁculties
when a difﬁcult time arrives.”
‘Sarisrikva said, “You are implacable and intelligent. The time has come when our lives are endangered. There
is no doubt that only one among many is wise and brave.”
‘Stambamitra said, “The eldest is the protector, because the eldest saves in times of difﬁculty. If the eldest one
does not know, what can the younger ones do?”
‘Drona said, “The one with the golden seed67 is swiftly advancing towards our abode in ﬂames. The seven
tongues of the ﬁre are lean and are eagerly licking.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘At these words of his brother, Jaritari folded his hands on his forehead in salutation. O
king! Listen to the way he praised the ﬁre.
‘Jaritari said, “You are the soul of the wind, the puriﬁer.68 You are the body of the creepers. O virile one!69 You
are the source of the water. The water is also your source. O most powerful one! Your ﬂames are like the rays of
the sun and they go above and below, and on every side.”
‘Sarisrikva said, “O you with the clouds in your banner! Our mother has ignored us and we do not know our father. Our wings have still not grown. O Agni! We have no protector but for you. You are the only hero and, therefore, protect us. O Agni! We are seeking refuge with you. In your benevolent form and in your seven ﬂames, therefore, protect us. O Jataveda! You alone are the one that heats. O god! You alone are the one who heats the heavens.
O bearer of sacriﬁcial offerings! Protect us young rishis today and bypass this place.”
‘Stambamitra said, “O Agni! You alone are everything. The entire universe is established in you. You sustain all
beings and you hold up everything that exists. O Agni! You are the bearer of all sacriﬁcial offerings. You alone are
the supreme sacriﬁcial offering. The learned ones offer sacriﬁces to you, knowing you to be one and many. O bearer of sacriﬁcial offerings! You are the creator of the three worlds. When the time arrives,70 you kindle them and
cook afresh. You are the mother of the entire universe. O Agni! You are the one in whom everything is established
again. O lord of the universe! You remain inside and digest the food that beings eat.71 Everything is established in
you and you are always cooking and always expanding.”
‘Drona said, “O Jataveda! You are the sun with its rays. You suck up the water from the earth and the juices that
are born in the ground. O Shukra! You take them all and return them again in the form of rain when it is time and
cause everything to grow. O Shukra! It is from you that the verdant creepers grow again. The ponds, the seas and
the giant oceans are born. O you whose rays are piercing! We are always dependent on Varuna.72 Be benevolent
and be our protector. Do not destroy us today. O ﬁre! Your eyes have the colour of copper. Your neck is red and
your trail is black. Save us, like the houses on the shores of the ocean.”’73
Vaishampayana said, ‘When he had been thus addressed by Drona of the unsullied deeds, Jataveda spoke to
Drona, remembering the promise he had made to Mandapala. Agni said, “O Drona! You are a rishi. What you have
uttered is the Brahman.74 I will do what you desire and you have nothing to fear. Mandapala had mentioned all
this to me earlier and had asked me to spare his sons when I consumed the forest. The word that I gave him and the
words that you have just spoken are both of great importance. Therefore, tell me what I should do. O fortunate
one! O brahmana! O illustrious one! I am extremely pleased with your praise.” Drona replied, “O Shukra! These
cats cause us trouble all the time. O bearer of sacriﬁcial offerings! Place them and all their relatives between your
teeth.” O Janamejaya! After granting leave to the Sharngakas, Agni acted accordingly. Blazing up, he consumed
the Khandava forest.’
224

Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Mandapala had meanwhile begun to worry about his
sons. Although he had spoken about them to the one with the piercing rays, his mind was still anxious. In his anxiety for his sons, he told Lapita, “O Lapita! My sons are still incapable of escaping. When the ﬁre grows in strength
and the wind blows swiftly, my sons will be incapable of freeing themselves. Their ascetic mother will be incapable of saving them. She will suffer misery when she sees that she cannot save her sons. My sons are incapable of
running or ﬂying. She will run around, lamenting her misery. How is my son Jaritari? How is Sarisrikva? How are
Stambamitra and Drona and how is that ascetic?” Thus, rishi Mandapala lamented in that forest.
‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In her jealousy, Lapita replied in these words, “You need not suffer anxiety on account of your sons. You have yourself told me that they are powerful and energetic rishis. They have
nothing to fear from the ﬂames. In my presence, you spoke to Agni on their behalf. The great-souled and blazing
one gave you his promise. Being the protector of the world, he will never utter a falsehood. They are eloquent in
speech and your anxiety is not because of them. You are anxious because you are thinking of my enemy.75 It is
certain that you do not love me as much as you loved her earlier. It can never be right that one with two parties
should display no love towards his relative, even when the one close to him suffers. Go to Jarita, for whom you are
suffering. I will wander around alone here, like one who is allied with a wretch.”76 Mandapala replied, “I am not
wandering around in this world because of the reasons you believe. I am roaming around for the sake of offspring
and those I have are now facing suffering. He who casts off that which he has, for the sake of that which might be
there, is stupid and the world disregards him. Do what you desire. These blazing ﬂames of Agni are licking the giant trees and are giving birth to a hateful and malevolent sorrow in my heart.” After the ﬂames had passed by that
spot, Jarita, who was attached to her sons, swiftly returned to the place where her sons were. Weeping and miserable in the forest, she saw that all her sons were well, having escaped from the ﬁre. On seeing them, she wept
again and again. She embraced her sons one by one and they too wept.
‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At that time, Mandapala suddenly arrived there. But none of his sons displayed any signs of greeting. He spoke to each one of them again and again and also to Jarita. But none of them
uttered a single word to the rishi, good or bad. Mandapala asked, “Which one of you is my eldest son and who is
the one born after that? Who is the one in the middle and who is the youngest? I am speaking to you in misery.
Why aren’t you replying to me? I left you to the ﬁre, but I did not ﬁnd any peace.” Jarita replied, “What do you
have to do with the eldest one or with the one who came after him? What do you have to do with the one in the
middle or with the youngest who is an ascetic? You had left me miserable in every way and gone away. Go back to
the young Lapita, the one with the beautiful smile.” Mandapala said, “Other than a different man, there is nothing
in this world that is more fatal to women than a co-wife. Even the fortunate Arundhati, renowned in all the worlds
and devoted to her vows, was distrustful of the supreme rishi Vasishtha. He was pure of heart and always devoted
to her welfare. But she was ill disposed towards that saptarshi77 and because of that insult, she is now a tiny star
that is like ﬁre covered with smoke. She is sometimes visible and sometimes invisible and is seen as an evil omen.
You yourself had a connection with me to obtain offspring. Now it has come to this that you give up what you once
desired and have become like her. A man should never commit the act of trusting a woman, even if she happens to
be a wife. Once a woman has obtained sons, she no longer pays attention to her duties.” At this, all his sons came
and paid homage to him. O king! And he too provided reassurances to his sons.’
225

‘Mandapala said, “I kept the ﬁre informed about your protection and Agni had earlier given me his word. On account of Agni’s promise, the devotion to dharma that is there in your mother and the great energy that is there in
you, I had not come here earlier. O sons! You had no reason to worry about your death. All of you are rishis,
learned in the knowledge of the brahman. The ﬁre knows that well enough.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having thus reassured his sons, Mandapala took his
wife with him and leaving that region, went to another region. The illustrious lord with the piercing rays consumed
the kindling Khandava forest, with the assistance of the two Krishnas and brought terror to beings and the world.
The ﬁre drank up rivers of fat and marrow. Agni was extremely satisﬁed and appeared before Arjuna.

‘Then, surrounded by masses of Maruts, the illustrious lord of the gods descended from the sky and spoke these
words to Partha and Madhava, “You have accomplished a feat that is difﬁcult, even for the immortals. I am
pleased. Choose boons that are difﬁcult to obtain and beyond what humans can get.” Partha asked for the boon that
he might get all of Shakra’s weapons. Then Shakra ﬁxed the time for the receiving. “O Pandava! When the illustrious Mahadeva will be pleased with you, that is when I will give you all the weapons. O descendant of the Kuru
lineage! O Dhananjaya! I will myself know when that time has arrived. Because of your great asceticism, I will
then bestow on you all my agneya78 and all my vayavya weapons and all my other weapons and you will accept
them.” Vasudeva asked for the boon that he might always be loving towards Partha. The lord of the gods happily
granted this boon. Having done so, the god who was the lord of the Maruts, took his leave of the ﬁre and returned
to heaven with the thirty gods.
‘Having consumed the forest with its animals and birds for ﬁve days and one, the ﬁre was extremely satiated and
ceased. He had eaten ﬂesh and drunk fat and blood. O lord of the world! He was ﬁlled with extreme joy and spoke
to them. “O warriors! O tigers among men! You have gratiﬁed me to the point of extreme bliss. You now have my
leave to go where you want.” O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having been thus granted leave by the greatsouled ﬁre, the threesome of Arjuna, Vasudeva and the danava Maya wandered around for some time. They then
seated themselves on the banks of the beautiful river.’
This ends the Adi Parva of the Mahabharata.

