Section Twenty-Nine
Aranyaka Parva
This section has has 327 shlokas and eleven chapters.
Chapter 298(1): 42 shlokas
Chapter 299(2): 79 shlokas
Chapter 300(3): 33 shlokas
Chapter 301(4): 10 shlokas
Chapter 302(5): 20 shlokas
Chapter 303(6): 22 shlokas
Chapter 304(7): 24 shlokas
Chapter 305(8): 23 shlokas
Chapter 306(9): 12 shlokas
Chapter 307(10): 23 shlokas
Chapter 308(11): 39 shlokas
The ﬁrst section within Aranyaka Parva is also called Aranyaka Parva, the word aranyaka having already been explained.
298(1)

Janamejaya asked, ‘O supreme among brahmanas! When the Parthas were defeated at the gambling match through
deceit by the evil-hearted sons of Dhritarashtra and their advisers and were angered, and also heard the harsh
words uttered by those who created the enmity, what did the Kouravyas, my ancestors and supreme among men,
do? Equal to Shakra in their energy, but having been suddenly dislodged from their riches and confronted with
great misery, how did the Parthas spend their time in the forest? Who followed those who had attained that great
misfortune? What did they eat? How did they conduct themselves? Where did those great-souled ones dwell? O
best among brahmanas! How did twelve years pass in the forest for those great-souled ones who were the destroyers of enemies? How did the princess,1 supreme among women, immensely fortunate and always devoted to her
husbands, one who always spoke the truth, endure the terrible misery of living in the forest, though she did not deserve it? O one blessed with the power of austerities! I wish to hear about the characters of those greatly radiant
and energetic ones. O brahmana! Tell me, because my curiosity is great.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having been defeated at the gamble with dice by the evil-hearted sons of Dhritarashtra
and their advisers, the Pandavas were angered and left Gajasahrya. They emerged through the gate of the city
known as Vardhamana. With Krishna2 and with all their weapons, they headed towards the north. Indrasena3 and
the other servants, fourteen in number, followed them in swift chariots, accompanied by their wives. On learning
that they were leaving, the citizens were overwhelmed with great grief. They assembled together, and speaking to
each other, fearlessly censured Bhishma, Vidura, Drona and Goutama4 repeatedly. “Everything in this lineage is
insecure. We are not secure. Our houses are not secure, when the evil Duryodhana, aided by Soubala, Karna and
Duhshasana, are covetous of the kingdom. When there is no lineage, there is no good conduct and no dharma, how
can there be happiness? Duryodhana hates his superiors. He has abandoned good conduct and his well-wishers. He
is avaricious of riches and insolent. He is mean and his character is reprehensible. Where Duryodhana is king, the
earth cannot remain healthy. Let us all go where the virtuous Pandavas are going. They are great-souled and not
given to wrath. They have control over their senses and enemies. They are modest and the performers of deeds.

Their conduct is in accordance with dharma.” Having spoken these words, all together, they followed the
Pandavas.
‘With hands joined in salutation, they spoke to the sons of Kunti and the sons of Madri. “O fortunate ones!
Where will you go, leaving us who share in your grief? We will follow you, wherever you are going. We are greatly distressed at learning that you have been defeated by reprehensible enemies, in ways that are not in accordance
with dharma. All of us are anxious. We have always been devoted to your happiness and well-being. We are devoted and attached to you. We have always been engaged in that which brings you pleasure. We do not wish to be
completely destroyed by living in a kingdom that is ruled by a bad king. O bulls among men! Listen. We will tell
you about merits and demerits that result from associating with those who possess good qualities and evil ones.
Garments, water, sesame seeds and the ground become fragrant through association with ﬂowers. It is the same
from association with good qualities. Association with foolish ones gives birth to a net of delusion. Regular association with the righteous gives birth to dharma. Therefore, those who desire equanimity should associate with the
wise, the old, the good, the austere and the righteous. One should serve those who are pure in three ways—learning, birth and deeds. They are superior to the sacred texts. Without performing rites, we will obtain merit by associating with righteous and meritorious ones, just as one obtains demerit by serving evil ones. The sight and touch
of, and conversing and sitting with, evil ones, diminish those who follow dharma and make men unsuccessful. Association with mean ones diminishes the intelligence of men. Association with those who are medium gives birth
to mediocrity and association with the best makes one supreme. There are qualities that are talked about in the
world as giving rise to dharma, kama and artha. These have been mentioned in the Vedas and are sanctioned by the
good and are the sources of conduct in the world. These good qualities exist in you, separately and collectively. We
wish to ensure our welfare and desire to live among those who possess these good qualities.” Yudhishthira replied,
“We are fortunate that our subjects, with the brahmanas at the forefront, driven by affection and compassion, credit
us with good qualities that we do not possess. With my brothers, I am requesting you. For the sake of that affection
and compassion, do not act otherwise. Our grandfather Bhishma, the king,5 Vidura, our mother and all our wellwishers are there in Nagasahrya. If you wish to do something for our pleasure, all of you must unite to take care of
them and protect them. They are beside themselves with sorrow and grief. You have assembled from distant
places. Please return now. It is certain that we will meet again. Let your minds be driven by affection for our kin,
whom we leave in your care. Please perform this act, because that is the act that is placed supreme in my heart. If
you do this, you will satisfy me and show me homage.” Having been thus advised by Dharmaraja, the subjects
raised a terrible sound of wailing. “Alas! O king!” They were miserable and extremely grief-stricken. Remembering the good qualities of the Parthas, though unwilling, they returned after meeting the Pandavas.
‘When the citizens returned, the Pandavas ascended their chariots and went to a large banyan tree named Pramana, situated on the banks of the Jahnavi.6 The Pandavas reached the banyan tree at the close of the day. The
brave warriors touched the pure water and spent the night there. Stricken with grief, they spent the night there, subsisting only on water. Some brahmanas had followed them out of the love they bore for them, with their disciples
and relatives. Some maintained the ﬁre,7 while others did not. Surrounded by those who knew the brahman, the
king8 was radiant. At the hour that is both beautiful and terrible,9 the ﬁres were lit and after chanting the name of
the brahman, conversations continued. In voices that were as soft as those of swans, the foremost among the brahmanas consoled the king, supreme among Kurus, and they spent the entire night.’
299(2)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Those performers of unsullied deeds10 were ready to leave for the forest. When night had
passed and morning dawned, the brahmanas who subsisted by begging for alms stood before them. At that, Kunti’s
son Yudhishthira spoke to them. “We have been robbed of everything. We have been robbed of our kingdom. We
have been robbed of our prosperity. In our sorrow, we will now go to the forest and live on fruit, roots and meat.
The forest is full of many dangers and has many predators and serpents. It seems to me that without a doubt, you
will face many difﬁculties there. The sufferings of brahmanas overwhelm even the gods, not to speak of men. O
brahmanas! Return where you wish to go.” The brahmanas replied, “O king! We are ready to travel where you are

travelling. Please do not abandon those who are devoted to you and those who can see what true dharma is. The
gods themselves show compassion for their devotees, especially brahmanas who follow good conduct.” Yudhisthira said, “O brahmanas! I too always have supreme devotion towards brahmanas. But the difﬁculties of my associates overwhelm me. My brothers are capable of collecting fruit, roots and deer. But they are deluded by the
misery and the sorrow that has overtaken them, by the oppression faced by Droupadi and by the robbing of the
kingdom. Since they are so miserable and wretched, I cannot impose painful tasks on them.”11 The brahmanas
replied, “O lord of the earth! Do not have any thoughts in your heart about our subsistence. We will follow you.
We will ﬁnd our food ourselves in the forest. We will bring you good fortune through our meditation and our
prayers. We will entertain you in the forest through stories and ourselves be happy.” Yudhishthira said, “There is
no doubt that it will be this way. We will ﬁnd pleasure in associating with brahmanas. But because of the lowly
condition to which I have been reduced, I only see my own inferiority. How can I witness all of you collecting
your own food and suffer undeserved difﬁculties because of your affection for me? Shame on the evil sons of
Dhritarashtra!” Having said this, the king sat down on the ground and began to sorrow.
‘There was a learned brahmana named Shounaka. He was skilled in samkhya yoga12 and he spoke to the king,
“There are a thousand reasons for grief and a hundred reasons for fear that delude people every day. But not those
who are learned. Intelligent ones like you do not get caught in deeds that are counter to knowledge and afﬂicted by
many faults, so that welfare is destroyed. O king! The eight13 forms of knowledge exist in you. This is the best of
everything and destroys evil, and is in conformity with shruti14 and smriti.15 When calamities arise because of
penury or hardship, or are caused by the deeds of kin, learned ones like you don’t become miserable because of
physical or mental sorrow. Listen. I will recount to you the shlokas that the great-souled Janaka16 chanted in earlier times, for imparting stability to one’s soul. ‘The world is engulfed in two kinds of misery, those resulting from
the mind and from the body. Individually and collectively, listen to the means of alleviating them. There are four
kinds of reasons behind physical sorrow—disease, the touch of something painful, labour and distance from loved
things. Mental and physical pain can be reduced through treatment, or by not thinking about them. These are the
two courses of action. That is the reason intelligent physicians ﬁrst try to pacify mental pain by saying that which
brings pleasure and offering objects that bring pleasure. Just as a hot iron ball affects the water in a pot, mental
pain affects the body. Just as water quenches ﬁre, knowledge quenches mental ailments. When the mind is paciﬁed, the body is also paciﬁed. The root of all mental ailments is affection. Affection makes a man attached and that
leads to misery. Attachment is the root of all unhappiness and attachment causes fear. Every kind of unhappiness
and happiness results from attachment. It is attachment that leads to the desire for material objects. Both are evil,
but the former has been said to be more serious.17 The ﬁre in a hollow tree burns down the entire tree, right to the
roots. Like that, the evil of attachment, no matter how small, destroys dharma and artha. He who has withdrawn is
not detached. But one who can see the faults18 from proximity is dispassionate, bears no hatred and is detached
from objects. Therefore, one should not be attached to one’s allies, one’s friends or the riches one has accumulated.
Learning destroys attachment to that which results from one’s body. Like water on a lotus leaf, one who is united
with the learning of the sacred texts has controlled his soul and is not touched by affection. A man overcome with
attachment is immersed in desire. From the desire that is created, thirst expands.19 Thirst is everything evil and
always disturbs man. It is terrible and leads to a lot that is against dharma. It ties one down in sin. Those who cannot give it up are deluded. It does not decay with the body’s decay. It is like a fatal disease. He who discards this
thirst, becomes happy. This thirst has no beginning and no end. It destroys men from inside their bodies. Like a ﬁre
that has no origin but has arisen, it destroys. Like kindling is destroyed by the ﬁre that it has created, one who has
not controlled his soul is destroyed through his natural avarice. Just as those who are alive are scared of death,
those who have riches are always scared of the king, water, ﬁre, thieves and relatives. A meat in the air is devoured
by birds, on the ground by predatory beasts and in the water by ﬁsh. But one with riches is devoured everywhere.
To some men, riches are the source of disaster. A man who is addicted to the superiority of riches will never attain
superiority. Therefore, the acquisition of riches always increases the delusion of the mind and is the source of
miserliness, insolence, vanity, fear and anxiety. The wise ones know that riches are the source of miseries in bodies. There is misery in earning riches, preserving it and in its decay. Its destruction brings unhappiness. Its expendi-

ture brings unhappiness. Even then, people murder for riches. There is unhappiness in giving up riches. But there
is unhappiness also in preserving it. Since its possession brings such misery, one should not think about its loss.
Deluded ones are always dissatisﬁed, the learned are content. There is no end to thirst. Contentment is the supreme
happiness. The learned ones know that youth, beauty, life, collection of riches, prosperity and association with
loved ones are temporary and never crave for these. Therefore, one should refrain from accumulation of riches and
consequent unhappiness. One who has accumulated riches is never seen without difﬁculties. For this reason, those
who are righteous praise those who have no desire for wealth. It is better not to touch mud than wash after touching it.’20 O Yudhisthira! Therefore, you should not have a desire for riches. If you wish to act in accordance with
dharma, free yourself from desire for riches.”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “O brahmana! I do not desire riches because I wish to enjoy them after acquisition. I do
not desire them out of avarice. I desire them so that I can support the brahmanas. O brahmana! How can someone
like me, who is in the householder stage, fail to support and sustain those who follow him? It is taught that one
must divide among all beings. One who is a householder should give to those who do not cook themselves.21 The
houses of good men should never lack four things—grass, ground, water and welcoming words. Those who are
sick must be given a bed.22 Those who are tired of standing must be given a seat.23 Those who are thirsty must be
given a drink and those who are hungry must be given food. One’s eyesight must be given.24 One’s heart must be
given. One’s pleasant words must be given. One must stand up to greet the guest and offer him proper homage.
Agnihotra, bulls, kin, guests, relatives, sons, wives and servants—burn down those who do not offer homage. No
one should cook food only for one’s own self. Nor should animals be killed in vain. No one should eat food oneself, without having offered it in the proper fashion. In the morning and in the evening, let food be spread out on
the ground for dogs, svapachas,25 birds and the Vishvadevas.26 Eating the food that is left is like partaking of ambrosia. What is left at the end of a sacriﬁce is also like ambrosia. It is said that one who leads the life of a householder while following these practices follows the supreme dharma. O brahmana! What do you think?”
‘Shounaka said, “Alas! It is a great misery that the world is full of contradictions. The evil ﬁnd satisfaction in
that which scares the good. Driven by delusion and attachment, slaves to gratiﬁcation of their senses, foolish men
perform many acts for the sake of the penis and the stomach. Like a charioteer who has lost control over evil and
wild horses, even sensible men lose their bearing and are led astray by their senses. When any of the six senses27
comes close to an object, preconceived desire springs up in the mind and manifests itself through them. When the
mind is directed towards enjoying the object of the senses, attachment and resolution are created. That resolution is
the seed of desire towards an object, and pierced, one falls into the ﬂames of avarice, like a moth in its greed for
light. Thus, immersed in the great delusion of happiness and deluded by the desire for pleasure and food, he does
not know his own self. He descends on earth, from one womb to another. As a result of ignorance, karma and
thirst, he is whirled around in a wheel, changing from one being to another—from Brahma to a blade of grass, born
repeatedly in water, on the ground and in the sky. This is the path of those who don’t know. Listen to that of the
ones who know. This is the way of those who are always devoted to superior dharma and seek to free themselves.
These are the words of the Vedas. Act, but be detached from the act. According to this, one should not practise any
dharma because of desire. It has been said that there is an eightfold path towards dharma—sacriﬁces, studying,
gifts, austerities, truthfulness, forbearance, self-control and lack of avarice. Of these, the ﬁrst four are established
in pitriyana.28 Therefore, one should always act because a deed has to be done, not because of desire. The second
four represent devayana,29 always followed by those who are virtuous. One whose soul is pure should always
travel along these eight paths—through correct resolution and association, correct deprivation of the senses, correct observance of the speciﬁc vows, correct serving of superiors, correct regulation of food, correct studying and
dissemination, correct renunciation of rituals and correct restraining of thoughts. Those who have conquered life30
perform their deeds in this way. It is because they are united with the powers of yoga and are bereft of attachment
and hatred that gods like the Rudras, the Sadhyas, the Adityas, the Vasus and the Ashvins are able to sustain beings
and possess prosperity. O Kounteya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Like them, you must attain great equanimity. You must seek to obtain success in austerities and in yoga. Through your deeds, you have already obtained

success for your father and your mother. So that you can sustain the brahmanas, you must now seek success in
your austerities. Those who obtain such success can obtain whatever they wish because of that. Therefore, practise
austerities. Accomplish everything that your soul desires.”’
300(3)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having heard these words of Shounaka, Kunti’s son Yudhishthira went to his priest and in
the midst of his brothers, said, “These brahmanas are learned in the Vedas. When I left, they followed me. I am immersed in many miseries and do not have the powers to sustain them. I cannot abandon them. But nor do I have the
powers to give to them. O illustrious one! Please tell me. What is the right course of action for me?” Dhoumya,
supreme among those who uphold dharma, thought for a moment about what was the right course of action in accordance with dharma. He then spoke these words to Yudhishthira, “In ancient times, when beings were created,
they suffered from great hunger. Like their own father, Savita31 felt compassion for them. While proceeding on his
northern course,32 he used his energy to suck up the juices. Then, returning on his southern course,33 the sun
placed them in the earth. When he became lord of the ﬁelds, the lord of the herbs34 collected the sun’s energy and
created the clouds. Sprinkled with the moon’s energy, it is the sun himself who is created as the herbs with six
ﬂavours.35 It is this that provides food to all beings on earth. Thus, it is the sun that provides food for sustaining
the lives of all beings. He is the father of all beings. Therefore, seek refuge with him. All great-souled kings, pure
in birth and in deeds, save all their subjects by resorting to great austerities. Bhima,36 Kartavirya, Vainya and
Nahusha—all of them saved their subjects through austerities, yoga and meditation. O one with dharma in your
heart! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You have been puriﬁed through your deeds. Like that, basing yourself
in dharma, you must sustain the brahmanas by resorting to austerities.” Having been thus addressed by Dhoumya
in words that were appropriate for the time, the pure-souled Dharmaraja undertook supreme austerities. After
touching the waters of the Ganga and the wind, the one with dharma in his soul resorted to yoga and pranayama,
controlled his senses and lived on air, worshipping Divakara37 with offerings of ﬂowers and ﬁreless oblations.’
Janamejaya asked, ‘For the sake of the brahmanas, how did King Yudhishthira, bull among the Kurus, worship
Surya, whose valour is extraordinary?’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! After purifying yourself, listen attentively to my words. O Indra among kings!
Find the time and I will tell you everything in detail. O immensely intelligent one! Listen to the one hundred and
eight pure names38 that were recited by Dhoumya to Partha, best among great-souled ones—Surya, Aryama, Bhaga, Tvashta, Pusha, Arka, Savita, Ravi, Gabhastiman, Aja, Kala, Mrityu, Dhata, Prabhakara, Prithivi, Apa, Teja,
Kha, Vayu, Parayana, Soma, Brihaspati, Shukra, Budha, Angaraka, Indra, Vivasvat, Diptamshu, Shuchi, Shouri,
Shanaischara, Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Skanda, Vaishravana, Yama, Vaidyuta, Jathara, Aindhana, Tejaspati, Dharmadhvaja, Vedakarta, Vedanga, Vedavahana, Krita, Treta, Dvapara, Kali, Sarvamarashraya, Kala, Kashtha, Muhurta, Paksha, Masa, Ritu, Samvatsarakara, Ashvattha, Kalachakra, Vibhavasu, Purusha, Shashvata, Yogi, Vyaktavyakta, Sanatana, Lokadhyaksha, Prajadhyaksha, Vishvakarma, Tamonuda, Varuna, Sagara, Amshu, Jimuta, Jivana, Ariha, Bhutashraya, Bhutapati, Sarvabhutanishevita, Mani, Suvarna, Bhutadi, Kamada, Sarvatomukha, Jaya,
Vishala, Varada, Shighraga, Pranadharana, Dhanvantari, Dhumaketu, Adideva, Aditya,39 Dvadashatma, Aravindaksha, Pita, Mata, Pitamaha, Svargadvara, Prajadvara, Mokshadvara, Trivishtapa, Dehakarta, Prashantatma, Vishvatma, Vishvatomukha, Characharatma, Sukshmatma, Maitra and Vapushanvita. These are the sacred one hundred
and eight names of the great-souled Surya, all deserving of praise.40 They were recounted by the great-souled
Shakra. Narada obtained them from Shakra and Dhoumya obtained them later. Yudhishthira got them from
Dhoumya and obtained all that he desired.
‘You who are served by the masses of the gods, the ancestors and the yakshas. You who are worshipped by the
asuras, nishacharas and siddhas. You who are like the ﬁre and the best of gold. O Bhaskara!41 With you in my
mind, I bow down before you.42 He who recites this at the time of sunrise with a calm frame of mind obtains sons
and a treasury of riches and gems. Such a man can always remember his past lives. He obtains memory and

supreme wisdom. Let a man recite this chant to the supreme of gods, after concentrating and purifying his mind.
He will be freed from the ﬁre and ocean of grief and will obtain everything that his mind desires.’
301(4)

Vaishampayana said, ‘At that,43 Divakara was pleased and showed himself to the Pandava in his own body. He
was radiant and blazed like the ﬁre. “O king! You will get everything that you wish for. I will provide you food for
the twelve years. There will be no shortage of the four kinds of food in your kitchen—fruit, roots, meat and vegetables. There will be no shortage of many riches too.” Having said this, he vanished.44
‘Having obtained this boon, Kounteya, knowledgeable in the ways of dharma, arose from the water.45 The one
without decay grasped Dhoumya’s feet and embraced his brothers. He went and met Droupadi. While she watched,
the lord Pandava cooked the food in the kitchen. However, once cooked, the four kinds of forest fare46 increased
and became inexhaustible. With that, he fed the brahmanas. When the brahmanas had been fed and his younger
brothers had also eaten, Yudhishthira later ate the remainder and this came to be known as vighasa.47 After feeding Yudhishthira, Parshati48 ate the remnants. The lord,49 who was as radiant as Divakara himself, thus obtained a
boon from Divakara and gave the brahmanas all that they desired. On the appointed tithis and nakshatras, with his
priest at the forefront, he performed sacriﬁces in accordance with the mantras and the rituals. Thereupon, with their
departure blessed, the Pandavas, with Dhoumya and surrounded by a mass of brahmanas, left for the forest of
Kamyaka.’
302(5)

Vaishampayana said, ‘After the Pandavas had left for the forest, Ambika’s son,50 whose wisdom was in his
eyes,51 was tormented and happily seated himself.52 The king spoke these words to the inﬁnitely intelligent Vidura, who had dharma in his soul, “Your intelligence is like that of the pure Bhargava.53 You know all the subtleties
of supreme dharma. The Kouravas applaud you as one who is impartial. Tell me what is right for me and for
them.54 O Vidura! Now that all this has happened, what should be done? How can the citizens be made to show us
respect? They55 may destroy us from our roots. But I don’t want their destruction either.”
‘Vidura replied, “O Indra among men! Dharma has three roots.56 It has been said that the roots of a kingdom
are also vested in dharma. O king! Therefore, sustain dharma to the best of your powers. Protect your sons and the
sons of Pandu. What happened in the sabha destroyed dharma. Led by Soubala, those evil-hearted ones challenged
Kunti’s son to a gamble with dice and your son vanquished one who is devoted to the truth. O king! In this, you
were misguided. O Kouravya! But I see a means of saving yourself, whereby your son can be cleansed of sin and
be established in this world as a righteous one. O king! Let Pandu’s sons regain everything that you took in excess
of what is yours. It has been said that the supreme dharma of a king is to be content with what he has and not covet
that of others. This is your foremost task, to gratify them57 and censure Shakuni. Otherwise, no one may remain
from your sons. O king! You should do this immediately. O king! If you do not do this, it is certain that the lineage
of the Kurus will be destroyed. When angered, neither Bhimasena nor Arjuna will leave enemies unslain in a war.
Savyasachi, skilled in the use of weapons, is their warrior. He possesses the bow named Gandiva, unmatched in the
world. Bhima with the powerful arms is their warrior. Who in the world is beyond their reach? Earlier, as soon as
your son was born, I told you what would have brought your well-being. O king! For the sake of the lineage, I
asked you to abandon your son. But you did not perform that task. O king! If you do not now listen to what is good
for you, you will have to regret it later. If your son agrees to rule the kingdom in friendship with the Pandavas,
there will be no regret and together with your son, you will ﬁnd happiness. But if the opposite happens, subdue
him58 and instate Pandu’s son as the king. O king! Let Ajatashatru,59 who is devoid of passion, rule the earth in
accordance with dharma. O king! Then all the lords of the earth will immediately offer us homage, like vaishyas. O
king! Let Duryodhana, Shakuni and the son of a suta60 happily wait upon the sons of Pandu. Let Duhshasana seek
Bhimasena’s pardon and that of Drupada’s daughter, in the middle of the sabha. After pacifying Yudhishthira, offer

him homage and instate him in the kingdom. O king! Asked by you, what else can I say? If you act according to
what I have said, you will have performed the right task.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Vidura! These are the words you spoke in the sabha, for the sake of the Pandavas and for
me. But this is for their welfare and not for mine. My mind does not approve of any of this. How have you arrived
at this conclusion, if not for the welfare of the Pandavas? I now think that you don’t have my welfare in mind.
How can I abandon my son for the sake of the Pandavas? There is no doubt that they are my sons too but Duryodhana has been born from my own body. Speaking for the welfare of others and appearing as one impartial, how can
you ask me to abandon my own body? O Vidura! Though I hold you in great respect, everything that your tongue
has uttered in wrong. Stay or go, as you please. However much she is paciﬁed, an unchaste wife always leaves.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! Having uttered these words, Dhritarashtra suddenly arose and went away to his
inner quarters. Declaring that this was not the way it should be, Vidura went away to where the Parthas were.’
303(6)

Vaishampayana said, ‘So as to live in the forest, the Pandavas, bulls among the Bharata lineage, left the banks of
the Jahnavi with their followers and went to Kurukshetra. They worshipped at the Sarasvati, the Dhrishadvati and
the Yamuna61 and travelling from forest to forest, headed in a western direction. At last, on the banks of the Sarasvati, they saw before them the forest of Kamyaka, beloved by sages and located on a desert plain. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Consoled and accompanied by the sages, the heroes settled down in that forest, teeming with
many animals and birds. Vidura then decided to meet the Pandavas. In a single chariot, he went to the prosperous
Kamyaka forest. Vidura reached that forest in a chariot drawn by swift horses. He saw Dharmaraja seated in a secluded spot, together with Droupadi, his brothers and brahmanas. From a distance, the truthful king saw Vidura
speedily approach and told his brother Bhimasena, “What will Kshatta say when he meets us? Is it possible that he
comes again at Soubala’s words, to challenge me once more to a gamble with dice? Does the mean Shakuni wish
to win our weapons by playing once again with dice? O Bhimasena! If challenged by anyone, I am unable to
refuse. Yet if the Gandiva is uncertain,62 our winning back the kingdom is uncertain.” O king! Then all the Pandavas stood up and welcomed Vidura. After the due homage had been shown, Ajamidha63 sat down among the
sons of Pandu and made the usual enquiries.
‘After Vidura had rested, those bulls among men asked him the reason for his coming. He told them in detail
about the conduct of Ambika’s son, Dhritarashtra. Vidura said, “O Ajatashatru! Dhritarashtra maintains me. He
summoned me and after showing his respects, told me, ‘This is what has happened. Now impartially, tell me what
is good for me and for them.’ I told him what is good for the Kouravas and also what will bring welfare to Dhritarashtra. But he did not like what I said. I could not think of any other course that would bring welfare. O Pandavas! I told him what would bring supreme welfare. But Ambika’s son did not listen to those words. Just as a sick
man does not like medicine,64 my words did not ﬁnd pleasure with him. O Ajatashatru! Like an unchaste woman
cannot be brought to the house of one who is learned, he cannot be brought to well-being. The bull among the
Bharata lineage did not like what I said, like a maiden does not like a husband who is sixty years old. O king! The
destruction of the Kouravas is certain. Dhritarashtra will never ﬁnd supreme well-being. Just as water on a lotus
leaf does not stick there, my medicine65 did not stick to him. Then the angry Dhritarashtra told me, ‘O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Go wherever your respect takes you. I do not desire you as an adviser any longer, to rule
the earth or the city.’ O Indra among men! Having been thus abandoned by King Dhritarashtra, I have now come
here to give you good advice. I will now repeat everything that I said in the sabha. Hear them and bear them in
mind. The man who pardons the terrible miseries caused by his enemies and waits for his time, gradually extending himself like feeding a ﬁre, that self-controlled man rules the entire earth alone. O king! If one shares one’s
riches with one’s companions, the companions also share in one’s adversity. That is the way to gather one’s companions. It has been said that companions are the way to win the earth. O Pandava! Without any lamentations, truth
is best. Food should be equally shared with one’s companions. One should never hold oneself above others. Such
conduct increases the prosperity of kings.” Yudhishthira replied, “I will do what you advise me and, undisturbed
by passion, follow your supreme intelligence. In every time and place, I will completely follow what you say.”’

304(7)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Vidura had left for the hermitage of the
Pandavas, the immensely wise Dhritarashtra repented. He went to the door of the sabha and deluded by his memories of Vidura, fell down unconscious in the presence of the lords of the earth. When he regained consciousness, he
got up from the ground. Sanjaya was with him and the king told him these words, “My brother and well-wisher is
like Dharma himself. On remembering him, my heart is being torn apart. Go quickly and bring my brother to me,
one who is knowledgeable about dharma.” Uttering these words, the king lamented piteously. He was tormented
by repentance and deluded by Vidura’s memory. Out of brotherly affection, the king again spoke these words to
Sanjaya. “O Sanjaya! My brother Vidura suffered because of my evil wrath. Go and ﬁnd out if he is still alive. That
brother of mine is wise and has inﬁnite intelligence. Never has he practised the slightest falsehood. Why should
this supremely intelligent one suffer a wrong from me? O Sanjaya! That wise one should not give up his life. Go
ﬁnd him and bring him back.” On hearing the king’s words, Sanjaya approved and said that he would act
accordingly.
‘Sanjaya set out for the Kamyaka forest. He soon arrived at the forest where the Pandavas were and saw Yudhishthira, attired in the skin of ruru deer. He was seated with Vidura, with thousands of brahmanas. He was surrounded by his brothers, like Shatakratu by the gods. Coming up to Yudhishthira, Sanjaya showed him homage and
to Bhima, Arjuna and the twins, as each one deserved. The king66 asked him about his welfare. When Sanjaya was
happily seated, he explained the reasons for his coming and said, “O Kshatta! Ambika’s son, King Dhritarashtra,
remembers you. Please go and see him quickly and revive the king. O descendant of the Kuru lineage!67 Take
your leave of the Pandavas, supreme among men. O revered one! On the command of that lion among kings, return immediately.” Having been thus addressed, the intelligent Vidura, always affectionate towards his relatives,
took Yudhishthira’s leave and returned to Gajasahrya. The powerful Dhritarashtra told the immensely wise one, “O
unblemished one! O one who is knowledgeable in dharma! It is through good fortune that you have remembered
me. It is through good fortune that you have come back. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Because of you, I
could not sleep during the day and during the night. While awake, I saw my body as if it had no soul.” He then
took Vidura on his lap and smelt the top of his head. He said, “Forgive what I had said to you in anger.” Vidura
replied, “O king! I have forgiven you. You are my greatest preceptor. I have come here swiftly so as to see you. O
tiger among men! O king! Men who have dharma in their hearts, come to those who are distressed, without thinking whether the deed should be done. Your sons are as dear to me as Pandu’s sons. But since they are now in distress, my intelligence went out towards them.” Having thus become reconciled towards each other, the immensely
radiant brothers, Vidura and Dhritarashtra, obtained supreme happiness.’
305(8)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having heard that Vidura had returned and that he had been paciﬁed by the king,68 the evilminded king who was Dhritarashtra’s son69 burnt with anger. Darkness having entered his mind, the king summoned Soubala, Karna and Duhshasana and told them these words, “The adviser honoured by Dhritarashtra has
returned. The learned Vidura is a well-wisher of the sons of Pandu and is always devoted to their welfare. Advice
me about what is in my welfare, so that Vidura does not inﬂuence his70 intelligence to again bring the Pandavas
back. If I again see the Parthas return here in some way, I will certainly dry up, without life and without riches. I
will consume poison or hang myself, or use a weapon or enter the ﬁre. I will never again be able to witness their
prosperity.”
‘Shakuni replied, “O king! O lord of the earth! Why are you falling prey to these childlike thoughts? They have
gone after an agreement. Therefore, their return won’t happen. O bull among the Bharata lineage! All the Pandavas
are always established in the truth of their words. O son! They will never accept your father’s words. If however
they accept them and return again to the city, thus violating the agreement, we will again play, staking everything.
Apparently obedient to the king71 and maintaining a middle position,72 we will protect ourselves and wait to see
many weaknesses emerge in the Pandavas.”

‘Duhshasana said, “O immensely intelligent maternal uncle! It will be exactly as you say. The intelligent words
you utter have always pleased me.”
‘Karna said, “O Duryodhana! All of us always try to accomplish what you desire. O king! I notice that all of us
are united in our view.”
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having been thus addressed by Karna, King Duryodhana then turned his face away, without being greatly happy. On realizing this, Karna opened his radiant eyes wide. In great anger, he aroused himself,
and spoke to Duhshasana and Soubala in wrath, “O lords of men! Listen to my true views. With servile hands, we
are trying to do everything that pleases the king.73 But while remaining stationary, we cannot always bring him
pleasure. Let us now grasp our armour and weapons and mounting our chariots, go together and kill the Pandavas,
who are roaming in the forest. When they have all been paciﬁed and have left for the unknown journey,74 we and
Dhritarashtra’s sons will be unchallenged. As long as they are distressed and as long as they are immersed in grief,
as long as they are without allies, till then, we can do this. This is my view.” Having heard these words, they applauded them repeatedly. All of them then praised the suta’s son, saying that his words were excellent. Having said
this, all those angry ones separately mounted their chariots. They then set out in a body, having made up their
minds to kill the Pandavas. The pure-souled and illustrious lord Krishna Dvaipayana75 saw this with his divine
sight and got to know about their departure. He is the illustrious one who is worshipped by all the worlds. He came
to them and restrained them. He then swiftly went to the place where the one whose wisdom was his sight76 was
seated, and spoke to him.’
306(9)

‘Vyasa said, “O immensely wise Dhritarashtra! Listen to my words. I will tell you what will bring supreme welfare
to all the Kouravas. O mighty-armed one! It does not please me that the Pandavas have gone to the forest and that
they have been deceitfully defeated by Duryodhana’s followers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After the
completion of thirteen years, they will remember their oppression and in anger, unleash venom on the Kouravas.
For the sake of the kingdom, why is your evil-souled and evil-minded son always angry? Why does he want to kill
the Pandavas? Restrain ﬁnally the deluded one. Bring your son to the path of paciﬁcation. In trying to kill the ones
who now live in the forest, he will be freed from his own life. Do what the wise Vidura has said. And Bhishma,
and we, and Kripa, and Drona and other wise ones have told you. O immensely intelligent one! War with one’s relatives is reprehensible. O king! This is not dharma, nor is it the way to fame. Refrain from it. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! O king! Such is his obsession with the Pandavas, that if it is ignored, great disaster will follow. Or
let your evil-souled son go to the forest. O king! Let him live with the Pandavas, alone and without allies. O lord of
men! If from this association affection towards the Pandavas results in your son, you will have succeeded in your
task. O great king! It has been said that the nature instilled in a man at birth does not leave him before his death.
What do Bhishma, Drona and Vidura think? What about you? What is right must be done immediately, before the
objective becomes impossible.”’
307(10)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O illustrious one! This affair of the gamble did not bring me pleasure. O sage! I think it was
destiny which overcame me and made me agree. It did not bring pleasure to Bhishma, Drona or Vidura either, nor
to Gandhari. There is no doubt that the gambling was caused by delusion. O illustrious one! I cannot abandon the
insensible Duryodhana. O one with vows! Though I know, I am bound by affection for my son.”
‘Vyasa replied, “O king! O Vichitravirya’s son! What you have said is true. I know that a son is supreme and
nothing is superior to a son. Indra himself realized this through the ﬂow of Surabhi’s77 tears. He understood that a
son surpasses all other riches, no matter how expensive. O lord of the earth! In this connection, I will recount that
great and supreme account, the conversation between Surabhi and Indra. O king! O son! In times long past, it is
said that Surabhi, the mother of all cows, cried out in heaven. Out of compassion for her, Indra asked, ‘O fortunate
one! Why are you crying like this? Is everything well with the gods, men and cattle? Or is there some misfortune
that is more than slight?’ Surabhi replied, ‘O lord of the thirty gods! I do not see any calamity looming before you.

O Koushika!78 I am sorrowing for my son and that is the reason I am weeping. My son is small and weak and he
is burdened by the plough. See that terrible peasant beat him with a stick. O lord of the gods! I see him terribly exhausted and close to death. O lord of the gods! I am overcome with compassion for him and my mind is agitated.
One of those two79 is stronger and bears the burden of greater weight. But the other one has little strength of life
and is thin, with nothing but veins. O Vasava! He bears the burden with great difﬁculty and that is the reason I am
grieving. He is close to death and is repeatedly beaten with the stick. O Vasava! Look. He is unable to bear the burden. Driven by compassion for him, I am sorrowful and extremely miserable. I am weeping and tears of sorrow are
ﬂowing from my eyes.’ Indra asked, ‘O beautiful one! Thousands of your sons are equally oppressed. Why are you
driven by compassion for this one? He is only one among several oppressed.’ Surabhi replied, ‘I have thousands of
sons everywhere and I look upon them equally. O Shakra! But my compassion is truly greater for the son who is
oppressed.’ On hearing Surabhi’s words, Indra was greatly surprised. O Kouravya! He became convinced that a
son was dearer than one’s own life. At that, the illustrious chastiser of Paka suddenly let loose a great shower of
rain there and caused an obstruction to the act of ploughing.
‘“O king! As Surabhi had said, all your sons may be equal to you. But among all your sons, your compassion
should be greatest towards the one who is oppressed. O son! Just as Pandu was my son, you are also my son, and
so is the immensely wise Vidura. It is out of affection towards you that I am telling you all this. O lord of the earth!
You have one hundred and one sons to outlive you.80 But Pandu’s are seen to be only ﬁve and they are in a bad
state and extremely miserable. How will they manage to remain alive? How will they prosper? Such thoughts
about the miserable sons of Pritha torment my mind. O lord of the earth! If you wish the Kouravas to live, let your
son Duryodhana go to the Pandavas and make peace.”’
308(11)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O immensely wise sage! It is exactly as you say. I know this and so do all the other lords of
men. O sage! What you consider to be beneﬁcial for the welfare of the Kurus was also pointed out to me by Vidura, Bhishma and Drona. If you have compassion for the Kouravas, teach my evil-souled son Duryodhana.”
‘Vyasa replied, “O king! The illustrious rishi Maitreya has come to see you, after having spent time with the
Pandava brothers. O king! For the sake of bringing rightful peace to this lineage of yours, this great rishi will instruct your son Duryodhana. O Indra among kings! Whatever he says should be done without any hesitation. If the
task is not done, he will curse your son in rage.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having said this, Vyasa went away and Maitreya appeared. The lord of men81 came and
worshipped him, together with his sons, offering gifts, water to wash his feet and performing other rituals. After
the bull among sages had rested, Ambika’s son, King Dhritarashtra, courteously asked him questions. “O illustrious one! Has your journey from Kurujangala82 been comfortable? Are the brave warriors, the ﬁve Pandava brothers, well? Do those bulls among men desire to spend their time in accordance with the agreement? Will the fraternal affection among the Kurus continue unabated?” Maitreya replied, “Setting out on a journey of pilgrimage, I arrived in Kurujangala. While roaming around, I saw Dharmaraja in Kamyaka forest. He had matted hair, wore deerskins and was living in a hermitage. O lord! Many sages had assembled there to see the great-souled one. O great
king! It was there that I heard about the blunder committed by your son and about the evil course of action he
adopted through the gambling match. I have therefore come to you out of affection for the Kouravas. O lord! I
have always had affection and love towards you. O king! When you and Bhishma are still alive, it is not proper
that your sons should act against each other. O king! You yourself are the central pillar,83 in both punishing and
rewarding. Why did you then ignore this terrible evil that has now arisen? O descendant of the Kuru lineage!84 O
king! What happened in the sabha was like the behaviour of dasyus.85 You will no longer be able to shine in an
assembly of ascetics.” Then he turned to the intolerant King Duryodhana.
‘The illustrious rishi Maitreya spoke to him in soft tones, “O mighty-armed Duryodhana! O supreme among eloquent ones! Listen. O immensely wise one! The words I utter are for your welfare. O king! O bull among men! Do
not ﬁght with the Pandavas. Do what is good for you, for the Pandavas, for the Kurus and for the world. All those

tigers among men86 are brave warriors, valorous in war. All of them have the strength of ten thousand elephants
and are as ﬁrm as the vajra. All of them follow the vow of truth and all of them have pride in their manliness. They
have killed rakshasas, who can assume any form at will and are the enemies of the gods. These rakshasas had
chiefs like Hidimba, Baka and Kirmira. When they left this place, he87 obstructed the path of those great-souled
ones. His soul was terrible and he was as immobile as a mountain peak. Bhima, supremely proud in battle and
supreme in strength among strong ones, killed him like an animal, the way a tiger kills small animals. O king!
Look at the royal conquest, where the mighty archer Jarasandha, with the strength of ten thousand elephants, was
killed in battle by Bhima. They have Vasudeva as their relative and Parshata88 as a brother-in-law. Which man,
susceptible to old age and death, would dare confront them in battle?89 O bull among the Bharata lineage! That is
the reason you should strive for peace with the Pandavas. O king! Listen to my words. Otherwise, you will expose
yourself to death.” O lord of the earth! Having heard these words spoken by Maitreya, Duryodhana smiled and
drew patterns on the ground with his feet. With his arms, he slapped his thighs, which were like the trunks of elephants. The evil-minded one said nothing, but stood there, with his head slightly bent.
‘O king! On seeing Duryodhana ignore him and draw patterns on the ground, Maitreya was angered. Maitreya,
supreme among sages, became overcome with anger. As if decreed by destiny, the sage got ready to curse him.
Maitreya’s eyes were red with anger. He touched the air90 and cursed Dhritarashtra’s evil-minded son, “Since you
ignored me and since you did not ﬁnd my words attractive, you will soon reap the fruits of your insolence. In the
great war that will result from the enmity created by you, the powerful Bhima will smash your thigh with the blow
of a club.” When he had uttered these words, Dhritarashtra, lord of the earth, sought to pacify the sage and pleaded
with him that this might not happen. Maitreya replied, “O king! O son! It is only if your son makes peace that what
I have said won’t happen. But if the opposite occurs, it will happen.” O Indra among kings! Deviated from his objective, Duryodhana’s father then asked Maitreya how Kirmira had been killed by Bhima. Maitreya replied, “I will
not tell you, since you are intolerant and my words ﬁnd no favour with your son. After I have left, Vidura will tell
you everything.” Having said this, Maitreya went away, just as he had come. Duryodhana also left the place, anxious about the killing of Kirmira.’

Section Thirty
Kirmira-vadha Parva
This section has 75 shlokas and only one chapter.
Kirmira was a rakshasa mentioned in the last section and as already explained the word vadha means killing. So this section is about the killing
of Kirmira.
309(12)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O Kshatta! I wish to hear about the killing of Kirmira. Tell me about the encounter between
the rakshasa and Bhimasena.”
‘Vidura replied, “Hear about this superhuman deed of Bhima’s. Earlier, I have repeatedly heard about this in my
conversation with them.1 O Indra among kings! Having been vanquished in the game with dice, the Pandavas left
this place. Having travelled for three days and three nights, they arrived at the forest known as Kamyaka. O king!
In the dead of the night, when the midnight hour had passed, man-eating rakshasas, whose deeds are terrible, begin
to roam around. Therefore, out of fear for the maneaters, we had heard that ascetics, cowherds and others who go
to the forest, always maintain a distance from the forest at that time.
‘“O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It was at that time that they entered and saw a rakshasa obstructing their
path. His eyes blazed and he was terrible. He held a blazing brand. With outstretched arms and a fearful face, he
stood and obstructed the path along which the extenders of the Kuru lineage were travelling. Eight of his teeth jutted out. His eyes were copper-red. The hair on his head blazed and stood up erect. He looked like a monsoon
cloud, tinged with the rays of the sun and lightning and adorned with a ﬂock of cranes.2 He let out a mighty roar
and created the maya used by rakshasas. When he let loose his giant roar, it was like the roar of clouds ﬁlled with
rain. Frightened by this roar, the birds ﬂed in all directions. They cried out in fear and so did the animals that lived
on the ground and in the water. As a result of deer, elephants, buffaloes and bears ﬂeeing in all directions, it
seemed as if the entire forest was running away from the roar. As a result of the wind generated by his thighs,
many creepers laden with copper-red blossoms seemed to embrace the tall trees. At that time, a terrible wind began
to blow and because of the dust, the sky lost the bear.3 Like a great enemy that causes inﬁnite grief to the ﬁve senses, he was still unknown to the ﬁve sons of Pandu. From a distance he saw the Pandavas, attired in black deerskins.
Like the Mount Mainaka, he obstructed their entry into the forest.
‘“On approaching near, the lotus-eyed Krishna4 was terriﬁed and closed her eyes in fear at the sight of something never seen before. She was the one whose hair had been dishevelled by Duhshasana’s hand. She now stood
there, like a river that had overrun its banks between ﬁve mountains. On seeing her lose her senses, the ﬁve Pandavas grasped her, like the ﬁve senses are attached to objects of pleasure. In the sight of the ﬁve sons of Pandu, the
valorous Dhoumya accurately used many types of mantras to destroy the maya, terrible of form, created by the
rakshasa. On seeing his maya destroyed, the immensely strong one widened his eyes in anger. The cruel one, who
could assume any form at will, appeared like Yama himself.
‘“Then the greatly wise King Yudhishthira spoke to him, ‘Who are you and whom do you belong to? Tell us
what we can do for you.’ The rakshasa replied to Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, ‘I am Baka’s brother and I am known
by the name of Kirmira. Without any worries, I live in this deserted Kamyaka forest. I always defeat men in battle

and then eat them up. Who are you who have appeared before me as food? Without any worries, I will defeat all of
you in battle and then eat you up.’ O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing the words of the evil-hearted
one, Yudhishthira told him everything about his name and lineage. ‘You may have heard about me. I am Pandu’s
son, Dharmaraja. I am with all my brothers, Bhimasena, Arjuna and the others. I have been robbed of my kingdom
and now wish to live in this forest. It is for this reason that I have come to this terrible forest that is your territory.’
Kirmira said, ‘This is my good fortune. Today, after a long time, the gods have granted me the wish that I have
had. With my weapons always raised, I have roamed the earth with the intention of killing Bhimasena. But I could
not ﬁnd him. Through good fortune, I have come upon my brother’s killer, fulﬁlling a long-cherished desire. O
king! It was he who, in the disguise of a brahmana, killed my beloved brother Baka in Vetrakriyagriha.5 Bhima has
no strength in his chest. Therefore, he resorted to the strength of skills. My friend Hidimba used to live in the forest. He was earlier killed by this evil-hearted one and he then abducted his6 sister. That fool has now come to me
in this deep forest in the middle of the night, at a time when we roam around. Today, I will wreak the vengeance
that I have sought for a long time. I will make large offerings of blood to Baka. Today, I will free myself of the
debts I owe to my brother and to my friend. I will obtain supreme peace by removing this thorn of the rakshasas. O
Yudhishthira! If Bhimasena was earlier freed from Baka, I will today devour him before your eyes. His life is long.
But today, I will kill Vrikodara. I will eat him up and digest him, the way Agastya did the great asura.’7 Having
been thus addressed, Yudhishthira, devoted to the truth and with dharma in his soul, angrily censured the rakshasa,
saying that this could not happen.
‘“Thereupon, the mighty-armed Bhima swiftly uprooted a tree. It was ten vyamas8 long. He then stripped it of
its leaves. In an instant, the victorious Arjuna strung the Gandiva, with a force like that of the vajra. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Restraining Jishnu, Bhima rushed at the terrible-looking rakshasa, uttering the words,
‘Stay! Stay!’ Having uttered these words, the angry Pandava9 tightened the cloth around his waist. The strong one
rubbed one hand against the other and bit his lips. With the tree as a weapon, Bhima dashed forward with great
force. Like Maghavan10 hurling his thunder, he brought it down, like Yama’s staff, on his11 head. But in that battle, the rakshasa could be seen, completely unmoved. Like ﬂaming thunder, he hurled his blazing brand. But Bhima, supreme among warriors, kicked the brand back at the rakshasa with his left foot. Kirmira then suddenly uprooted a tree and rushed at the Pandava in battle, like Dandapani.12 A battle began with trees, such that all the
trees were destroyed. This was like the ancient battle between the brothers Vali and Sugriva, in their desire for the
fortune.13 Like lotuses hurled at rutting elephants, the ends of the fallen trees splintered into many fragments. In
that great forest, many trees were crushed like reeds and lay scattered like rags. O lord of the earth! That ﬁght with
the trees between the chief of the rakshasas and the supreme among men lasted but an instant. Then, as Bhima
stood ready to ﬁght, the angry rakshasa hurled a rock and Bhimasena staggered. When he was numbed by the force
of the rock, the rakshasa rushed at him, like Svarbhanu14 dashing at the sun and dispersing the rays with his arms.
They then grappled with each other and dragged each other in different ways. They seemed to be like two ﬁghting
bulls. The ﬁght between them was great, violent and terrible, like that between two proud tigers armed with fangs
and claws.
‘“Vrikodara was proud of the strength of his arms. He saw Krishna’s eyes look towards him and remembered
Duryodhana’s oppression. His vigour increased. Intolerantly, he grabbed him in his arms, like an elephant whose
rutting glands having burst, falls upon another elephant. In turn, the mighty rakshasa also grasped him. But Bhimasena, supremely strong among the strong ones, violently threw him down. As those two mighty warriors tried to
crush each other with their arms in that battle, a terrible sound was heard, like that made by shattering bamboo.
Then Vrikodara forcibly threw him down. Grabbing him by the waist, he shook him, like a violent wind shakes a
tree. Having been thus seized by the mighty Bhima in battle, he weakened. But though he trembled and panted, he
still dragged the Pandava. Noticing that he was exhausted, Vrikodara entwined him in his arms, like an animal is
tied with ropes. Uttering a loud roar, like that of a broken war drum, the strong one whirled him around repeatedly,
until his body was swollen and unconscious. Knowing that the rakshasa was exhausted, Pandu’s son swiftly
grasped him in his arms and then killed him like an animal. Vrikodara placed his knee on the evil rakshasa’s hips

and placing his hands on his throat, began to press down. Then, when his entire body was numb and his wide-open
eyes were glazed, he hurled him on the ground and said, ‘O evil one! You will no longer have to shed tears over
Hidimba and Baka. You too have proceeded to Yama’s abode.’ Having said this, that supreme warrior among men
looked at the rakshasa, his eyes wide with rage. He discarded the swollen body that no longer had life and was
empty of mind with its garments and ornaments strewn about.
‘“When the one with the form of a cloud was slain, those sons of the Indra among men15 placed Krishna at the
forefront. They praised Bhima for his many qualities and in a happy frame of mind, set out for the forest of
Dvaita.16 O lord of men! O Kourava! Thus it was that, on Dharmaraja’s instructions, Kirmira was killed in battle
by Bhimasena. Having freed the forest of its thorn, the undefeated king,17 knowledgeable in dharma, lived there
with Droupadi and made it his home. Consoling Droupadi, all those bulls of the Bharata lineage affectionately
praised Vrikodara, with happiness in their minds. After the rakshasa had been destroyed through the strength of
Bhima’s arms, those warriors entered the peaceful forest that had been freed of its thorn. Passing along that road, I
myself saw the evil-hearted and fearful body strewn in that great forest, killed through Bhima’s strength. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! From the brahmanas who had assembled there, I heard the account of Bhima’s
exploit.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having heard this account about the killing of that supreme rakshasa, Kirmira, in battle,
the king18 seemed thoughtful and sighed, as if in sorrow.’

Section Thirty-One
Kairata Parva
This section has 1150 shlokas and thirty chapters.
Chapter 310(13): 120 shlokas
Chapter 311(14): 17 shlokas
Chapter 312(15): 22 shlokas
Chapter 313(16): 23 shlokas
Chapter 314(17): 33 shlokas
Chapter 315(18): 24 shlokas
Chapter 316(19): 33 shlokas
Chapter 317(20): 27 shlokas
Chapter 318(21): 38 shlokas
Chapter 319(22): 30 shlokas
Chapter 320(23): 51 shlokas
Chapter 321(24): 16 shlokas
Chapter 322(25): 26 shlokas
Chapter 323(26): 18 shlokas
Chapter 324(27): 25 shlokas
Chapter 325(28): 37 shlokas
Chapter 326(29): 35 shlokas
Chapter 327(30): 50 shlokas
Chapter 328(31): 42 shlokas
Chapter 329(32): 40 shlokas
Chapter 330(33): 58 shlokas
Chapter 331(34): 85 shlokas
Chapter 332(35): 21 shlokas
Chapter 333(36): 34 shlokas
Chapter 334(37): 41 shlokas
Chapter 335(38): 45 shlokas
Chapter 336(39): 30 shlokas
Chapter 337(40): 61 shlokas
Chapter 338(41): 26 shlokas
Chapter 339(42): 42 shlokas
Kiratas, as mentioned earlier, are mountain-dwellers who make a living through hunting. This section is so named because Shiva assumed the
form of a kirata and fought with Arjuna.
310(13)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing that the Pandavas were tormented by misery, the Bhojas, the Vrishnis and the
Andhakas assembled together and went to them in the great forest. The heirs of Panchala,1 Dhrishtaketu the king
of Chedi and the extremely valorous Kekaya brothers, famous in the world, went to meet the Parthas in the forest,
full of anger and intolerance. They censured the sons of Dhritarashtra and asked, “What will we do?” All those
bulls among the kshatriyas placed Vasudeva at their forefront. They surrounded Dharmaraja Yudhishthira and seated themselves around him. Vasudeva said, “The earth will drink the blood of Duryodhana, Karna, the evil-souled
Shakuni and Duhshasana as the fourth. After that, all of us will instate Dharmaraja Yudhishthira. Those deceitful
ones deserve to be slain. This is eternal dharma.” Out of his preference for the Parthas, Janardana was angered.

Since it seemed as though he would burn down all beings, Arjuna paciﬁed him. On witnessing Keshava’s2 rage,
Phalguna3 recited the deeds the great-souled one had performed in his earlier bodies.4
‘He is the one whose deeds are true, the man who cannot be measured, but whose energy is truly inﬁnite. He is
the lord of the Prajapatis and the intelligent Vishnu, lord of the worlds. Arjuna said, “O Krishna! In ancient times,
you roamed in Mount Gandhamadana for ten thousand years, as a sage who had no abode.5 O Krishna! In ancient
times, you lived in the region of Pushkara for eleven thousand years, surviving on water alone. O Madhusudana!
With your arms raised, standing on one leg and surviving only on air you spent one hundred years in the vast region of Badari.6 O Krishna! You took off your upper garments and you were so thin that you seemed to be held by
your veins. You lived on the banks of the Sarasvati for the sacriﬁce that went on for twelve years. O Krishna! O
immensely energetic one! You went to the sacred pilgrimage of Prabhasa, known to all pure ones, and stood there
on one leg for one thousand divine years, practising austerities and observing rites. O Keshava! You are the
supreme soul of all beings, their beginning and their end. O Krishna! You are the store of all austerities and sacriﬁces and you are the eternal one. O Krishna! You killed Naraka, famous as Bhoumya, the one with the earrings.7
You performed the ﬁrst horse sacriﬁce. O bull among all the worlds! Having accomplished this deed, you became
victorious over all the worlds. When all the daityas and danavas assembled together, you killed them in battle. O
mighty-armed Keshava! You then gave lordship over everything to Shachi’s husband.8 You then manifested yourself in the world of men. O scorcher of enemies! You were Narayana and then you became Hari.9 You then became Brahma, Soma,10 Surya, Dharma, Dhata,11 Yama, Anala,12 Vayu,13 Vaishravana,14 Rudra, Kala,15 the
sky, the earth and the directions. You are without birth. You are the preceptor of everything that moves and is still.
You are the creator. You are the supreme being. O Krishna! You are the original god. In the forest of Chitraratha,
you performed the turayana sacriﬁce16 and other sacriﬁces, donating large amounts of alms. You have great energy. O Janardana! At each sacriﬁce, you apportioned out one hundred times, according to the share, a hundred thousand gold pieces. O beloved of the Yadavas!17 You have been Aditi’s son. O illustrious one! You are now famous
as Vishnu, Indra’s younger brother.18 O scorcher of enemies! O Krishna! While you were only a child, you used
your energy to cover heaven, sky and earth in three steps.19 You have attained heaven. You ride the sky seated in
the sun’s chariot. You are the soul of all beings. Through your radiance, you are brighter than the sun. The
Mouravas and the Pashas have been destroyed.20 Nisunda and Naraka have been killed and the road to the city of
Pragjyotisha has become safe again. Ahuti was killed at Jaruthi. Kratha, Shishupala and his followers,
Bhimasena,21 Shaibya and Shatadhanva have been conquered. Your chariot is as resplendent as the sun and roars
like the cloud. Riding on that, you defeated Rukmi in battle and obtained your queen from the Bhojas.22 In your
anger, you killed Indradyumna and the yavana Kasheruman. You have killed Shalva, the lord of Soubha, and you
brought down Soubha itself. On the banks of the Iravati, you killed Bhoja, who was the equal of Kartavirya in battle. You also killed Gopati and Talaketu. O Janardana! You journeyed to the ocean and made Dvaraka, sacred,
prosperous and loved by the rishis, your own.23 O Madhusudana! O Dasharha!24 You show no anger, no jealousy
and no falsehood. No cruelty or crookedness is established in you. O Achyuta!25 You are seated in the centre of
the mind, radiant in your own energy. The rishis come to you there and ask for freedom from fear.26 O Madhusudana! You gather up all beings at the end of a yuga.27 O scorcher of enemies! You withdraw the entire universe
into yourself and remain alone. No other one in the past has performed such deeds, nor will they in the future. O
immensely radiant god! Such are the deeds you performed even when a child. O Pundarikaksha! Such are the
deeds you performed with Baladeva’s help. You lived in the abode of Vairaja28 with Brahma himself.” Having
thus spoken, the great-souled Pandava, who was like Krishna’s soul himself, fell silent.
‘Janardana then spoke to Partha, “You are mine and I am yours. All that is mine is yours too. He who hates you
also hates me. He who follows you also follows me. O invincible one! You are Nara and I am Hari Narayana. We
are the rishis Nara and Narayana, born from that world in this world. O Partha! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You are no other than I. I am no other than you. O bull among the Bharata lineage! No one can know any

difference that exists between us.” In that assembly of warriors, the kings became agitated. Panchali, surrounded
by her valiant brothers, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, went to Pundarikaksha, who was seated with the Yadavas. Krishna29 sought refuge with the one who is all refuge and uttered these words.
‘“It has been said that when all the beings were ﬁrst created, you were the only Prajapati.30 Asita–Devala have
said that you are the creator of all beings. O invincible one! O Madhusudana! You are Vishnu. You are the sacriﬁce. You are the sacriﬁcer. You are the one for whom sacriﬁces are performed. Jamadagni’s son31 has said this. O
supreme being! The rishis have said that you are forgiveness and the truth. Kashyapa has said that you are the sacriﬁce born from the truth. Narada has said that you are the supreme lord of the Sadhyas and the gods. O lord of
prosperity! You are the creator of the worlds and you are the lord of the worlds. O lord! The sky is covered with
your head and the earth with your feet. You are the stomach of all these worlds and you are the eternal being. You
are the supreme one among all the rishis who burn with learning and austerities, who have puriﬁed their souls with
asceticism and who have become content through contemplating their own souls. O supreme being! You are the
refuge of all the rajarshis, the performers of pure deeds who withdraw from the ﬁeld of battle32 and who have the
knowledge of every dharma. You are the lord. You are omnipresent. You are the soul of all beings. You are the
earth. You are eternal. The rulers of all the worlds, the stars, the ten directions, the sky, the moon, the sun and the
worlds are all established in you. O mighty-armed one! The mortality of all beings, the immortality of the dwellers
of heaven and all the deeds of the worlds are established in you. O Madhusudana! Because of my love for you, I
will tell you the account of my sorrows. You are the lord of all beings, be they divine or human. O Krishna! O
lord! I am a wife to the Parthas. I am your friend. I am Dhrishtadyumna’s sister. How could someone like me be
dragged to the sabha? I was then in the dharma of women.33 I was trembling. I was stained with blood. I was clad
in a single garment. I was miserable. But I was dragged into that assembly of Kurus. On seeing me in that sabha, in
the middle of all those kings, stained in my menses, those evil-minded sons of Dhritarashtra laughed at me. O
Madhusudana! They wished to enjoy me like a slave girl, when the sons of Pandu, the Panchalas and the Vrishnis
were still alive. O Krishna! According to dharma, am I not the daughter-in-law of both Bhishma and Dhritarashtra?
But I was forcibly made a slave. The Pandavas may be extremely strong and supreme in war. But I censure them.
They looked on when their famous wife, according to dharma, was molested. O Janardana! Shame on Bhimasena’s
strength! Shame on Partha’s Gandiva! Both of them allowed me to be oppressed by insigniﬁcant ones. The eternal
path of dharma is always followed by the righteous ones. The husband, however weak he may be, must protect his
wife. When the wife is protected, the offspring are protected. When the offspring are protected, one’s own soul is
protected. One’s own self is born in one’s wife and that is the reason she is called jaya.34 A wife should also protect her husband because he is born in her womb. The Pandavas never abandon someone who has sought refuge,
but they abandoned me when I sought refuge. Five immensely energetic sons have been born to me from my husbands. O Janardana! For their sake too, I should have been rescued. Prativindhya was born from Yudhishthira, Sutasoma was born from Vrikodara, Shrutakirti was born from Arjuna, Shatanika was born from Nakula and Shrutakarma was born from the youngest.35 All of them derive valour from the truth. O Krishna! They are maharathas
like Pradyumna and you. They are supreme archers. Enemies cannot vanquish them in battle. Why did they tolerate the weak sons of Dhritarashtra? Having been deprived of their kingdom in violation of dharma, all of them became slaves, when, in my menses, I was dragged into the sabha in a single garment. O Madhusudana! Even when
strung, the Gandiva cannot be handled by anyone other than Bhima, Arjuna and you. O Krishna! Shame on Bhimasena’s strength and shame on Partha’s Gandiva, if Duryodhana lives for more than an instant! O Madhusudana!
A long time ago, when they were but children engaged in studying and observance of rites, he threw the non-violent ones and their mother out of the kingdom. It was that evil one who mixed freshly collected, hair raising and
virulent poison in Bhimasena’s food. O Janardana! O supreme being! O mighty-armed one! He digested it with his
food and without any effects, because his time had not ended. O Krishna! Vrikodara was safely asleep in Pramanakoti. It was he36 who tied him up, ﬂung him into the Ganga and went away. Though fettered, the mightyarmed and immensely strong Kounteya Bhimasena tore off his bonds and arose from the water. O Krishna! It was
he37 who caused virulent serpents to bite him38 all over his body when he slept, but that destroyer of enemies did

not die. On waking up, Kounteya killed all the serpents and he killed his39 favourite charioteer with the back of
his hand. Once again, when they were asleep and unconscious with the arya lady40 in Varanavata, he41 tried to
burn them. Who could have acted in this way? It was then that the frightened and weeping arya lady, greatly oppressed and surrounded by ﬂames, told the Pandavas, ‘I am slain. How will we ﬁnd peace from the ﬂames today?
Without a protector, I will perish with my young sons.’ The mighty-armed Bhima Vrikodara’s valour is like the
force of the wind. He comforted the arya lady and his brothers. ‘I will rise up like the bird Garuda, Vinata’s son
and supreme among birds. I will ﬂy up and we need not be afraid.’ He took up the arya lady on his left lap and the
king42 on his right. He took the twins on his shoulder and Bibhatsu on his back. Grasping all of them, the valorous
one suddenly arose with force and the powerful one freed the arya lady and his brothers from the ﬁre. Setting out
in the night with their mother, all those famous ones arrived in the great forest, near the forest that was Hidimba’s.
They were tired and extremely unhappy and fell asleep with their mother. When they were asleep, a rakshasa
woman named Hidimba arrived.43 That fortunate one ﬁrmly placed Bhima’s feet on her lap and happily caressed
them with her soft hands. The broad-souled and strong Bhima, whose valour is his truth, then woke up and asked,
‘O unblemished one! What do you desire here?’ Having heard this conversation, the worst of rakshasas arrived. He
was terrible to look at, his form was terrible and he let loose a loud roar. ‘O Hidimba! Whom are you talking to?
Bring him to me and I will eat him up. Do not delay.’ But she was moved by compassion in her heart. The intelligent and unblemished lady felt pity. Then the man-eating terrible rakshasa uttered fearful roars and with great
force, rushed at Bhimasena. Angered, the immensely strong rakshasa grasped Bhimasena’s hand with his own
hand and with great force. Making his hand as ﬁrm as Indra’s thunder, like the vajra, he suddenly struck Bhimasena with his hand. His hand having been seized by the rakshasa’s hand, the mighty-armed Vrikodara could not bear
it and became angry. Then a terrible ﬁght waged between Bhima and Hidimba. They were both skilled in the use
of all weapons and this was as terrible as that between Vritra and Vasava.44 Having killed Hidimba, Bhima left
with his brothers, placing Hidimba45 at the forefront. Ghatotkacha was born from her. Then, accompanied by their
mother and surrounded by many brahmanas, those famous ones went towards Ekachakra. On this journey, Vyasa,
always devoted to their welfare, was their adviser. The Pandavas, rigid in their vows, arrived in Ekachakra. There
they killed an immensely strong maneater named Baka, who was as strong as Hidimba. Having killed him, Bhima,
supreme among warriors, went with his brothers to Drupada’s capital. O Krishna! While he lived there, Savyasachi
won me, just as you yourself won Bhishmaka’s daughter Rukmini. O Madhusudana! Partha won me at that
svayamvara, achieving a great deed that others found extremely difﬁcult. O Krishna! We have thus suffered many
difﬁculties and are miserable and extremely unhappy. We have Dhoumya at the forefront, but we are without the
arya lady.46 They have the valour of lions and are greater than others in courage. Why do they ignore me when I
am oppressed by inferiors? I have suffered such miseries at the hands of those who are weak, evil and the performers of evil deeds. I have burnt for a long time. I was born in a great lineage through divine destiny. I am the
beloved wife of the Pandavas. I am the daughter-in-law of the great-souled Pandu. O Krishna! O Madhusudana! I
am supreme among chaste ones. But I was seized by my hair, while the ﬁve who are like Indras looked on.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having uttered these words, the soft-spoken Krishna47 wept and covered her face in her
hands, soft as the bud of a lotus. On her upraised, full and well-formed breasts, marked with all the auspicious
marks, Panchali showered teardrops of grief. She wiped her eyes and sighed repeatedly. In a voice choked with
tears, she uttered these angry words, “O Madhusudana! I have no husbands. I have no sons. I do not have a brother
or a father. Nor do I have any relatives. When I was oppressed by inferior ones, you ignored me, unmoved by sorrow. My grief that Karna laughed at me then will never be paciﬁed.” Then Krishna spoke to her in that assembly of
warriors, “O beautiful one! The wives of those who have angered you will weep like this. They will see the dead
bodies lying on the ground, bereft of life. Their bodies will be covered with Bibhatsu’s arrows and will be
drenched with blood. Do not sorrow. I will do whatever the Pandavas can do. I will make you a promise. You will
be the queen of kings. The heavens may fall, the Himalayas may be rent asunder, the earth may splinter and the
ocean may dry up. O Krishna! But my words will not be falsiﬁed.” Dhrishtadyumna said, “I will kill Drona.
Shikhandi will kill the grandfather. Bhimasena will kill Duryodhana. Dhananjaya will kill Karna. O sweet-smiling

one! With the aid of Rama48 and Krishna, we are invincible in battle even with the slayer of Vritra,49 not to speak
of Dhritarashtra’s sons.” When these words were uttered, all the warriors looked towards Vasudeva and in their
midst, the mighty-armed Keshava spoke these words.’
311(14)

‘Vasudeva said, “O lord of the earth!50 O king! Had I been present in Dvaraka earlier, this misfortune would not
have befallen you. O invincible one! Even if I had not been invited to the gambling match by the Kouravas, by
Ambika’s son51 and by King Duryodhana, I would have gone and prevented the gambling by pointing out the
many evils that result. I would have brought in Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and Bahlika. For your sake, I would have
told the king who is Vichitravirya’s son,52 ‘O Kourava! O Indra among kings! O lord! Make your sons desist from
this gambling.’ I would have pointed out the evils through which you have been removed from your seat and
through which, in earlier times, Virasena’s son was deprived of his kingdom.53 O lord of the earth! Whatever has
not been eaten up54 is destroyed through gambling. I would have described how the addiction to gambling lasts
continuously. Women, gambling, hunting and drinking are four things that arise out of desire. O king! It has been
said that these lead to loss of prosperity. Those who are learned in the sacred texts hold that while this is true of all
of them, it can be especially seen in the case of gambling. On a single day, one may lose all one’s property. Misery
is certain. Wealth that has not been enjoyed is lost. Only harsh words are left. O Kouravya!55 I would have recounted these and other bitter topics. O mighty-armed one! I would have spoken to Ambika’s son about these effects of gambling. O descendant of the Kuru lineage!56 If my words had been accepted by him, the dharma of the
Kurus would have remained undisturbed. O Indra among kings! O best of the Bharata lineage! If he had not accepted my soft words, which are like medicine,57 I would have restrained him through force. In similar fashion, I
would have destroyed all the courtiers and gamblers, ill-wishers masquerading as well-wishers. O Kouravya! It
was my absence from Anarta58 that led to all your misfortunes from gambling. O Pandu’s son! O best of the Kurus! When I reached Dvaraka, I learnt everything about your misfortunes from Yuyudhana.59 O Indra among
kings! As soon as I heard this, my mind was ﬁlled with great anxiety. O lord of the earth! I have swiftly come here,
in a desire to see you. O bull among the Bharata lineage! All of us are beset with great difﬁculties, since we ﬁnd
you and your brothers immersed in this misfortune.”’
312(15)

‘Yudhishthira asked, “O Krishna! O descendant of Vrishni!60 Why were you absent? Where did you go and what
did you do on your travels?”
‘Krishna replied, “O bull among the Bharata lineage! O best of men! I went to Shalva’s city Soubha to destroy
it. Listen to the reasons. O best of the Bharata lineage! The valiant King Shishupala, Damaghosha’s son, immensely energetic, mighty-armed and greatly famous, was killed by me at your rajasuya sacriﬁce over the issue of who
should be given the homage. Because of his anger, that evil-souled one did not wish to see me receive it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing that he had been killed, Shalva was ﬁlled with terrible rage. He went to the
empty Dvaraka, because I was with you then. O king! He went there ascended on Soubha,61 which could go wherever it wished. In cruel fashion, he fought with the young bulls among the Vrishnis. He slew many brave Vrishni
youth and the evil-minded one destroyed all the parks in the city. The mighty-armed one then shouted, ‘Where is
that wretch of the Vrishni lineage? Where has the evil-souled Vasudeva, son of Vasudeva, gone?62 He is desirous
of doing battle and I will destroy his pride in battle. O Anartas!63 Tell me truthfully where he is, and I will go
there. I will return after killing the slayer of Kamsa and Keshi. I truthfully swear on my weapons that I will not return without killing him. Where is he? Where is he? The lord of Soubha wished to ﬁght me in battle and rushed
around, from one place to another. That mean one has performed an evil deed. He is treacherous. I am angry at the
killing of Shishupala. I will send him to Yama’s abode today. Through his evil nature, he has killed my brother

Shishupala, lord of the earth.64 I will kill him on the ground. Though a king, my brother was only a child. He
wasn’t killed in proper battle. The brave one was killed when he wasn’t ready. I will kill Janardana.’ O great king!
Thus did he lament.
‘“O descendant of the Kuru lineage!65 Thus abusing me, he took to the sky on Soubha, which is capable of going wherever it wishes. O Kouravya! On returning there, I learnt everything that the evilminded and evil-souled
king of Marttikavata had said about me. O Kouravya! O king! With eyes red with rage, I made up my mind. I resolved in my mind to kill him. O Kourava! I heard about his oppression of Anarta, his abuse of me, his great insolence and his evil deeds. O lord of the earth! I therefore left to destroy Soubha. When I was looking for him, I
found him whirling in the ocean. O king! I blew on Panchajanya,66 which had been obtained from the water, and
challenging Shalva to battle, got ready. At that time, a terrible battle took place between me and the danavas there.
They were all vanquished and laid low on the ground by me. O mighty-armed one! It was this task that kept me
from coming to you in Hastinapura then, though I had heard about the terrible gambling match.”’
313(16)

‘Yudhishthira asked, “O Vasudeva! O mighty-armed one! O immensely intelligent one! Tell me in detail about the
destruction of Soubha, because I am not satisﬁed with what you have said.”
‘Vasudeva replied, “O best of the Bharata lineage! When he heard that the mighty-armed King Shroutashrava67
had been killed by me, Shalva marched on the city of Dvaravati. O Pandu’s son!68 The evil-minded Shalva laid
siege to the city from every side, arranged his battle formations and stationed himself in the air.69 That lord of the
earth fought with the city from there. He attacked from everywhere and the battle began. O best of the Bharata lineage! O king! The city was ready everywhere, with ﬂags, gates, troops, fences, machines, miners, barricaded
streets, turrets, towers, hair-graspers,70 catapults that hurled ﬂaming missiles, water vessels,71 kettledrums, musical instruments, army drums, kindling, straw, grass, shataghnis,72 ploughs, bhushundis, rocks, clubs, weapons,
battleaxes, iron shields and machines that hurled ﬁre and iron. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Everything was
in accordance with what is laid down in the sacred texts. There was a stock of many types of objects and it was
guarded by Gada, Samba, Uddhava and the like. O tiger among the Kuru lineage! They were men capable of repulsing attacks. There were warriors from famous lineages, their valour having been witnessed in battle. The middle and upper parts of the fortiﬁcations were protected well and the upper parts had cavalry and infantry. Ugrasena,
Uddhava and the others announced in the city that no one should drink, so that there should not be carelessness in
protection. Knowing that they would be killed by King Shalva if they were intoxicated, all the Vrishnis and the
Andhakas remained sober. The guards entrusted with the treasuries of Anarta swiftly drove out all the actors,
dancers and singers. O Kouravya! The bridges were destroyed. All the boats were forbidden to ply. The moats
were fortiﬁed with spikes. O best of the Kuru lineage! Because of the impending war, the reservoirs were destroyed. For a krosha73 on every side, the ground was made uneven.74 O unblemished one! Our fortress is naturally difﬁcult to access. It is guarded well by nature. Nature has equipped it with special types of weapons. O best of
the Bharata lineage! It was protected well. That city was stocked with every kind of weapon, like Indra’s abode. O
king! At the time when Soubha advanced, the city of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas was such that nothing could
come out or go in without a seal.75 O Kourava! O Indra among kings! Everywhere, along the roads and the open
spaces where the roads meet, there were forces and many elephants and horses. O mighty-armed one! The soldiers
had been paid wages and rations. They had been given weapons and armour. Nothing was pending. No one was
given too little pay. No one was paid in excess. No one was shown preference. There was no one whose valour had
not been tested. O king! Thus Dvaraka was prepared well. The soldiers had been paid a lot. O lotus-eyed one! It
was defended by King Ahuka.”’76
314(17)

‘Vasudeva said, “O Indra among kings! But Shalva, the lord of Soubha, came to the city with many men, elephants
and forces. The army controlled by King Shalva had four kinds of forces.77 The army settled itself on plain
ground, where there were plenty of sources of water. But the army avoided cremation grounds, temples of the
gods, anthills and chaityas.78 O king! The army formations were divided such that all the roads were covered and
Shalva’s troops encompassed all the nine slopes.79 There was every kind of weapon and the soldiers were skilled
in use of every kind of weapon. There were masses of chariots, elephants and horses, with infantry and ﬂags. The
army was well paid and well fed and bore all the marks of courage. There were colourful pennants and colourful
chariots and bows. O Kouravya! O bull among men! He settled in Dvaraka, and like the king of the birds, attacked
with great strength.
‘“On seeing King Shalva’s strength, all the young descendants80 of the Vrishni lineage emerged, to do battle
with him. O Kourava! They were unable to bear the invasion of King Shalva—Charudeshna, Samba and maharatha Pradyumna. They emerged in their chariots, all adorned in colourful attire and ﬂags. They fought with
King Shalva’s warriors, who were like bulls. Samba took up his bow and in a happy frame of mind, fought with
Kshemavriddhi, Shalva’s adviser and the general of his army. O best of the Bharata lineage! Just as the one with
one thousand eyes81 unleashes rain, Jambavati’s son82 unleashed a great volley of arrows. O great king! Stationary like the Himalayas, the general Kshemavriddhi withstood that terrible shower of arrows. O Indra among kings!
Then, using his powers of maya, Kshemavriddhi unleashed a greater net of arrows on Samba. But Samba tore apart
that net of maya with his own maya and showered one thousand arrows on his83 chariot. Samba pierced the general Kshemavriddhi and oppressed by Samba’s arrows, he ﬂed on his swift horses. When Shalva’s cruel general ﬂed,
a powerful daitya named Vegavan attacked my son. O Indra among kings! O king! But Samba is the extender of
the Vrishni lineage. Though Vegavan attacked him with force, the brave one withstood it. O Kounteya! The brave
Samba, whose valour is based on truth, swiftly hurled a fast club at Vegavan. O king! Struck by it, Vegavan fell
down on the ground, like a giant tree, rotten at the roots, collapses when struck by the wind. When that brave and
giant asura was killed by the club, my son entered the enemy’s large army and began to ﬁght. O great king! The
danava Vivindhya was a maharatha and a great archer. O king! He then began to ﬁght with Charudeshna and a terrible duel ensued between Charudeshna and Vivindhya, like that between Vritra and Vasava84 in ancient times. O
great king! Enraged with each other, they shot arrows at each other and roared like mighty lions. Rukmini’s son85
then ﬁxed a great weapon to his bow and chanted mantras over it. Its radiance was like that of the sun and it was
capable of destroying the enemy. O king! In great rage, my son, the maharatha, challenged Vivindhya and let loose
his weapon. The asura fell down dead.
‘“On seeing Vivindhya dead and his army agitated, Shalva returned again on Soubha, which could go anywhere
at will. Then the entire army of the residents of Dvaraka was alarmed, when they saw the mighty-armed Shalva arrive on earth in Soubha.86 O Kounteya! O great king! Then Pradyumna came out and reassembled the army. He
told the inhabitants of Anarta, ‘All of you stay where you are and all of you watch me ﬁght. In this battle, I will repel with force Soubha and its king. O Yadavas! Today I will destroy the soldiers of the lord of Soubha, using my
hands to let loose iron weapons, that are like serpents, from my bow. Be reassured and do not be scared. Soubha’s
king will be destroyed. Attacked by me, the evil-souled one will be destroyed, together with Soubha.’ O descendant of the Pandu lineage!87 When Pradyumna thus spoke with a happy heart, the brave warriors stood where they
were and happily, began to ﬁght again.”’
315(18)

‘Vasudeva said, “O bull among the Bharata lineage! After having uttered these words to the Yadavas, Rukmini’s
son88 ascended his golden chariot. It was yoked to tawny horses and the ornamented ﬂag had a makara,89 with its
jaws gaping open. The mighty-armed one, best among archers, dashed at the enemy on swift horses that seemed to
ﬂy through the sky. The great bow roared when he strung it and the warrior held quivers and a sword, with his
arms and ﬁngers clad in armour. With lightning speed, he switched the bow from one hand to another and the
daityas and all the residents of Soubha were confused. As he shot an arrow and ﬁxed another one to his bow re-

peatedly, it was impossible to see a gap and the enemies were continuously killed in battle. The colour of his face
did not change. There was no trembling of his body. All the worlds heard the sound of his wonderful valour, as he
roared like a lion. The aquatic animal90 that oppressed all ﬁshes was on his golden ﬂag-post, its jaws wide open,
adorning the chariot. It created terror among the chief soldiers in Shalva’s army. O king! Pradyumna, the destroyer
of enemies, then rushed with great speed and attacked Shalva, who also wished to ﬁght with him.
‘“O extender of the Kuru lineage! Attacked by the brave Pradyumna in that great battle, Shalva was enraged and
could not bear it. He was mad with anger and began to do battle with Pradyumna. Shalva, the destroyer of enemy
cities, descended from the chariot that could go anywhere at will. A terrible battle then raged between Shalva and
the warrior from the Vrishnis. All the worlds watched it, like that between Bali and Vasava.91 That brave one92
knew the use of maya and ascended a chariot that was ornamented with gold. It had a ﬂag, a ﬂagstaff and an undercarriage and was stocked with quivers. O Kouravya! O lord! Ascending that supreme chariot, that illustrious and
immensely strong one, unleashed arrows at Pradyumna. At that, Pradyumna also used the speed of his arms to bewilder Shalva with a shower of arrows. Thus attacked in battle, the king of Soubha could not bear it. He discharged
arrows at my son that were like blazing ﬁre. O Indra among kings! Having been pierced by Shalva’s arrows, Rukmini’s son swiftly unleashed an arrow that could seek out the heart in battle. This arrow shot by my son pierced his
armour. The feathered shaft pierced his heart and he fell down unconscious. When the brave King Shalva fell
down unconscious, all the lords among the danavas ran away, cleaving the earth.93 O lord of the earth! O king!
Lamentations arose in Shalva’s army, on seeing the lord of Soubha felled and deprived of his senses.
‘“O Kouravya! But he regained his consciousness and arose. Then that immensely strong one suddenly unleashed an arrow at Pradyumna. Though the mighty-armed Pradyumna was pierced, he remained steady in battle.
But he was struck around his collarbone and the brave one sank down on his chariot. O great king! Thus piercing
Rukmini’s son,94 Shalva uttered a loud roar like a lion and it resounded through the earth. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Thereupon, when my son was senseless, he swiftly again shot many arrows at him, which were
difﬁcult to repulse. O best of the Kouravas! Struck by these many arrows and deprived of his senses, Pradyumna
was helpless in the ﬁeld of battle.”’
316(19)

‘Vasudeva said, “When Pradyumna, supreme among strong ones, had been struck down by Shalva’s arrows, the
Vrishnis who had come to ﬁght lost their calm and their resolution. Lamentations then arose in the army of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas. O king! The enemies were delighted at Pradyumna’s fall. Having seen him lose his senses, his trained charioteer Daruki95 used his swift horses to take him away from the ﬁeld of battle. The chariot
hadn’t gone very far, when that supreme of warriors regained his senses.
‘“He grasped his bow and spoke thus, ‘O Souti!96 What have you done? Why are you turning back? This is not
the dharma of Vrishni warriors in battle. O Souti! Have you lost your senses at the sight of Shalva in that great battle? Are you unhappy on witnessing that battle? Tell me exactly.’ Souti replied, ‘O Janardana’s son! I am not bewildered. Nor am I overcome with fear. O son of Keshava!97 But I think that you will ﬁnd Shalva too difﬁcult. O
brave one! I am therefore retreating slowly. This evil one is powerful. When a warrior is knocked unconscious on
the chariot, it is the charioteer’s duty to protect him. Your life must always be protected by me, just as you always
protect me. Thinking that a warrior must always be protected, I am taking you away. O mighty-armed one! You are
alone. The danavas are many. O Rukmini’s son! Thinking that this is not an equal battle, I am taking you away.’ O
Kouravya! The charioteer thus spoke to the one with the makara on his ﬂag.
‘“And he98 said, ‘O Suta! Turn the chariot back again. O Daruka’s son! Never act in this way again. O Souti!
Never retreat from a ﬁeld of battle while I am still alive. One who has born in the Vrishni lineage never goes back
on a word he has given and never kills an enemy who has fallen or has surrendered. Nor does he kill a woman, an
aged one or a child, or one who has lost his chariot or his weapons, or is bewildered. You have been born in the
suta lineage and you are well trained in the tasks of sutas. O Daruka’s son! You know the dharma of Vrishnis in
battle. O Souti! Since you know the conduct of Vrishnis in battle, you will never again, no matter what the situa-

tion is, leave the ﬁeld of battle. What will Gada’s elder brother, the invincible Madhava, tell me when he sees that I
have been frightened and have ﬂed the ﬁeld of battle, struck by weapons on my back? The mighty-armed Baladeva, who is dressed in blue and is Keshava’s elder brother, is addicted to wine. What will he say when he returns? O
Suta! Sini’s grandson99 is a great archer and a lion among men? What will he say when he hears I have ﬂed from
battle? What will the victorious Samba say, or the invincible Charudeshna, or Gada, or Sarana? O charioteer! What
will the mighty-armed Akrura tell me? The wives of the Vrishni warriors have always considered me brave, honourable, virtuous and manly. When they get together, what will they say? They will say, “Pradyumna is frightened
and retreats from the great battle. Shame on him!” They will never say, “Well done!” O Souti! To a person like me,
shame with ridicule is worse than death. Therefore, never withdraw again. Before he left for the sacriﬁce of the inﬁnitely energetic Partha, lion among the Bharata lineage, Hari, the killer of Madhu, left this burden on me. O son
of a suta! When the brave Kritavarma was about to come out to face Shalva, I restrained him, saying that he should
refrain and that I would stop him. Because of his respect for me, Hridika’s son100 desisted. What will I tell the
maharatha after abandoning the ﬁeld of battle? What will I tell Pundarikaksha,101 the mighty-armed and invincible man who wields the conch shell, the chakra and the club, when he returns? What will I tell Satyaki, Baladeva
and the other Andhakas and Vrishnis, who have always taken pride in me? O Souti! Having abandoned the ﬁeld of
battle, with arrows piercing my back and having been carried away unconscious by you, I do not wish to live any
longer. O Daruka’s son!102 Turn the chariot back at once. Never act in this way again, not even if disaster looms.
O Souti! After having ﬂed the ﬁeld of battle in fright and with arrows piercing my back, I do not think life is worth
living. O son of a suta! Have you ever seen me suffer from fear, or ﬂee from the ﬁeld of battle like a coward? O
Daruka’s son! As long as I desired to ﬁght, you should not have left the ﬁeld of battle. Therefore, return to the ﬁeld
of battle.’”’
317(20)

‘Vasudeva said, “Having been thus addressed, on that ﬁeld of battle, the son of a suta then spoke to Pradyumna in
soft and placating words, ‘O Rukmini’s son! I am not afraid to drive horses in battle. I know the conduct of the Vrishnis in battle and it is not different from what you have said. But it has been said that the duty of charioteers is to
always protect the life of the warrior. And you were greatly afﬂicted. O hero! You were badly pierced through the
arrows unleashed by Shalva. You had also lost consciousness and that is the reason I retreated. O foremost among
the Satvatas! O son of Keshava!103 Now that you have regained your senses, in accordance with your wishes, you
will see my skill in handling horses. I have been born from Daruka and I have been trained by him. Without any
fear, I will now penetrate Shalva’s great army.’ O brave one! Having uttered these words, he tugged at the reins of
the horses and drove them speedily. He drove them in circular motions, withdrawing them and releasing them
again. In beautiful motions, the horses turned to the left and to the right, and everywhere. O king! Controlled by
the reins, those supreme horses seemed to ﬂy through the sky. O king! Knowing Daruki’s light touch of hand, it
seemed that the horses were on ﬁre, but did not touch the ground with their feet. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
He wheeled around Shalva’s army so easily from the right that those who witnessed it thought that it was
extraordinary.
‘“Unable to tolerate this penetration by Pradyumna from the right, the king of Soubha suddenly unleashed three
arrows at the charioteer. But Daruka’s son gave no thought to these swift arrows. O mighty-armed one! He continued to drive the horses. Then the king of Soubha once again shot many arrows at my brave son, Rukmini’s son.104
But before they could strike, Rukmini’s son, the destroyer of enemy warriors, exhibited his lightness of touch and
smilingly, sliced them off with his own sharp arrows. On seeing all his arrows sliced down by Pradyumna, the king
of Soubha resorted to the terrible maya of the asuras and unleashed his arrows. Knowing that daitya weapons had
been released, he105 sliced them off by unleashing enormously powerful brahma arrows. Those weapons always
drink the blood of others and driving the other weapons away,106 pierced him107 in the head, chest and face, so
that he was knocked down unconscious. Thus, oppressed by arrows, the mean Shalva fell down. So as to destroy
the enemy, Rukmini’s son ﬁxed another supreme arrow. All the bulls of the Dasharhas used to worship this arrow,

which was as radiant as the sun and the ﬁre. On seeing it ﬁxed to the bow, sounds of lamentation were heard in the
sky. All the masses of gods, together with Indra and the lord of riches,108 sent Narada and the immensely strong
god of the wind. These two went to Rukmini’s son and delivered the message of the gods, ‘O brave one! You
should never kill King Shalva. Restrain the arrow, because he is not to be killed by you in battle. There is no man
who cannot be killed by this arrow. O mighty-armed one! But it has been destined by the creator that he will be
killed in battle by Devaki’s son109 Krishna and that should not become false.’ At that, Pradyumna was extremely
delighted and withdrew that supreme arrow from the excellent bow and returned it to the quiver. O Indra among
kings! Then Shalva arose, in an extremely miserable frame of mind. Oppressed by Pradyumna’s arrows, he swiftly
retreated with his troops. O Indra among kings! Vanquished by the Vrishnis, the cruel one left Dvaraka. He ascended Soubha and went up into the sky.”’
318(21)

‘Vasudeva said, “O king! When your great rajasuya sacriﬁce was over, I returned to the city of Anarta after he had
left it. O great king! I saw that Dvaraka had been robbed of its splendour. Studying and recitations had ceased.
Beautiful women were bereft of ornaments. The forms of the gardens of Dvaraka were such that they could no
longer be recognized. Alarmed at this, I asked Hridika’s son,110 ‘O tiger among men! Why do the men and
women of the Vrishni lineage look distressed? What has happened? I wish to hear all about it.’ O supreme among
kings! On being thus addressed, Hridika’s son told me everything in detail, about the siege by Shalva and its relief.
O best of the Kuru lineage! When I heard about everything in its entirety, I immediately made up my mind to kill
King Shalva. O best of the Bharata lineage! I reassured the citizens of the city and also King Ahuka111 and
Anakadundubhi.112 Smilingly, I spoke to all the chiefs among the Vrishnis, ‘O bulls of the Yadava lineage! Always be careful in tending to the city. Know that I will leave to go and destroy King Shalva. I will not return to the
city of Dvaravati without killing him. You will again see me after I have destroyed Shalva and the city of Soubha.
Strike the three beats on the kettledrum that enemies ﬁnd so terrible.’ O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having
thus been appropriately reassured by me, all the warriors happily told me to go and destroy the enemies. The delighted warriors blessed me and said farewell. The best of the brahmanas uttered benedictions over me and I
bowed my head before Ahuka. Then I yoked Sainya and Sugriva to my chariot and drove away, the directions
thundering with the roar. O king! I blew on Panchajanya, my supreme conch shell, as I left. O tiger among men! I
departed with a large army that I had gathered. It had the four kinds of forces and shone with the radiance of
victory.
‘“I passed over many countries, mountains with many trees in them, lakes and rivers, until I reached Marttikavata. O tiger among men! I learnt there that Shalva had left the city on Soubha. But I followed after him. O destroyer
of enemies! Having reached the bay of the ocean where large waves billow, I found Shalva on Soubha, in the middle of the ocean.113 O Yudhisthira! Having seen me from a distance, the evil-souled one challenged me again and
again to a battle. Then many arrows were shot from Sharnga,114 capable of piercing the heart. But the arrows
failed to reach his city and rage engulfed me. O king! That evil-natured and invincible wretch among the daityas
began to rain thousands of showers of arrows on me. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He showered arrows on
my soldiers, my charioteer and my horses. But without thinking about this, we continued to ﬁght. Then the warriors who were Shalva’s followers in battle shot hundreds and thousands of curved arrows115 at me. The asuras
covered my horses, my chariot and Daruka himself with arrows that were capable of piercing the heart. O brave
one! At that time, I could not see the horses, the chariot, or my charioteer Daruka. My soldiers and I were invisible
because of those arrows. O Kouravya! Then I also released many tens of thousands of arrows from my bow, invoking them with divine and prescribed mantras. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But Soubha was one krosha up
in the sky and my soldiers and I could not see the object. All of them therefore only looked on, like spectators at
the enclosure of a performance. But they happily cheered me on, clapping their hands and roaring like lions. The
beautiful arrows released from my bow in that great battle entered the bodies of the danavas like locusts addicted
to blood. At that, sounds of wailing increased inside Soubha. Those who had been killed by those sharp arrows fell

into the great ocean. Having lost their arms and their necks, they assumed the form of headless trunks. With terrible roars, the danavas continued to fall down.
‘“My conch shell Panchajanya originated in the ocean. It had the colour of cow’s milk, jasmine, the moon, the
stalk of a lotus or silver. I ﬁlled it with my breath. On seeing them fall, Shalva, the lord of Soubha, began to ﬁght
with me in a great battle of maya. He hurled iron clubs, barbed missiles, spears, lances, battleaxes and bhushundis
incessantly at me. But I grasped them and destroyed all of them through my own maya. On seeing that his maya
had been destroyed, he fought with me with mountain-peaks. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At one moment, it seemed as if it was night. The next instant, it seemed as if it was morning. In one instant, it was a nice day.
The next instant, it was a foul day. It was cold, followed by hot. Creating such maya, the enemy fought with me.
But knowing this, I destroyed all this maya with my own. At the right time in battle, I scattered all of them with
my arrows. O great king! O Kounteya! Then the sky seemed to blaze forth with a hundred suns. There were a hundred moons, and suddenly, there were ten thousand stars. Neither day nor night could be detected, nor the directions. I was then bewildered and attached the prajna116 weapon. That weapon blew his arrows away, as if they
were cotton. Then a tumultuous battle raged, making the hair stand up. O Indra among kings! Having obtained
light, I again began to ﬁght with the enemy.”’
319(22)

‘Vasudeva said, “O tiger among men! King Shalva, the great enemy, was engaged in battle with me and again
arose into the sky. O great king! In his desire for victory, the evil-minded Shalva angrily hurled shataghnis, giant
clubs, ﬂaming lances, bludgeons and swords at me. With my fast arrows, I warded them off as they descended towards me from the sky. I sliced them into two and three parts. At that, a great uproar arose in the sky. He covered
Daruka, my horses and my chariot with a hundred thousand nataparva arrows. Daruka was afﬂicted and spoke to
me, ‘O brave one! Though I am suffering from Shalva’s arrows, I will stay here, because I must.’ On hearing these
pitiful words of my charioteer, I looked at him and saw that the charioteer had been wounded by the arrows. O best
of the Pandavas! There was not a spot on his chest, his head, his torso and his two arms that had not been wounded
by an arrow. Blood freely ﬂowed from the wounds the shower of arrows had caused. He looked like a mountain of
red chalk after a shower of rain. O mighty-armed one! I saw that though the charioteer still held the reins in battle,
he was fatigued. He was suffering from Shalva’s arrows and I cheered him.
‘“O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At this time, a man swiftly came to me from Dvaraka and spoke to me,
in my chariot, like a well-wisher. O brave one! He was Ahuka’s servant and he carried a message from him. O
Yudhisthira! Listen to what he told me in a sad and breathless voice. ‘O valiant one! Ahuka, the lord of Dvaraka,
has sent a message for you. O Keshava! Know what your father’s friend has told you. O descendant of the Vrishni
lineage!117 O invincible one! While you were restrained, Shalva has attacked Dvaraka today. He has forcibly
killed Shura’s son.118 O Janardana! Therefore refrain from ﬁghting here. Your greatest task now is to defend
Dvaraka.’ Having heard his words, my mind was extremely distressed. I could not make up my mind about the
right course of duty. O brave one! Having heard those unpleasant words, I mentally censured Satyaki, Baladeva
and maharatha Pradyumna. O descendant of the Kuru lineage!119 Having entrusted the task of protecting Dvaraka
and my father to them, I had come for the destruction of Soubha. How could the mighty-armed Baladeva, the destroyer of enemies, still be alive? What about Satyaki, Rukmini’s son, the valiant Charudeshna and the others led
by Samba? The thought made me miserable. Had those tigers among men been alive, not even the wielder of the
vajra120 himself would have been able to kill Shura’s son.121 But it was clear that Shura’s son had been killed and
therefore it was clear that so had the others. I presumed that all the others, with Baladeva as the chief, had also
been killed. I repeatedly kept thinking about all their destruction. O great king! Though I was greatly overwhelmed, I continued to ﬁght with Shalva. O great king! I then saw that warrior, Shura’s son, himself fall from
Soubha and at this, confusion overtook me. O lord of men! I saw the exact form of my father falling down, like
Yayati fell down from heaven to earth after all the merits of his good deeds had been exhausted.122 I saw him faded, deprived of his headdress. His garments and hair were dishevelled. He could be seen falling, like a planet that
has lost all its merits. O Kounteya! Then Sharnga, supreme among bows, fell down from my hand and in complete

bewilderment, I sat down on my chariot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing me bereft of my senses, a
loud wail of lamentation arose from all my army, because they could see me on my chariot, as if I had lost my life.
I saw the form of my father drop like a vulture123 from the sky, with his arms extended and his feet extended. O
mighty-armed one! As he fell, powerful warriors struck at him with lances and spears in their hands. My heart began to tremble.
‘“O brave one! But I regained my senses in an instant. When I did, I could no longer see Soubha, or the enemies, or Shalva in that great battle. Nor could I see my old father. I then concluded in my mind that this was certainly nothing but maya. On regaining my senses, I again began to shoot hundreds of arrows.”’
320(23)

‘Vasudeva said, “O best of the Bharata lineage! Then I grasped my beautiful bow and with my arrows, began to
slice off the heads of the enemies of the gods who were on Soubha. From Sharnga, I unleashed excellently prepared arrows at King Shalva. They had the forms of virulent serpents, were inﬁnitely energetic and were capable of
rising to great heights. O extender of the Kuru lineage! At that time, I could no longer see Soubha. It had disappeared because of the maya and I was surprised. O great king! The masses of danavas had deformed faces and dishevelled hair. They let out a great roar as I stood there. In that great battle, with the intention of destroying them, I
afﬁxed a weapon that could only kill by sound124 and the uproar ceased. All those danavas who had raised the uproar were killed by my arrows, which blazed like the sun and which could strike only by sound. O great king!
When the noise died down in one place, it arose again in another. I then shot my arrows at the other place where
the noise arose. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this way, the asuras raised an uproar from all the ten directions, including the side and above, but I killed them.
‘“O valiant one! Soubha was capable of going anywhere at will. Having gone to Pragjyotisha,125 it suddenly
reappeared, confounding my eyes. Then a danava in the form of a monkey, a destroyer of the world, suddenly covered me with a great shower of rocks. O Indra among kings! He repeatedly tried to kill me with this shower of
mountains. Covered with those mountains, I looked like an anthill. O king! Covered with all those mountains, I became completely invisible, with my horses, my charioteer and my ﬂag. At that, the heroes from the Vrishni lineage
who were part of my troops became frightened and suddenly ﬂed in all the directions. O lord of the earth! On seeing me in that state, when I became invisible, loud wails of lamentation were heard everywhere, in heaven, on the
earth and in the sky. O king! My well-wishers were miserable in their minds and cried and wept, immersed in grief
and sorrow. O brave one! O one without decay! My enemies were delighted. My friends were miserable. Later, after I had triumphed, this is what I heard. Then I took up my beloved vajra weapon. It was capable of destroying all
rocks and using it, I shattered all the mountains. O great king! My horses had been oppressed by that burden of
rocks and stood there trembling, weak in breath and effort. On seeing me appear like a sun in the sky after the net
of clouds had dispersed, all my well-wishers repeatedly raised cheers.
‘“O king! My charioteer bowed to me and with hands joined in salutation, said, ‘O Varshneya! Look. Shalva, the
lord of Soubha, is there. O Krishna! Do not ignore him now and take care about the task. O mighty-armed Keshava! Forget all gentleness and friendship towards Shalva. Kill Shalva. Do not allow him to live. O valiant one! O
slayer of enemies! An enemy should be killed with all one’s valour and even a weak enemy should not be disregarded by those who are strong, even if he is at one’s feet, not to speak of one who is standing in battle. O tiger
among men! O lord! Use all your efforts to kill him. O best among those of the Vrishni lineage! Do not delay any
more. This one cannot be killed through gentleless. O brave one! Nor in my view can he be your friend, since he
fought with you and oppressed Dvaraka.’ O Kounteya! On hearing these words of my charioteer and knowing
them to be true, I once again set my mind on the battle, with the intention of killing King Shalva and destroying
Soubha.
‘“O brave one! I asked Daruka to hold steady for an instant. I then afﬁxed my beloved agneya weapon to my
bow. It was irresistible and divine. It could not be cut and it was extremely energetic. It had great radiance and was
capable of destroying everything in battle—yakshas, rakshasas, danavas and perverse kings. This great one could
reduce all of them to ashes. My chakra is as sharp as a razor. It is unblemished and is like time, or Yama himself. I

invoked mantras over this unmatched destroyer of enemies.126 I asked it to destroy, with its own valour, Soubha
and whatever enemies of mine were inside it. Having uttered these words, I angrily ﬂung it, with the valour of my
arms. It arose into the sky in the form of Sudarshana127 and descended, like a second sun when the destruction of
an era is near. It approached the city of Soubha, which had now lost its splendour. It sliced through the middle, just
as a saw cuts through a piece of wood. Cut into two by the force of Sudarshana, Soubha fell down, like Tripura
through Maheshvara’s arrow.128 When Soubha fell down, the chakra returned to my hand. I took it up once more
and hurled it, saying, ‘Go to Shalva.’ Shalva was about to hurl a giant club in that great battle. The chakra suddenly blazed up with its energy and cut him into two. When that brave one was killed, the danavas were frightened
and lost their senses. Chased by my arrows, they lamented and ﬂed towards the sky. I then took my chariot close to
Soubha. I blew on my conch shell and brought great delight into the hearts of my well-wishers. On seeing that the
city, as high as Mount Meru, had been destroyed, with all its palaces and towers, and was in ﬂames, the women
ﬂed. Thus it was that I killed Shalva in war and destroyed Soubha. Then I again returned to Anarta and delighted
my well-wishers. O king! It was because of this that I could not go to Nagasahrya.129 O destroyer of enemy warriors! Had I been there, Suyodhana would not have been alive.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having thus spoken to Kourava,130 Madhusudana, the mighty-armed Supreme Being,
took his leave from the intelligent Pandavas and got ready to depart. The mighty-armed one paid his respects to
Dharmaraja Yudhishthira.131 The king and the mighty-armed Bhima inhaled the fragrance of his head.132 He
asked Subhadra and Abhimanyu to ascend his golden chariot.133 Having been duly shown homage by the Pandavas, Krishna then ascended the chariot. Having comforted Yudhishthira, Krishna left for Dvaraka on a chariot
that had the radiance of the sun and to which, Sainya and Sugriva had been yoked. When Dasharha134 had left,
Dhrishtadyumna, the son of Prishata,135 took Droupadi’s sons with him and left for his own city. After having met
the Pandavas, Dhrishtaketu, the king of Chedi, took his sister with him and left for the beautiful city of
Shuktimati.136 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Kekayas also took their leave from the inﬁnitely energetic Kounteya. Having paid their respects to all the Pandavas, they departed. Then the brahmanas and the
vaishyas who lived there were also repeatedly urged to go, but they refused to abandon the Pandavas. O Indra
among kings! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those great-souled ones remained in Kamyaka and the crowd
that surrounded them was large and extraordinary. Honouring the great-souled brahmanas, in due course of time,
Yudhishthira instructed his servants to yoke the chariots.’
321(24)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the lord of the Dasharhas137 had left, Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, Arjuna, the twins,
Krishna138 and the priest139 ascended chariots that were extremely expensive and yoked to supreme horses. In
forms that resembled that of Bhutapati,140 the warriors left for the forest.141 They gave golden coins, garments
and cattle to those who were knowledgeable in studies, letters and mantras.142 They were led by twenty armed
servants with bows, shields, yellow arrows,143 bowstrings, implements and arrows. All of them followed behind.
Indrasena144 swiftly collected the garments of the princess,145 her nurses, maidservants and ornaments into another chariot and followed them.
‘Then the citizens went to the best of the Kurus.146 With dejected minds, they circumambulated him. All the
brahmanas happily pronounced their blessings, as did all the chiefs of Kurujangala. With his brothers, Dharmaraja
happily greeted them back. The great-souled lord stood there for some time, to see the great numbers of people in
Kurujangala. The great-souled bull among the Kurus felt for them the way a father feels for his sons. For the chief
of the Bharata lineage, they too felt the way sons feel for their father. The people approached in large numbers and
stood around the chief of the Kurus. They lamented, “Oh, Protector!”, “Oh, dharma!” and the like, and tears rolled
down all their shamed faces. “You are the supreme lord of the Kurus and we are subjects.147 O Dharmaraja!
Where are you going, leaving all the inhabitants of the cities and the countryside, like a father deserting his sons?

Shame on the cruel-minded son of Dhritarashtra! Shame on the evil-minded Soubala and Karna! Those evil ones
wish for destruction. O Indra among men! You are always devoted to dharma, but they harm you. O great-souled
one! You have yourself established a great and unmatched city that is as radiant as a city of the gods.
Shatakratuprastha is unfailing in deeds. O Dharmaraja! You are ours and where are you going, leaving us and that?
Great-souled Maya built an unmatched sabha for you that was like the sabhas of the gods. It was like divine maya
and had divine mysteries. O Dharmaraja! You are ours and where are you going, leaving us and that?” Then energetic Bibhatsu, learned in dharma, kama and artha, spoke in a loud voice to the gathering, “The king will make his
home in the forest so as to rob the enemies of all their fame. With the brahmanas at the forefront, separately and
collectively, let all the ascetics approach us and bless us. Let those who are learned in dharma and artha exactly tell
us how we will attain our supreme success.” O king! When these words were uttered by Arjuna, all the brahmanas
and all the varnas were delighted and rejoiced. They circumambulated the one who was supreme among all those
who uphold dharma.148 They said farewell to Partha,149 Vrikodara, Dhananjaya, Yajnaseni150 and the twins.
Then they took Yudhishthira’s permission and sorrowfully returned to the kingdom, to wherever they lived.’
322(25)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When they had left, Kounteya Yudhisthira, who was always wedded to the truth and had
dharma in his soul, told all his brothers, “We will have to live in this deserted forest for twelve years. Look for a
place in this great forest that has many deer and birds, with many ﬂowers and fruit, beautiful and pure and frequented by virtuous men. We will happily spend these many autumns151 there.” When he had thus spoken,
Dhananjaya replied to Dharmaraja, after having honoured that intelligent one like a preceptor and offering him the
homage due to a preceptor. “You have worshipped the ancient maharshis. There is nothing in the world of men that
is not known to you. O bull among the Bharata lineage! You have always worshipped brahmanas like
Dvaipayana152 and the immensely ascetic Narada. He153 has control over himself and always roams at the gates
of all the worlds, from the world of the gods to the world of Brahma and that of gandharvas and apsaras. Without a
doubt, you know the ways of all brahmanas. O lord of the earth! You know their inﬂuence and everything. O king!
You yourself know what will bring us the best welfare. O great king! We will ﬁx our abode wherever you desire.
There is a lake here known as Dvaitavana. It is frequented by virtuous people. It is beautiful and has many ﬂowers
and fruit. It is frequented by many types of birds. O king! If it so pleases you, I think we can spend our twelve
years here. Or do you think otherwise?” Yudhishthira said, “O Partha! I agree with what you have said. Let us go
to the great, pure and famous lake of Dvaitavana.” Thereupon, all the Pandavas, who always walked along the path
of dharma, went to the sacred lake of Dvaitavana.
‘They were accompanied by many brahmanas. There were those who observed the agnihotra, those who did not
maintain the ﬁre, those who begged for food and those who lived in the forest. Many brahmanas went with Yudhishthira. There were many hundreds of ascetics, devoted to the truth and rigid in their vows. Accompanied by
many brahmanas, the Pandavas, bulls among the Bharata lineage, arrived at the sacred and beautiful Dvaitavana. It
was the end of the hot season and the lord of the land saw the great forest covered with shalas, palm trees, mango
trees, madhukas,154 nipas, kadambas,155 sarjas,156 arjunas,157 and karnikas.158 There were peacocks on the
tops of those large trees, uttering sweet notes and there were large numbers of datyuhas and chakoras.159 There
were also wild cuckoos in the forest. In that forest, the lord of the land also saw the leaders of large herds of elephants, which ﬂowed with rut and stood like mountains. They were accompanied by herds of she-elephants. On
approaching the beautiful Bhogavati,160 he161 saw many who lived in the forest with dharma in their hearts, selfcontrolled, attired in skins and with matted hair. He also saw many emancipated rishis. The king, foremost among
those who uphold dharma, got down from his vehicle and entered the forest, with his brothers and companions,
like the inﬁnitely energetic Shakra162 in heaven. When the one who was devoted to the truth descended, masses of
charanas163 and siddhas and dwellers of the forest approached the lion who was an Indra among men and surrounded the intelligent one. He worshipped all the siddhas and was shown homage in return, like a king or a god.
With his hands joined in salutation, the supreme one among those who uphold dharma entered,164 together with

all the foremost ones among the brahmanas. The great-souled one who was pure in his conduct was worshipped
like a father by the ascetics who had dharma in their hearts. Having returned the homage, the king sat down at the
foot of a large tree that was laden with ﬂowers. Dhananjaya, Krishna, Bhima, the twins, foremost among the
Bharata lineage, and the followers of that Indra among men also dismounted from their vehicles and all of them
joined him. That large tree was bent with the weight of creepers and when the ﬁve great-souled Pandavas, all terrible archers, sat down, it looked like a giant mountain with herds of elephants around it.’
323(26)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Those sons of Indras among men were used to pleasures. But they had now attained misfortune and reached the forest. Like Indras, they began to sport themselves in that sacred place, along the banks of the
Sarasvati, with shala forests. In the forest, the king, who was a bull among Kurus, satisﬁed all the ascetics, sages
and the best of brahmanas who were with him, by offering them the best of roots and fruit. When the Pandavas
lived in that great forest, Dhoumya, their immensely energetic priest, who was like a father to the Kurus, performed sacriﬁces for the gods and the ancestors. Having lost their kingdom, the illustrious Pandavas lived there.
While they lived there, the ancient rishi Markandeya, terrible and resplendent in his energy, arrived in their hermitage as a guest. When he saw all of them, Krishna Droupadi, Bhima and Arjuna in the middle of the ascetics, the
great-souled one, inﬁnite in his energy, remembered Rama and seemed to smile.
‘Dharmaraja was miserable and said, “All these ascetics are ashamed. While all these ascetics are looking on,
why do you look at me and smile, as if you are amused?” Markandeya replied, “O son! I am not delighted. Nor am
I smiling. Happy pride has not possessed me. But on witnessing your misfortunes today, I have been reminded of
Dasharatha’s son, Rama, who was devoted to the truth. With Lakshmana, that king also lived in the forest on the
instructions of his father. O Partha! In ancient times, I saw him once on Mount Rishyamukha, while he was wandering around with his bow. That great-souled one was the equal of the one with a thousand eyes,165 the one who
defeated Maya and killed Namuchi. The unblemished Dasharathi166 lived in the forest on his father’s instructions,
so as to maintain his own dharma. He was like Shakra in his power, a great-hearted one who was invincible in battle. He gave up his comforts and roamed around in the forest. Therefore, thinking that one is powerful, one should
never follow that which is not dharma. Nabhaga, Bhagiratha and other kings have conquered this earth, right up to
the boundaries of the ocean. O son! They won the worlds by observing the truth. Therefore, thinking that one is
powerful, one should never follow that which is not dharma. O supreme among men! When he gave up his kingdom and his riches, the truth-abiding and virtuous king of Kashi and Karusha was called a mad dog.167 Therefore,
thinking that one is powerful, one should never follow that which is not dharma. O Partha! O best of men! In ancient times, the righteous saptarshis who blaze in the sky observed the ordinances decreed by the creator. Therefore, thinking that one is powerful, one should never follow that which is not dharma. O Indra among men! O
supreme among men! Look! Even tusked and powerful elephants, as large as mountain peaks, base themselves in
accordance with the ordinances decreed by the creator. Therefore, thinking that one is powerful, one should never
follow that which is not dharma. O Indra among men! Look! All beings conduct themselves in their own species in
accordance with the ordinances decreed by the creator. Therefore, thinking that one is powerful, one should never
follow that which is not dharma. O Partha! You have surpassed all beings in truth, devotion to dharma, appropriate
conduct and humility. Your fame and energy are as radiant as that of the sun which gives out rays. O lord of the
earth! O great-minded one! After having spent a difﬁcult time in the forest in accordance with your promise, you
will again obtain blazing prosperity from the Kouravas through your own energy.” Having spoken these words to
him and his well-wishers in the midst of all those ascetics, the maharshi took his leave of Dhoumya and the Parthas
and left from there, in a northward direction.’
324(27)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the great-souled Pandavas lived in Dvaitavana, the giant forest was ﬁlled with brahmanas. In every direction, the lake of Dvaitavana always resounded with chants of the brahman and became like
the world of Brahma. The charming chants of yajus, samas and riks, in poetry and in prose, were intoned every-

where by the brahmanas and pleased the heart. The wise intonations of the brahman mingled with the twangs of
the bowstrings of the Parthas and the beautiful unity between brahmana and kshatriya practices radiated.
‘One evening, when Kounteya Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was seated and surrounded by all the rishis, Dalbhya’s
son Baka168 spoke to him, “O Partha! O supreme among the Kurus! Look! In Dvaitavana, the hour has come for
brahmanas and ascetics to kindle their sacriﬁcial ﬁres. Under your protection, they are observing dharma by following secret and rigid vows—Bhrigus, Angirasas, Vasishthas, Kashyapa, the immensely fortunate Agastyas and
Atreyas of supreme vows.169 All the supreme brahmanas in the world have assembled here with you. O Partha! O
Kounteya! O Kourava! With your brothers, listen to the words I am going to say to you. Brahmanas are enriched
by kshatriyas and kshatriyas are enriched by brahmanas. Thus rendered strong, they burn down enemies, like ﬁre
and wind together consume the forest. O son! If you wish to win this world and the next, do not wish to remain
without brahmanas. Having obtained a disciplined brahmana who knows the ways of dharma and artha, a king can
eliminate his enemies. Having conducted himself in accordance with supreme dharma and having protected his
subjects, Bali could ﬁnd no other refuge in this world other than that of a brahmana.170 It was because of this that
the asura Virochana’s son satisﬁed all his desires and never lacked in prosperity. Having obtained the earth through
his alliance with brahmanas, he met misfortune when he began to oppress them. The earth and its riches do not remain eternally with one from the second varna171 who does not have a brahmana. But right up to the boundaries
of the ocean, the earth pays homage to one who is instructed by a disciplined brahmana. Like an elephant without
restraint172 in battle, a kshatriya’s strength declines, if it is not accompanied by brahmanas. The brahmana has unmatched insight, the kshatriya has unmatched strength. When the two are together, the entire world is delighted.
Just as a great ﬁre aided by the wind burns up dry wood, kings aided by brahmanas consume the enemy. To acquire
what he has not got and to extend what he has got, an intelligent one should seek the advice of wise brahmanas.
Therefore, to obtain what you have not got and to extend what you have got and to obtain the right refuge, you
need a brahmana who is famous, knowledgeable in the vedas, wise and greatly learned. O Yudhishthira! Your conduct with brahmanas has always been excellent and your great fame therefore shines in all the worlds.” At this, all
the brahmanas showed homage to Baka Dalbhya, as he praised Yudhishthira, and they were immensely delighted.
Dvaipayana, Narada, Jamadagnya, Prithushrava, Indradyumna, Bhaluki, Kritacheta, Sahasrapad, Karnashrava,
Munja, Lavanashva, Kashyapa, Harita, Sthunakarna, Agniveshya, Shounaka, Ritavak, Brihadashva, Ritavasu, Urdhvareta, Vrishamitra, Suhotra, Hotravahana—these and many other brahmanas of rigid vows spoke to
Ajatashatru,173 the way rishis speak to Purandara.’174
325(28)

Vaishampayana said, ‘One evening, the Pandavas who had gone to the forest were seated with Krishna and were
talking to each other, afﬂicted with grief and sorrow.
‘The beloved, beautiful, learned and devoted Krishna spoke these words to Dharmaraja, “There is no sorrow
over us in the mind of that evil, cruel and evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra.175 O king! When you were banished
to the forest with me and your brothers, attired in deerskins, the evil-hearted and evil-minded one felt no torment.
The heart of that performer of evil deeds is made of iron. Thus it was that he could address harsh words to his superior, who is supreme among those who follow dharma.176 Having reduced you, always used to comforts and undeserving of hardship, to this misfortune, that evil-souled one, that performer of evil deeds, rejoices with his wellwishers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing you leave for the forest in your deerskins, there were four
among all the Kurus who did not shed any tears—Duryodhana, Karna, the evil-souled Shakuni and the cruel and
evil brother Duhshasana. O supreme among those of the Kuru lineage! All the others were overcome with grief
and tears rolled down from their eyes. O great king! On seeing your bed now and remembering your earlier one, I
sorrow for you. You are used to comforts and do not deserve this misery. Thinking of that jewelled seat, inlaid with
ivory, in the middle of that sabha and seeing this one made of kusha grass, I am consumed with grief. I have seen
you in the sabha, surrounded by kings. O king! On no longer seeing that, how can there be peace in my heart? O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! I have seen you anointed with sandalwood paste, as radiant as the sun. On see-

ing you now anointed with mud, I am losing my senses. O Indra among kings! Earlier, I have seen you attired in
white and expensive silk garments. I now see you dressed in tattered rags.177 Earlier, food that catered to every
kind of taste used to be taken from your house for thousands of brahmanas, on plates made out of gold. O king! O
lord with all the qualities! From your house you provided food to the ascetics and the homeless. O king! Now that
I can no longer see that, how can there be peace in my heart? O great king! Young cooks who wore polished earrings used to prepare and serve the best of tasty food for your brothers. I now see them in the forest, surviving on
the fare of the forest. O Indra among men! They do not deserve this discomfort. My mind can ﬁnd no peace. I see
Bhimasena, unhappily living in the forest, immersed in thought. As time passes, are you not suffused with anger?
Are you not angered to see that Bhimasena has to perform all these tasks himself? How can your anger not increase on seeing that one who is used to happiness is now in misery? He was served in many ways, the high and
the low, with vehicles and garments. How can your anger not increase on seeing him in the forest thus? That powerful lord could have killed all the Kurus, but honouring your promise, Vrikodara tolerated everything. This twoarmed Arjuna is the equal of the many-armed Arjuna.178 In the speed with which he discharges arrows, he is like
Yama, the destroyer. O great king! Through the power of his weapons, all the lords of the earth were forced to bow
down at your sacriﬁce, tended to by brahmanas. This tiger among men has been worshipped by the gods and the
demons. Look at Arjuna, immersed in thought. O king! How can your anger not increase? Partha is used to comforts and does not deserve this unhappiness. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing him in the forest thus,
I am confounded that your anger does not increase. On a single chariot, he defeated gods, men and serpents. On
seeing him in the forest thus, how can your anger not increase? Through force, this scorcher of enemies obtained
tribute from all the lords of the earth—extraordinarily constructed vehicles, horses and elephants. Shooting one
swift arrow, he created ﬁve hundred arrows. On seeing him in the forest thus, how can your anger not increase?
Nakula is tall, dark and young and wields the best of shields in battle. On seeing him in the forest thus, how can
your anger not increase? O Yudhishthira! You have seen Madri’s handsome and brave son, Sahadeva, in the forest.
How can your anger not increase? I have been born in the lineage of Drupada. I am the daughter-in-law of the
great-souled Pandu. On seeing me in the forest thus, how can your anger not increase? O supreme among those of
the Bharata lineage! It is certain that there is no anger left in you. Despite seeing your brothers and me, your mind
is not miserable. But the sacred texts say that there is no kshatriya in the world without anger. But in you, today, I
see that which is contrary to kshatriyas. O Partha! A kshatriya who does not display his energy when the time is
right is always despised by all beings. Therefore, under no circumstances should you show and forgiveness towards your enemies. There is no doubt that you are capable of destroying all of them through your energy. But it is
also true that a kshatriya who is not paciﬁed when the time of forgiving arrives, is not loved by all beings and is
destroyed here, and in the hereafter.”’
326(29)

‘Droupadi said, “On this, an ancient story is recounted, the conversation between Prahlada and Bali, the son of Virochana. Prahlada was Bali’s father’s father and was the Indra of the daityas. That immensely wise Indra of the
asuras was one to whom all knowledge of dharma had been imparted. ‘O father!179 Does forgiveness lead to welfare, or is it better to seek revenge? I have a doubt about this. So please tell me exactly by answering my question.
You are knowledgeable about dharma. So please tell me, without a doubt, which of the two is better. I will then do
exactly as you have instructed me.’ On being thus asked, the grandfather answered everything exactly. He was
wise and answered everything exactly, so that the doubt in the question could be removed.
‘“Prahlada said, ‘O son!180 Revenge is not always superior. Nor is forgiveness always superior. Learn the nature of both, so that there is no scope for doubt. O son! A man who always forgives suffers from many faults. His
servants treat him with contempt and others are also disrespectful. All the beings never bow down before him.
Therefore, the learned say that perpetual forgiveness should be avoided. Disregarding him, the servants fall prey to
many sins. Those with limited intelligence try to take his riches away from him. The servants also appropriate his
vehicles, garments, ornaments, beds, seats, food, drink and all his other articles. They do not give to those to whom
presents should be given, as instructed by the master to give, but fall prey to their own desires. The master is never

shown the respect he deserves. To be ignored in this world is worse than death. O son! Slaves, sons, servants and
even those who are not servants speak harsh words to such a forgiving person. They abuse the forgiving person
and even desire his wife. The wife too follows her own desire and intelligence. Even if a slight bit of punishment is
deserved and it is not meted out, those lovers of pleasure will injure him and resort to evil acts. These and other
faults are always associated with those who are forgiving. O Virochana’s son! Now listen to the faults associated
with those who never forgive. If in the wrong place, or even in a right one, a person is afﬂicted with passion and
anger and metes out various punishments on the strength of his energy, he will be clouded because of his energy
and will face conﬂicts with his allies. He will receive hatred from the worlds and from his relatives. Because of the
contempt displayed, such a man suffers loss of riches and receives abuse, disrespect and disregard. He confronts
remorse, hatred and confusion and creates enemies. If in anger, a man inﬂicts different kinds of punishments on
men, he is swiftly deprived of his riches, life and relatives. If he equally uses his force on benefactors and those
who wish him ill, such a man is shunned in the world, like a snake inside a house. How can the world confer good
fortune on someone who is shunned? People are sure to hurt him, as soon as they ﬁnd a weakness. Therefore, one
should not always be overpowering. Nor should one always be gentle. He who is gentle at the right time and harsh
at the right time always ﬁnds happiness in this world and the next. Listen, I will now tell you in detail about the
time when one should be forgiving. This has been recounted by the learned ones earlier and should always be followed. If a former benefactor commits a crime that is not too great, in view of the earlier favour, this transgression
should be pardoned. Those who commit an offence out of stupidity and seek pardon should be forgiven, because
learning is not easily available everywhere to men. Even if the offence is slight, an offender who commits a crime
with full knowledge, but claims he did not know, should be punished, because this is crookedness. The ﬁrst offence
should be forgiven for all beings. But when they commit the second one, however slight, it should be punished. If
a crime is committed unknowingly, it is said that this should be pardoned, but only after proper examination. Gentleness can vanquish gentleness and gentleness can also vanquish harshness. There is nothing that gentleness cannot vanquish. Therefore, gentleness is the stronger of the two. But one should act after considering the time and the
place, the strengths and the weaknesses. The wrong time and place can lead to failure. Therefore, one should wait
for the right time and place. Sometimes, an offender can be pardoned out of regard for the people. These have been
described as the right times to forgive. At times other than these, it has been said that one should use one’s
energy.’”181
‘Droupadi said, “O lord of men! Therefore, I think that the time for displaying your energy has come. The avaricious sons of Dhritarashtra are always engaged in doing harm. This is not the time to exhibit forgiveness towards
the Kurus. The time has come to show energy, and punishment must be displayed. The mild are always disregarded. But people are careful of those who are harsh. He who knows the right time to employ both of these is a true
lord of the earth.”’
327(30)

‘Yudhishthira said, “Anger destroys men and anger again leads to prosperity. O immensely intelligent one! Know
therefore that both well-being and ill-being ﬁnd their source in anger. O beautiful one! He who always restrains his
anger obtains prosperity. O beautiful one! But he who never controls his anger, never obtains prosperity. The terrible anger contributes to his downfall. It has been seen that anger is the root of destruction for all beings. How can
someone like me indulge in anger, when it brings about the destruction of the worlds? The angry man commits sin.
The angry man may even murder his superiors. The angry man abuses his superiors with harsh words. When angered, one cannot distinguish between what should be said and what should not be said. There is nothing that such
a person cannot do or say. From anger, one can kill someone who should not be killed, or honour someone who
should be killed. An angry person can even send himself to Yama’s abode. On realizing these faults, the learned
ones have said that anger must be conquered, if one wishes for supreme welfare in this world and the hereafter.
The wise have controlled anger. O Droupadi! Thinking about this, why should someone like me also not act accordingly? That is the reason my anger does not increase.
‘“One who does not retaliate in anger against someone who is angered, saves himself and the other person from
great fear. He is like a physician for both. A weak man may be oppressed by men who are stronger. But if he is an-

gered in his folly, he brings about his own destruction. In the hereafter, there is no world for one who does not control one’s own self and destroys one’s own self. O Droupadi! It has therefore been said that those who are weak
should control their anger. And though powerful, the wise one is not angered when oppressed. Having destroyed
his oppressor, he ﬁnds delight in the next world. It is for this reason that wise men who have the knowledge, be
they strong or weak, always forgive, even if they are in difﬁculties. O Krishna! The righteous always praise those
who have controlled anger. The virtuous hold the view that victory comes to the forgiving and the good. Truth is
superior to falsehood and gentleness to cruelty. For the sake of killing someone like Suyodhana,182 how can
someone like me show the anger, with its many faults, that is shunned by the virtuous? It is certain that learned and
far-sighted ones call someone controlled when he has no anger in him. If a person uses wisdom to check an anger
that has arisen, those who know the truth call such a person powerful. O one with the beautiful hips! An angry one
cannot see the course of action accurately. An angry man does not see his tasks or his limits. The angry one kills
those who should not be killed. He exhibits harshness towards his superiors. Therefore, it is the duty of anyone
with power to keep anger at a distance. For one overcome with anger, it is not easily possible to attain courtesy,
tolerance, valour, swiftness, energy and other qualities. By forsaking anger, a man can attain his true energy. O immensely wise one! But it is extremely difﬁcult for an angry one to exhibit his energy when the time is right. Those
who have no learning always think that anger is the same as energy. Passion has been given to humankind for the
destruction of the world.
‘“Therefore, a person who wishes to live appropriately must always forsake anger. It is certain that it is better to
give up one’s own dharma than fall prey to anger. It is all those who have no intelligence and limited senses who
transgress this. O unblemished lady! How can someone like me do this? If men equal to the earth in forgiveness
did not exist, there would be no peace among men, but dissension caused by anger. If injured ones return the injury
and those oppressed by seniors return the oppression, the outcome will be a destruction of all beings and the establishment of that which is not dharma. O Krishna! O one with the beautiful face! If every man who is abused immediately abuses back, if one who is injured returns violence with violence, if fathers oppress their sons and sons oppress their fathers, if husbands oppress their wives and wives oppress their husbands, there can be no birth in a
world thus angered. Know that the birth of all beings is conditional on conciliation. O Droupadi! All beings will be
swiftly destroyed in such a world. Thus anger leads to the destruction and non-existence of all beings. It is because
people as forgiving as the earth are seen in this world that beings keep getting born and there is existence. O beautiful one! A man must be forgiving in all his difﬁculties. It has been said that the birth of all beings results from
forgiveness. If a man is insulted and oppressed by a stronger person, but always paciﬁes his anger and controls his
anger, he is said to be learned and supreme. Such a man has inﬂuence in the eternal worlds. But one who has little
knowledge and falls prey to anger is destroyed in this world and the next.
‘“O Krishna! The great-souled and forgiving Kashyapa sung this hymn in honour of those who are eternally forgiving: ‘Forgiveness is dharma. Forgiveness is sacriﬁces. Forgiveness is the Vedas. Forgiveness is the sacred texts.
He who knows this is capable of forgiving everything. Forgiveness is the brahman. Forgiveness is the truth. Forgiveness is the past and the future. Forgiveness is austerities. Forgiveness is purity. Forgiveness holds up the entire
world. Forgiving ones attain the worlds of ascetic ones who know the brahman and those who know about sacriﬁces. Forgiveness is the energy of the energetic. Forgiveness is the brahman of the ascetics. Forgiveness is the
truth of those who are truthful. Forgiveness is alms. Forgiveness is fame.’ O Krishna! The brahman, truth, sacriﬁces and the world are established in forgiveness and how can someone like me give up something like that?
Those who perform sacriﬁces enjoy their worlds and those who forgive enjoy other ones. A man who is wise must
always forgive. Whoever forgives everything attains the brahman. This world belongs to those who forgive. The
next belongs to those who forgive. They are honoured here and in the hereafter and attain the pure goal. Men who
always overcome their wrath through forgiveness obtain the supreme worlds. Therefore, forgiveness is considered
supreme.
‘“In praise of those who are forgiving, Kashyapa always chanted these verses. O Droupadi! Now that you have
heard these verses about forgiveness, do not be angered. Our grandfather,183 Shantanu’s son, always praises
peace. The preceptor184 and Kshatta Vidura also speak about peace. Kripa and Sanjaya also speak about peace.

Somadatta, Yuyutsu, Drona’s son185 and our grandfather Vyasa always speak about peace. Always urged by all of
them towards peace, I think the king186 will return the kingdom. If he does not, he will face destruction. A terrible
time has come about. It will lead to the destruction of the Bharatas. O beautiful one! I am certain that this has been
decreed by destiny a long time ago, and thereafter. Suyodhana is undeserving of forgiveness and therefore he ﬁnds
none. I deserve it and therefore, forgiveness has taken possession of me. Forgiveness and gentleness are eternal
dharma and the conduct of those who have control over their own selves. Therefore, that is the way I will act.”’
328(31)

‘Droupadi said, “I bow before Dhata and Vidhata,187 who have confused you. You should follow the conduct of
your father and grandfather. But your mind leads you in a different direction. A man never obtains prosperity in
this world through dharma, gentleness, forgiveness, uprightness and tenderness. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Else, this miserable calamity would not have befallen you. Neither you, nor your immensely energetic brothers, deserve this. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then, and even now, they know that nothing is as loved by
you as dharma, which is more dear to you than even life. The brahmanas, the superiors and even the gods know
that your kingdom is for dharma and your life is also for dharma. I think that you can give up Bhimasena, Arjuna,
Madri’s two sons and me, but you will never forsake dharma. I have heard from aryas188 that a king protects dharma and dharma in turn protects him. But I think it does not protect you. O tiger among men! Like a man is followed by his own shadow, you have always steadily followed dharma. You have never disparaged your equals or
your inferiors, not to speak of your superiors. Even after conquering the entire earth, your vanity did not increase.
O Partha! You have always served the gods, the ancestors and the brahmanas through svahas,189 svadhas190 and
other forms of worship. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You have always satisﬁed brahmanas, ascetics, those
who desire salvation and householders with every object that they desire. You have given forest-dwellers iron191
vessels. In your house, there is nothing to be seen that cannot be given to brahmanas. O king! Every morning and
every evening, at the end of the vaishvadeva ritual,192 you give to guests and servants and survive on what remains. Sacriﬁces to obtain wishes, sacriﬁces with animals, sacriﬁces to gratify desires, sacriﬁces connected with
cooking and other sacriﬁcial tasks are always performed. Even in this great and deserted forest, populated by bandits, your recourse to dharma has not diminished, even though you have been deprived of your kingdom. You have
observed great sacriﬁces like the horse sacriﬁce, the rajasuya, the lotus sacriﬁce and the cow sacriﬁce and offered
large quantities of dakshina.
‘“O king! But after that, your intelligence was confounded and you were vanquished in an unequal game of
dice. You lost your kingdom, riches, weapons, brothers and even me. You are upright, gentle, benevolent, humble
and truthful. How could this attachment to dice degrade your intelligence? On witnessing your great unhappiness
and your misfortune, my mind is agitated and extremely bewildered. I will recount an ancient tale to show how all
the worlds are under the control of the supreme god.193 Even before the seed is released, the lord Ishana194 determines in advance happiness and unhappiness and pleasure and displeasure for all beings. O brave man! O king!
These subjects are like wooden puppets and he controls their bodies and limbs. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Covering all these beings like the sky, the supreme god decides on all that is good and all that is evil. A bird
tied to a string is not its own master. Like that, they are under the control of the supreme god and are not their own
master or anyone else’s. Like a pearl on a string, like a bull with a rope through its nose, a man is under the control
of the creator, is part of him and is given to him. Like a tree that has fallen from the bank into the middle of a river,
he is at no time under his own control. Creatures are ignorant. Their happiness or unhappiness is not determined by
themselves. They are sent by the supreme god to heaven or hell. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All beings
are under the control of the creator, like the tips of straws are under the control of the strong wind. Yet again, the
supreme god yokes himself to good deeds and evil ones. He pervades and roams in all beings, but is not noticed.
This physical body is only the ﬁeld. It is only the creator’s instrument and the illustrious one uses it to perform
deeds, good and evil. Look at the powers of maya the supreme god exhibits. He confounds them with illusion and
makes beings kill other beings. The sages who know the truth visualize this in a different way and alter their

course, like the wind in the sky. But men think of it in a different way and the lord creates and alters them in a different way. O Yudhishthira! Like wood is broken with wood, stone again with stone, iron with iron and that which
is insensate with that which has senses, like that, the great grandfather, the self-created one, the illustrious god is
not detected, and kills beings with other beings. The lord unites and disunites them, as he desires. The illustrious
one plays with all beings, like a child with his toys. O king! The creator does not act towards beings like a father or
a mother. Like an inferior person, he seems to be driven by rage.
‘“My thoughts are agitated when I see that those who are good, righteous and modest suffer in their conduct,
while evil ones are happy. O Partha! On witnessing your calamity and Suyodhana’s prosperity, I blame the creator
who tolerates such inequality. He confers prosperity on Dhritarashtra’s cruel and avaricious son,195 who lowers
dharma and transgresses what the virtuous sacred texts say. What fruits does the creator obtain from this? If a performed deed follows its performer and no one else, then the supreme god has certainly been tainted by this evil
deed. Or if the evil that is done does not taint the performer, then strength alone is the cause of everything and I
grieve for those who are weak.”’
329(32)

‘Yudhishthira said, “O Yajnaseni! We have heard the words that you have spoken. They are sweet, well crafted and
full of good expressions. But what you have said is atheism. O princess! I do not follow dharma because of its
fruits. I give what should be given. I sacriﬁce what should be sacriﬁced. O Krishna! Without bothering about
whether there is fruit or not, and to the best of my abilities, I do what a man who is a householder is supposed to
do. O one with the beautiful hips! I do not follow dharma because of the fruits of dharma, but because I do not
want to transgress the traditional texts and wish to follow the conduct of the virtuous. O Krishna! My mind is naturally ﬁxed on dharma. He who wishes to milk dharma does not obtain the fruits of dharma. Nor does the evilminded atheist, who having performed a task, has doubts. Do not doubt dharma, driven by pride, or in an attempt
to debate. A man who doubts dharma is destined to be born as inferior species. Like shudras have no access to the
Vedas, weak-minded ones who are doubtful about dharma and the ways of the rishis are barred from the undecaying and immortal worlds. O famous one! If one studies the Vedas, follows dharma and is born in a noble lineage,
then kings who follow dharma refer to him as old.196 Vile ones who transgress the sacred texts and have doubts
about dharma in their evil-mindedness, are worse than even shudras and thieves.
‘“With your own eyes, you have seen the immensely ascetic rishi Markandeya. Rendered immortal by dharma,
the one whose soul is immeasurable had come here. Vyasa, Vasishtha, Maitreya, Narada, Lomasha, Shuka and other rishis, whose minds are virtuous, have obtained success through dharma alone. You have yourself seen them,
possessing the powers of divine yoga, capable of every curse and boon, and superior to the gods themselves. They
have always told me that dharma alone is the task to be followed. They are like the immortals and clearly have
knowledge of the traditional texts. O fortunate one! Therefore, out of the confusion of passion or because your
mind is agitated, you should not doubt the creator or dharma, or censure them. He who doubts dharma ﬁnds nothing else against which he can measure himself. He considers himself as the measure and proudly debases the superior. He thinks like a child that the world connected with pleasuring the senses alone is real, and is deluded about
everything else. There is no atonement for one who doubts dharma. Despite all his reﬂections, there are no worlds
for such a mean and evil one. The ignorant one, who does not acknowledge what has been proved, criticizes the
meaning given to the Vedas and the sacred texts and is addicted to desire and avarice, descends into hell. O fortunate one! But he who unquestioningly and with a steady mind follows the path of dharma, obtains eternity in the
hereafter. O Krishna! He who transgresses the proof given by the rishis, does not follow dharma and transgresses
all the sacred texts, that deluded one doesn’t obtain bliss in a hundred births. O Krishna! Do not doubt the dharma
followed by the righteous, which has been recounted by the ancient rishis who know everything and can see everything. O Droupadi! Like a boat to a merchant who wishes to cross to the other shore of an ocean, dharma is the
only boat that takes one to heaven and there is nothing else. O unblemished one! If the dharma followed by those
who observe dharma had no fruit, then this entire universe would have been immersed in darkness and would not
have been established. No one would have progressed towards salvation. Everyone would have lived the life of animals. There would only have been restraints and nothing would have been earned or gained. If austerities, brah-

macharya, sacriﬁces, studying, generosity and honesty did not have their fruits, then the ancient ones and those
who came before them, would not have observed these. If these deeds did not have fruits, there would have been
extreme confusion.
‘“Why do rishis, gods, gandharvas, asuras, rakshasas and all the other powerful lords follow dharma so assiduously? It is because they know that the creator will give the supreme fruits to those who follow dharma. O
Krishna! This is eternal dharma. This dharma bears fruits. It has never been said that dharma has no fruits. It can
be seen that learning and austerities also bear fruit. O Krishna! That is also the case with you. Remember the circumstances of your birth, as you have heard them. You also know how the powerful Dhrishtadyumna was born. O
one with the sweet smiles! This is sufﬁcient proof. Knowing that deeds have fruits, the wise one is content with
only a little. But ignorant and stupid ones are not satisﬁed with even a lot. But after death, dharma gives them no
happiness or deeds. O passionate one! The fruits of deeds, both good and evil, and their origins and ends are mysteries to even the gods. No one knows them. Beings are in darkness about them. They are protected by the gods
and the maya of the gods is deep. Brahmanas who are lean of form, righteous in their vows and are austere, and
having burnt down their sins are of a serene mind, they can see them. Not being able to see the fruit, one should
not doubt dharma or the gods. Without distractions and envy, one should perform sacriﬁces and donations. Deeds
have their fruits. That is the eternal dharma. This is what Brahma told his sons and it was known by rishi Kashyapa.197 O Krishna! Therefore, let your doubt be destroyed like the mist.198 Deciding that this is the way it is, give
up your atheism. Do not speak ill of the supreme god who is the preserver of all beings. Learn about him. Worship
him. Do not have the kind of thoughts you have had. O Krishna! It is through the grace of the supreme god that
faithful mortals can tread the path of the immortals. Do not disregard him in any way.”’
330(33)

‘Droupadi said, “O Partha! I have not insulted or censured dharma in any way. Why should I censure the supreme
god, the lord of all beings? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Know me as one who is incoherent with grief.
Listen to me with a calm mind, as I lament a lot more. O destroyer of enemies! Whatever is born must certainly
perform tasks. Not even inferior ones, but only the immobile199 can live without acting. O Yudhishthira! From the
time one suckles at a breast to the time one is supine before death, all mobile beings act according to their nature.
O bull among the Bharata lineage! Among mobile beings in particular, men wish to perform deeds that ensure conduct in this life and the next. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All beings know about ascent.200 The world is
a witness to the fact that they directly reap the fruits of their actions. I can see myself that all beings live in accordance with this ascent, even the creator201 and the preserver,202 like a crane in the water. You should do your
own task, without becoming fatigued. You should be armed through your deeds. He who knows his own task is
one in a thousand, if not rarer. Therefore, one should act, to protect and to extend what one has. If it203 is eaten up
without a new crop, it dwindles like the Himalayas. All subjects would have been destroyed had they not performed their tasks. Do we ever see people act, without their acts leading to fruits? We do not know of anyone in
this world who makes a living without action. In this world, those who believe in destiny and those who believe in
chance are both wrong. What is praised is intelligence based on action. He who is happily asleep and believing in
destiny, makes no effort, that evil-minded one soon sinks like a pot in the water. This is also true of the one who
believes in chance and though capable of action, fails to act. His seat is not permanent and he lives like a weak
one, without a protector. If a man unexpectedly obtains something and it is thought that it has been obtained by
chance, his efforts have not been successful. O Partha! If a man obtains something and describes it as destiny, then
he certainly decides that it was divine decree and nothing but fate. The fruit that a man obtains through his own
acts is directly seen through the eyes and is regarded as manliness. One who is naturally active obtains results
without any obvious reason. O supreme among men! Know that this fruit is only natural. Whatever is thus obtained by a man through chance, divine destiny and as the natural outcome of deeds is the fruit of the man’s earlier
deeds.
‘“According to the deeds men have earlier done, the preserver and the supreme god distribute them and their
fruits in their respective tasks. Whatever task a man performs, good or bad, know that this has been decided by the

preserver in accordance with the fruits of the earlier deeds. This body is only an instrument of the preserver to undertake acts and take actions. Under his control, one helplessly acts accordingly. O Kounteya! It is the great lord
who appoints us to this task or that one and all beings are made to act, though they are themselves inert. Having
ﬁxed the objective in one’s mind, one subsequently undertakes the task. A man who himself uses his intelligence
ﬁrst is therefore the cause, because of his resolution. O bull among men! It is not possible to count the number of
deeds. Man is the reason behind the success of houses and towns. There is oil in sesame seeds. There is milk in
cows. Finally, there is ﬁre in wood. Using one’s intelligence, one should cleverly understand the means for attaining success. Thereafter one undertakes action, after ascertaining the reasons for success. It is on the success of their
deeds that beings survive. An act that is well performed by a skilled actor is certainly different from another act
that is felt to have been performed by one who is not skilled. Had man not been the reason behind the success of
acts, there would have been no oblations and sacriﬁces, no disciples or preceptors. It is because a man is himself
the actor that he is praised for the success of his deeds and blamed in the case of failure. How can one’s deeds be
destroyed?
‘“Some say that everything is the outcome of chance, others that everything is the outcome of destiny. There are
those who think it results from a man’s efforts. Others say the reason is threefold. Others hold that it is not enough
to think of the task alone. Everything is invisible, be it chance or destiny. It is seen that results are the outcome of
chance or destiny. Some of it is chance, some of it is destiny, some of it is the outcome of one’s own deeds. This is
how a man obtains the fruits, there is no fourth reason. Learned and skilled ones who know say this. But even then,
the preserver is the one who gives desirable and undesirable fruits to all beings. Had that not been the case, no beings would have been miserable. A man would have performed the act that would bring him his desired results.
Had earlier acts not existed, his deeds would have led to success. Those men who do not see these three doors to
success and failure are unsuccessful, like their own worlds. Tasks must always be performed. This is what Manu
had decided. A man who does not act is always defeated. O Yudhishthira! If a man acts, he is usually successful.
Those who are lazy rarely attain success. If there is a reason for failure, propitiation is indicated. O Indra among
kings! But if the act is undertaken, one is freed from one’s debts. Misfortune characterizes the lazy man who
sleeps. But a skilled one certainly obtains the fruits and attains prosperity. Intelligent men committed to acting never have doubts and are successful. But they do not seek to free from doubt those who doubt and are unsuccessful.
‘“We have now been overtaken by misfortune. However, if you engage in action, there is no doubt that this misfortune will be removed. Even if you are unsuccessful, you will have the pride and this is also true of Vrikodara,
Bibhatsu and the twin brothers. The tasks of others have obtained success and ours might also be. Without undertaking the task ﬁrst, how can one know what the outcome will be? Having cleaved the earth with his plough and
sown the seed, the farmer waits silently for the rains to be the cause. However, if the rains do not favour him, the
farmer is not to be blamed. He knows he has done everything that any other man could have. Even if we do not obtain the fruits of success, the slightest bit of blame will not attach to us. The intelligent one keeps this in mind and
does not blame himself. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Even if the objective is not attained, though one has
acted, there is no reason to despair, because there are two other reasons too.204 There is success and there is failure. But lack of inclination is a different thing altogether. Success in a task is the united outcome of many factors.
If the required attributes are deﬁcient, the fruit may be incomplete, or non-existent. O one without decay! But if the
task is not begun, neither fruit nor attributes can be seen. According to his strength and power, the intelligent one
brings together time, place, means and auspicious rites for prosperity. Those who are not deluded must act. Valour
will be the instructor. Among the qualities required for action, valour is the most important. If an intelligent person
sees one205 who is superior in many qualities, he should employ conciliation and other kinds of tasks. O Yudhishthira! He should wish for his misery and destruction. This is true of oceans and mountains, not to speak of
mortal men. By looking for the weaknesses in an enemy, a man satisﬁes a debt to himself, as well as to the enemy.
A man should never think ill of himself. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Prosperity does not come to one
who thinks of himself as having become overpowered. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is the foundation
for the success of the world. It is said that the reasons for success are many and depend on the time and the place.

‘“In earlier times, a learned brahmana was lodged in my father’s house.206 O bull among the Bharata lineage!
He told all this, ﬁrst propounded by Brihaspati,207 to my father. He also taught all this to my brothers. I overheard
this conversation at home. O King Yudhishthira! He explained this to me comfortingly, when I would arrive on
some task, or when I was serving, or when I was seated on my father’s lap.”’
331(34)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having heard these words of Yajnaseni, the intolerant Bhimasena went to the king.208 He
sighed angrily and told him, “For the sake of kingship, tread along the road of dharma, one used by righteous ones.
Deprived of dharma, artha and kama, what do you gain by living in this hermitage of ascetics? Duryodhana did not
rob the kingdom through dharma, honesty or energy, but through deceitful gambling with dice. Our kingdom was
stolen the way a weak scavenging jackal steals a piece of meat from stronger lions. O king! Why have you abandoned artha, which is the source of dharma and kama, tormenting yourself in this wilderness in some triﬂing pursuit of dharma? Protected by the wielder of the Gandiva,209 our kingdom could not even have been robbed by
Shakra. But because of our obedience to you, it was stolen in front of our eyes. While we were still alive, our riches were taken away from us because of you, like bilva fruit or cattle from those who are crippled. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! You are always ﬁrm in desiring dharma. But it is because we sought to do what is pleasing to
you, that we now face this great calamity. O bull among the Bharata lineage! It was because our selves were under
your control that we are now ploughing our friends and providing delight to our enemies. It was our stupidity that
we did not kill the sons of Dhritarashtra. But because we followed your commands, that evil deed is now tormenting us. O king! Look at you, living in a home meant for animals. This is the act of a coward, not one served by the
strong. This is not approved by Krishna,210 or Bibhatsu, or Abhimanyu, or Srinjaya,211 or I myself, or the two
sons of Madri. Because you are dharma, you always oppress yourself by your vow towards dharma. O king! But
isn’t it possible that despair has condemned you to the life of an impotent? It is only cowards who are incapable of
winning back their prosperity. They love despair, which bears no fruits and destroys everything. You have strength
and sight. You can see your manliness. O king! But because you have resorted to gentleness, you do not feel our
distress.
‘“While we have always been forgiving, the sons of Dhritarashtra regard us as incapable. This causes more grief
than death in battle. If all of us were to die in battle, in a straight ﬁght and without turning back, that would have
been better, because we would have obtained worlds after death. O bull among the Bharata lineage! And if we
killed them all and obtained back the entire earth, that would also be superior. If we are always devoted to our
tasks and established in our own dharma, if we wish to obtain great fame, if we wish to repulse enmity, then the
signs are that for our own sake, we should embark on war. Our kingdom has been stolen by others. We will be
praised and not censured. O king! Dharma that causes afﬂiction to our friends and our own selves is vice. It is not
dharma. It is bad dharma. A man who always resorts to dharma follows weak dharma. Dharma and artha desert
him, like happiness and unhappiness leave a man who is dead. One who suffers dharma’s afﬂictions for the sake of
dharma alone is not learned. He does not know the true purpose of dharma, like a blind one does not know the rays
of the sun. He who thinks that artha exists only for the sake of artha, does not know about artha. He is like a servant tending to cattle in the forest. He who excessively pursues artha and doesn’t pay attention to the other two
goals212 deserves to be censured, like the killer of a brahmana, and should be killed by all beings. In that way, he
who always pursues kama and ignores the other two goals of dharma and artha, is certain to be robbed of his
friends and will be weak in dharma and artha. He is certain to be killed at the end of the kama, like a ﬁsh that
roams with pleasure until the pond dries up. It is for this reason that the learned are never confused about dharma
and artha. They are required for kama, like kindling for a ﬁre. Dharma is the root of all artha and dharma is united
with artha. Know that the two are rooted in each other, like the ocean and the clouds. One feels a sensation of pleasure when one touches objects that have artha. This kama is a state of the mind and has no physical existence. O
king! A man who pursues artha should also strive for great dharma. He who strives for kama also seeks artha, because from kama one obtains nothing else. Kama yields no fruit other than desire, once that fruit is used up. The
learned regard it as ashes from wood. O king! Just as a seller of meat kills small birds, in that way, it is the nature

of that which is not dharma to kill beings. One who does not perceive the nature of dharma because of desire and
avarice deserves to be killed by all beings. He remains evil-minded, here and in the hereafter. O king! It is known
to you that artha is derived from the possession of objects. You also know about its nature and its various transformations. Its loss, or destruction at the time of old age and death, is regarded as a calamity. That afﬂiction has now
overtaken us. The ﬁve senses, the mind and the heart ﬁnd pleasure when there is attachment to objects. In my view,
that is the supreme fruit of one’s deeds. Thus, dharma, artha and kama should be considered separately. A man
should not be excessively addicted to dharma, or to artha, or to kama. All of them must always be served. The sacred texts decree that dharma must be followed in the ﬁrst, artha in the middle and kama in the last.213 The sacred
texts decree that, in due order and according to age, kama must be observed in the ﬁrst, artha in the second and
dharma in the last.214 O supreme among eloquent ones! Learned ones who know the nature of time apportion their
time in due order, serving all of dharma, artha and kama. O king! O descendant of the Kuru lineage!215 Whether
freedom from these or obtaining them is the superior goal for those who seek to obtain happiness is a question that
you should reﬂect on, with every means at your disposal. O king! You should then swiftly act on obtaining either
the former or the latter. He who lives a life of vacillation between the two is immersed in a miserable state.
‘“You know dharma and you have always practised it. On knowing this, your well-wishers are urging you to act.
O king! Donations, sacriﬁces, honesty, worship, retention of the Vedas and uprightness—these represent powerful
and supreme dharma, here and in the hereafter. O king! But one who is distressed and destitute cannot serve these.
O tiger among men! This holds even if one has all the qualities. O king! The universe is based on dharma and there
is nothing that is above dharma. O king! But dharma can only be served through great wealth. O king! Such wealth
can never be obtained through begging or through impotence, but can always be obtained by one whose intelligence is based on dharma. O bull among men! Begging brings success to brahmanas. But that has been forbidden
to you. Therefore, seek to obtain the artha that you desire by exercising your energy. Begging is not recommended,
nor the life of a vaishya or a shudra. In the heart of kshatriyas, the special dharma is that of strength. The wise and
the learned say that nobility is dharma. Therefore, strive for nobility and do not stop short of it. O Indra among
kings! You know the eternal dharma. Awake! You have been born to perform cruel deeds,216 those that other men
suffer from. The fruits that you obtain by nurturing your subjects can never be condemned. O king! This is the
eternal dharma that the preserver217 has determined for you. O Partha! If you deviate from this, you will provide
cause for laughter to the world. Men do not praise deviation from one’s own dharma. O Kounteya! Make your
mind that of a kshatriya. Forsake this lassitude of mind. Rely on valour. Bear the weight like a beast of burden. O
king! No one has won the world with only dharma in his soul. No king has won prosperity and fortune in this way.
One can obtain a kingdom by deceiving inferior ones, who have avarice in their hearts, with a sweet tongue, like
one with a spear218 obtains food. O bull among the Pandavas! The asuras were the elder brothers and were prosperous in every way.219 But the gods conquered them through deceit. O lord of the earth! O mighty-armed one!
Knowing that everything belongs to those with strength, win over the enemies by resorting to deceit. There is no
archer who is equal to Arjuna in battle. There is no man who is my equal in wielding the club. O king! A strong
one engages in battle on the basis of strength, not on the basis of greater numbers or greater enterprise. O Pandava!
Therefore, resort to your prowess. Prowess is the source of artha. Nothing else is the source. It is not useless, like
the shade of a tree during the winter. O Kounteya! If one desires greater artha, one should give up some artha, like
seeds sown on the ground. There is no doubt about this. But when the gain of artha is equal to the expenditure
made of artha, or smaller than it, expenditure is not the indicated task. That would be like scratching an ass. O Indra among men! In that way, a man who gives up a little bit of dharma for the sake of obtaining greater dharma is
certainly considered to be wise. If an enemy possesses friends, learned ones make them their friends. Then, when
the enemy is weakened because his friends have left him, they overcome him. O king! Those who are strong embark on a battle on the basis of prowess, not only enterprise or sweet words. That is how all the subjects are made
one’s own. By uniting together, weak ones can kill a stronger enemy, like bees kill someone trying to steal the
honey.
‘“O king! The sun sustains and destroys all beings with its rays. Be like the sun. O king! Just as it was observed
by our grandfathers, we have heard the ancient accounts about the observance of austerities, so as to protect the

earth in accordance with ordinances. On witnessing your afﬂiction, the world has decided that the sun may lose its
light and the moon its beauty. O king! Separately and collectively, when assemblies gather together in conversation, they praise you and censure the other.220 O king! Over and above this, when brahmanas and the Kurus assemble, they happily talk about your adherence to the truth. They say you have never uttered a falsehood because
of delusion, meanness, greed, fear, desire or wish for prosperity. If a king acquires demerits in an attempt to win
the earth, all of that can later be countered through sacriﬁces and offering of large quantities of dakshina. O king!
Just as the moon emerges from darkness, he is freed from all his sins by giving villages and thousands of cows to
brahmanas. O descendant of the Kuru lineage!221 O Yudhishthira! All the citizens and residents of the countryside, both young and old, often praise you. The kingdom vested in Duryodhana is like a dog’s skin touched by
milk, the brahman in a shudra, truth in a robber and strength in a woman. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
These are the words that have been uttered in the world since ancient times. Even women and children say it, as if
it was part of studying.
‘“Therefore, mount the chariot that is stocked with all the implements. Let the best of brahmanas pronounce
benedictions over you, so that your supreme objective is successful. Set out instantly, and today itself, for Gajasahrya.222 Surrounded by your brothers, who are skilled in the use of weapons and wield ﬁrm bows, and whose
valour is like that of venomous serpents, you will be like the killer of Vritra223 surrounded by the Maruts. Use
your energy to destroy the weak enemies, like the destroyer of the asuras. O Kounteya! O immensely strong one!
Rob the sons of Dhritarashtra of their prosperity. No man on earth can withstand the touch of arrows when they are
unleashed from Gandiva. Shafted in feathers of vultures, they are like virulent serpents. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! When I am enraged in battle, no warrior, no elephant and no noble steed can withstand the force
of my club. O Kounteya! With the help of the Srinjayas,224 the Kekayas and the bulls among the Vrishnis, how
can we not win back our kingdom in battle?”’
332(35)

‘Yudhishthira said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is no doubt that all this is true. Your sharp words
pierce me like barbs and weaken me. But I cannot blame you. My wrong course of action has brought this adversity and misery on us. I took up the dice with a desire to take away the sovereignty and kingdom of Dhritarashtra’s
son. It was thus that Subala’s son, the skilful and deceitful gambler, played with me for Suyodhana’s sake. O Bhimasena! Shakuni, the dweller of the mountains,225 is knowledgeable in great maya. He hurled out the dice in the
middle of the sabha. He used maya against me, who did not know any maya. It is then that I saw the deceit. I saw
that the dice would always follow the wishes of Shakuni and favour him in odds and evens.226 I was capable of
restraining my mind then, but anger robs a man of his patience. O son!227 The self cannot be controlled when it is
overcome by manliness, pride and valour. O Bhimasena! I do not take umbrage at what you have said. I think that
this was destined to be. O Bhimasena! The king who is Dhritarashtra’s son wished to rob us of our kingdom and
inﬂict misery on us. Slavery was inﬂicted on us and it was Droupadi who became our only refuge.
‘“Both you and Dhananjaya know what Dhritarashtra’s son told us when we were summoned to the sabha yet
again to gamble with dice. In front of all the Bharatas, he told us what one throw of the dice would entail. He said,
‘O prince! O Ajatashatru! Without being concealed, you will have to live in the forest of your choice for twelve
years. After that, you and your brothers will have to live for another year in concealment and without being detected. O father!228 O Partha! But when you are roaming thus, if the spies of the Bharatas hear of you or detect you,
you will again have to spend a similar period in that fashion. Knowing this, you must give your certain promise. O
king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If you are not found out during that period and manage to confound my
spies, I promise in this assembly of Kurus that you will have the ﬁve rivers back.229 If we are defeated by you, ‘all
my brothers and I’ will give up our comforts for a similar period and live accordingly.’ This is what the king said
earlier in the midst of the Kurus and I gave my promise. That abominable game of dice then began there. All of us
were defeated and exiled. We are thus roaming around in these regions, in these difﬁcult forests that are in the form
of a calamity. Even then, Suyodhana did not wish for peace. He fell prey to even greater rage. He encouraged all

the Kurus and all those who were under his control.230 Having entered into an agreement before righteous ones,
who would wish to break it for the sake of a kingdom? As an arya, I think that transgression of dharma is worse
than death, even for the sake of ruling the earth.
‘“You could have performed a brave deed then. You grasped your club at the time of the gamble. Had Phalguna
not restrained you, you would have burnt my arms. O Bhima! That would not have been a misdeed then. Since you
are aware of your manliness, why did you not speak up then and perform the deed at its appointed time. You have
found the time now, when it is too late. When the time has passed, what is the point of censuring me? O Bhimasena! But I suffered from misery even more, when I saw Yajnaseni oppressed and though we saw it, we restrained
ourselves. O Bhima! That was like drinking a poisonous juice. O brave one among the Bharata lineage! We cannot
do anything now. We made an agreement in the midst of the Kuru warriors. We must wait for the time, until our
happiness dawns again, like those who sow seeds wait for the fruit. If someone has been vanquished through deceit
earlier and knows that the enmity will bear ﬂowers and fruit, such a brave one truly lives in the world of the living
and obtains many qualities through his manliness. He obtains all the prosperity in this world. I think that his enemies bow down before him. His friends gather around and worship him, and live off him, like the gods off Indra.
Know that the promise I made will be true. I think dharma is superior to immortality and life. The kingdom, sons,
fame, wealth—all of these are worth only a small fragment231 of truth.”’
333(36)

‘Bhimasena said, “O great king! You have made an agreement with time, the arrow232 that brings an end to everything. It has no end, it is without measure and it is like a current that carries everything away. I think that it follows
the dharma of foam and the dharma of fruit. You are a mortal and you are tied down by time. How can you think
that time is directly before you? O Kounteya! Like collyrium becomes less every time it is picked with a blade of
grass,233 one’s life becomes less in an instant. Why should it234 wait? Only one whose life has no end or one who
knows the measure of one’s life can wait for time, since one can then see everything clearly. O king! If we wait for
time and for thirteen years, our lives will be shortened and we will be nearer death. The bodies of those who have
bodies are always overtaken by death. Therefore, we should work towards obtaining the kingdom before death.
One who should extend the earth,235 but does not avenge enmity, fails to achieve fame and remains incomplete,
like a useless cow. If a man does not avenge enmity because he has little strength and enterprise, I think that his
birth has been useless and that he has been born in an inferior lineage. O lord of the earth! Your arms will be laden
with gold, you will attain fame. Use the strength of your arms to kill those who hate you in battle and enjoy the
riches. O king! O destroyer of enemies! If a man goes to hell after killing a deceitful person, that instantly becomes
like heaven to him.
‘“The torment born from anger burns more than ﬁre. I am tormented by it and cannot sleep during the day or at
night. Partha Bibhatsu is foremost among those who draw the string of the bow. He is now supremely tormented
like a lion in its den. Like a giant elephant, he is suppressing the great heat that arises inside him, though unaided,
he can take on all the archers in the world. So as to please you, Nakula, Sahadeva and the aged mother236 who has
given birth to warriors are seated, benumbed and dumb. All our relatives, together with the Srinjayas, wish you
well. But I and Prativindhya’s mother237 are greatly tormented and speak to you, though what I am saying will be
agreeable to them too. All of them have attained great grief and all of them will welcome war. O king! No calamity
can be greater than this. Mean and weaker ones have stolen our kingdom and are now enjoying it. O scorcher of
enemies! You are bearing this misery so that your conduct is not tainted out of tenderness and gentleness. But no
one will praise you for this. Your gentleness is like that of a brahmana. How have you been born as a kshatriya?
Those who are born in that womb are usually cruel-minded. You have heard about the dharma of kings, as recounted by Manu. They are cruel, characterized by deceit and are against paciﬁcation. O tiger among men! There is
work to be done. Why are you behaving like a crippled one? You have intelligence, valour, knowledge and birth.
‘“O Kounteya! You wish to conceal us, like hiding the Himalaya Mountains in a handful of grass. You are famous throughout the earth. You will not be able to live secretly, undetected. O Partha! The sun cannot pass undetected in the sky. How can Jishnu remain unrecognized? He is like a giant shala tree, like a palasha tree with

branches and ﬂowers. He is like a white elephant. O Partha! How will these two young brothers who are like lions,
Nakula and Sahadeva, remain hidden? The princess Droupadi is the mother of brave ones and the performer of sacred deeds. O Partha! Krishna is famous. How will she remain unrecognized? O king! All the subjects know me,
even the children. I see myself as unrecognized as Mount Meru. Besides, we have exiled many kings and the sons
of kings from their kingdoms and they will now follow Dhritarashtra. Deprived and exiled by us, they will not
have paciﬁc feelings towards us. They will certainly try to injure us, so as to cause him pleasure. They will employ
many spies against us. There will be a great danger that they will detect us and inform against us. We have already
lived in this forest for thirteen months. Regard that as equal to that number of years. The learned ones have said
that a month can substitute for a year, like putika238 is a substitute for soma. Act accordingly. O king! You can
also free yourself from this single sin239 by satisfying with sacred food a bull that pulls a sacred burden. O king!
Therefore, make up your mind to kill your enemies. For kshatriyas, there is no dharma other than that of ﬁghting.”’
334(37)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing Bhimasena’s words, Kunti’s son Yudhishthira, a tiger among men and the
scorcher of enemies, sighed and reﬂected. Having reﬂected for an instant and having decided what he should do,
he immediately replied to Bhimasena, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O mighty-armed one! It is as you say.
O one who is wise with words! But also listen to the words that I have to say. O Bhimasena! O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Great sins that are begun only out of courage bring pain. O mighty-armed one! But an act that is
well advised, well powered, well executed and well planned is successful in its objective and is divinely auspicious. Out of your own strength and insolence and out of rashness, you have thought about a deed that needs to be
done. But listen to what I have to say about that. Bhurishrava, Shalya, the valorous Jarasandha, Bhishma, Drona,
Karna, Drona’s valorous son240 and Dhritarashtra’s invincible sons with Duryodhana at the forefront—all of them
have their weapons ready and are prepared to murder. The kings and the lords of the earth whom we suppressed
have resorted to the Kourava side and are affectionate towards them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They
now seek to do good to Duryodhana, not to us. Their treasury is full and they have a large army. They will make an
effort to protect these. All the Kourava armies, with their sons, advisers and soldiers, have been given riches and
honours everywhere. The warriors have been specially honoured by Duryodhana. It is my certain view that they
will give up their lives for him in battle. Though the conduct of Bhishma, the mighty-armed Drona and the greatsouled Kripa is equal,241 they will certainly be driven by the royal morsels.242 That is what I think. All of them
are knowledgeable in the use of divine weapons and all of them are devoted to dharma. Therefore, no matter how
precious, they will give up their lives in battle. My view is that they cannot be vanquished, even by the gods and
Vasava. Then there is maharatha Karna, intolerant and always angry. He is skilled in the knowledge of all weapons
and cannot be assailed, because he is covered with impenetrable armour. O Vrikodara! Without ﬁrst defeating in
battle all these foremost of men and without any allies, you cannot kill Duryodhana. I cannot go to sleep when I
think of the lightness of hand of the suta’s son.243 He is foremost among all those who handle the bow.” Bhimasena was intolerant. But having heard these words, he became pensive and alarmed at the truth of these words and
did not reply anything.
‘When the two Pandavas were thus conversing, Satyavati’s son, the great yogi Vyasa arrived. When he arrived,
he was duly worshipped by the Pandavas and the supreme among eloquent ones then spoke these words to Yudhishthira, “O Yudhishthira! O mighty-armed one! O bull among men! I have swiftly come here, because with my
insight I got to know what was passing through your heart. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O killer of enemies! I will dispel the fear that exists in your heart about Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna and Drona’s son. I will tell
you how they can be legitimately killed according to the rules. On hearing this, regain your composure and do
what needs to be done.” Then Parashara’s son244 spoke to Yudhishthira alone and that eloquent of speakers told
him words of grave import. “O supreme among those of the Bharata lineage! The time for you to regain your fortune will come. Partha Dhananjaya will overcome the enemies in battle. Accept from me this knowledge known as
pratismriti, as I recount it to you. It is success personiﬁed. On receiving it from you, the mighty-armed Arjuna will
be successful. O Pandava! For the sake of weapons, he must go to the great Indra, Rudra, Varuna, the lord of

riches245 and Dharmaraja.246 Because of his austerities and valour, he has the power to see the gods. He is an immensely energetic rishi. He is the ancient, eternal and everlasting god who is Narayana’s companion and a part of
Vishnu.247 When he has obtained weapons from Indra, Rudra and the Lokapalas,248 the mighty-armed one will
perform great deeds. O Kounteya! O lord of the earth! Think about leaving this forest and going to another forest
that is more appropriate for your residence. It is never very pleasant to live in the same place for a long time. This
can cause anxiety to the serene ascetics. Since you support many brahmanas who are learned in the Vedas and the
vedangas, the deer will be exhausted and the plants and herbs will decay.” Having thus spoken, the illustrious lord,
Satyavati’s intelligent son Vyasa who was learned in yoga, taught Dharmaraja, who had puriﬁed himself, that
supreme knowledge of yoga. He then took Kounteya’s leave and instantly disappeared.
‘Yudhishthira, the intelligent one with dharma in his soul, carefully nurtured that knowledge of the brahman in
his mind, repeating it from time to time. He was happy with Vyasa’s words. Leaving the forest of Dvaitavana, he
went to the forest of Kamyaka, on the banks of the Sarasvati. O great king! Just as the rishis follow Indra of the
gods, the brahmana ascetics, learned in words and sounds, followed him. On arriving in Kamyaka, the great-souled
bulls among the Bharatas began to live there, with their advisers and followers. O king! Those intelligent ones
lived there for some time. The warriors engaged themselves in the science of archery and listened to the supreme
Vedas. They went out on hunts every day, seeking to kill deer with pure arrows.249 In accordance with the rites,
they offered oblations to the ancestors, the gods and the brahmanas.’
335(38)

Vaishampayana said, ‘After some time, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira remembered the sage’s words. He spoke privately to Arjuna, bull among the Bharata lineage and whose wisdom was known. He smiled at him and gently took
him by the hand. After thinking for an instant about their abode in the forest, Dharmaraja, the destroyer of enemies, secretly spoke to Dhananjaya. O king! The intelligent one thought about it there and said, “O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! The four parts of dhanurveda250 are today established in Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and Drona’s
son.251 They know all types of brahma, divine and asura weapons, how to release them and how to counter them.
They know the use of all weapons and how to counter them. All of them have been paciﬁed by Dhirtarashtra’s son.
He has gratiﬁed them with gifts and treats them like preceptors. He always exhibits the best of conduct towards all
the warriors. Thus revered by him, they will not fail to show their power when the time comes. Today, the entire
earth is under Duryodhana’s suzerainty. You are our last refuge and a great burden is vested in you. O destroyer of
enemies! I see that the time has come for you to perform a task. O son!252 I obtained secret knowledge from
Krishna Dvaipayana. If you use it, the entire universe will become visible to you. O son! Having attentively received this brahman, when the time is right, you must seek the favour of the gods. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Devote yourself to terrible austerities. Armed with a bow, armour and sword, be like a revered sage. O son!
Without allowing anyone to pass you, traverse a path towards the northern direction. O Dhananjaya! Indra possesses all the divine weapons. Out of their fear from Vritra, the gods gave all their powers to Indra. They are all accumulated in one place. Go to Shakra and he will give all the weapons to you. Be consecrated and set out immediately for the god Purandara.”253 Having uttered these words, the lord Dharmaraja imparted the knowledge to him,
after he was consecrated according to the rites and controlled in speech, body and mind. The elder brother then
gave the warrior brother the permission to leave.
‘On Dharmaraja’s instructions that he should meet the god Purandara, he grasped the bow Gandiva and the great
inexhaustible quivers. He clad himself in armour, leather gloves, leather arm-guards and ﬁnger-guards. The
mighty-armed one offered oblations into the ﬁre and having received gold coins, the brahmanas pronounced their
blessings. Having grasped his bow and arrows, sighing and casting a glance upwards, the mighty-armed one then
left, for the sake of the destruction of Dhritarashtra’s sons. On seeing Kounteya grasp his bow and arrows, the
brahmanas, the siddhas and the invisible beings said, “O Kounteya! May you swiftly obtain the desire in your
heart.” Arjuna’s gait was like that of a lion and his thighs were like the trunks of shala trees. The hearts of everyone went with him and Krishna254 told him, “O mighty-armed Dhananjaya! O Kounteya! All that Kunti wished

for you at the time of your birth and all that you desire for yourself must come true. Let none of us ever be born in
the lineage of kshatriyas again. I always salute the brahmanas, who never have to make a living out of war. All
your brothers will spend their waking hours in repeatedly praising and recounting your valorous deeds. O Partha!
But if your sojourn proves to be a long one, we will ﬁnd no satisfaction in our minds in our comforts, riches and
even in our lives. O Partha! All our happiness and unhappiness is now established in you, our life and death, our
kingdom and our prosperity. O Kounteya! I take leave of you. O Pandava! May all be well with you. I bow down
before Dhata and Vidhata. May all be well along your path and may you be healthy. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! May you be safe from all beings in the sky, the earth and heaven and may all other beings not create obstructions in your path.” The mighty-armed Pandava then circumambulated his brothers and Dhoumya, and grasping his beautiful bow, departed.
‘All the beings left the path the lustrous and valorous one traversed, resorting to yoga so as to be united with Indra. The great-souled one reached the sacred mountain in just one day. Having resorted to yoga,255 he was as fast
as thought and like the wind. Having crossed the Himalayas and Gandhamadana and traversing unwearied over inaccessible terrain during night and day, Dhananjaya reached Indrakila256 and stopped there. He heard a voice
from the sky asking him to stop. Then Savyasachi saw an ascetic seated under a tree. He was thin and yellow and
his hair was matted. He blazed with the radiance of the brahman.
‘On seeing that he had stopped, the great ascetic spoke to Arjuna, “O son! Who are you? You have come here,
clad in armour and with bow and arrows. You have girded on a sword and have leather gloves. You are following
the dharma of kshatriyas. But there is no use for weapons here. This is a peaceful region populated by ascetic brahmanas who have controlled anger and delight. The bow has no use here, nor is there any ﬁghting. Therefore, throw
down your bow. You have reached your supreme objective.” Thus the brahmana repeatedly spoke to Arjuna, the
brave one of inﬁnite energy, as if he was an ordinary man. But so ﬁrm was he that he could not dislodge him from
his resolution. Then the brahmana was extremely pleased and smilingly told him, “O fortunate one! O destroyer of
enemies! I am Shakra. Choose a boon.” Having been thus addressed by the one with the thousand eyes,257
Dhananjaya, the brave extender of the Kuru lineage, joined his hands in salutation and bowed and replied, “O illustrious one! This is the object of my desire. Please grant it to me as a boon. I wish to obtain from you today the
knowledge of all weapons.” The great Indra was extremely pleased and smilingly replied, “O Dhananjaya! You
have attained this place. What use will weapons be to you? Ask for desires and worlds. You have attained the
supreme objective.” Having been thus addressed, Dhananjaya replied to the one with a thousand eyes, “I do not
wish for worlds, desires or divinity, not to speak of happiness. O lord of the thirty gods! I do not wish for lordship
over the gods. If I forsake my brothers in the wilderness and do not avenge the enmity, I will attain infamy in all
the worlds for an eternity.” Having been thus addressed, the slayer of Vritra, worshipped in all the worlds, told
Pandu’s son in consoling words, “O son! When you have seen the lord of all beings, the three-eyed Shiva who
wields the trident, I will then give you all the divine weapons. O Kounteya! Act so that you are able to see the
supreme god. When you have seen him, you will be successful and will go to heaven.” Having thus spoken to
Phalguna, Shakra disappeared. Resorting to yoga, Arjuna remained there.’
336(39)

Janamejaya said, ‘O illustrious one! I wish to hear in detail how Partha, the one whose deeds are unsullied, obtained the weapons. What did the long-armed Dhananjaya, tiger among men, do? O one who knows about the
brahman! What did he do while he lived there? How did he satisfy the illustrious Sthanu, lord of the gods? O
supreme among brahmanas! Through your grace, I wish to hear all this. You are omniscient. You know everything,
divine and human. O immensely wise one! The ancient battle between Arjuna, supreme among warriors and unvanquished in battle, and Bhava258 was unparalleled and extraordinary and made one’s hair stand up. On hearing
about it, the hearts of the brave Parthas,259 lions among men, also trembled in despondency, delight and great surprise. Tell me everything about Partha’s260 deeds. I do not see the slightest thing to censure in Jishnu. Recount to
me everything about the character of that brave one.’

Vaishampayana said, ‘O son! O tiger among the Kouravas! I will recount for you the divine, great and extraordinary story of that great-souled one. O unblemished one! Hear in detail the account of Partha’s meeting with
Tryambaka,261 god of the gods, where there was physical contact. On Yudhishthira’s instructions, the inﬁnitely
valorous one set out to see Shakra, lord of the gods, and Shankara,262 god of the gods. To ensure that his task met
with success, the immensely strong and mighty-armed Arjuna, bull among men, took his divine bow and sword.’
‘O king! With a steadfast mind, Kouravya, Indra’s son,263 maharatha in all the worlds, set out in a northward
direction for the peak of the Himalayas. His mind was ﬁxed on austerities. He swiftly entered a terrible forest that
was full of thorns. It was full of many ﬂowers and fruit and was populated by many birds. It was full of many types
of animals and was frequented by siddhas and charanas. When Kounteya entered the forest that was bereft of men,
the sounds of conch shells and drums could be heard from heaven. A great shower of ﬂowers fell down on the
ground. A net of clouds covered everything with shade. Passing through the forest that was difﬁcult of access, he
approached the great mountain. In all his splendour, Arjuna then lived on the peak of the Himalayas. He saw many
ﬂowering trees there, resounding with the sweet sounds of birds. There were rivers with many currents, tinged like
blue lapis lazuli,264 echoing with the sounds of swans and ducks, the cries of cranes and resounding with the notes
of male cuckoos, herons and peacocks. On seeing the beautiful woods and the pure, cool and clear water, the great
warrior Arjuna was delighted. The great-souled Arjuna then engaged in terrible austerities in a beautiful region of
that beautiful forest. He clad himself in darbha grass, bark and deerskin and carried a staff. In the ﬁrst month, he
ate fruits once every period of three nights was over. In the second month, it was for double the period.265 In the
third month, he ate once every fortnight, surviving on decayed leaves that fell down on the ground. When the
fourth moon arrived and the moon was full, the mighty-armed son266 of Pandu survived only on air. He raised his
arms up, and without anything for support, stood on the tips of his toes. Because of the frequent baths he took, the
matted hair of that great-souled one whose energy was inﬁnite, became as lustrous as lightning and the lotus.
‘Then all the maharshis went to Pinaki.267 They prostrated themselves before the immensely illustrious one
with the dark throat268 and sought his favours. They told him about Phalguna’s deeds, “This immensely energetic
Partha has established himself on the peak of the Himalayas. He is engaged in difﬁcult and terrible austerities and
smoke is emerging in all the directions. O lord of the gods! None of us knows what he wishes for. He is tormenting
us. It would be better if he were to be restrained.” Maheshvara replied, “In a happy frame of mind and without fatigue, swiftly return to wherever you have come from. I know the resolution that is ﬁxed in his mind. He does not
wish for heaven, or riches, or a long life. I will accomplish today everything that he wishes for.” Having heard
Sharva’s269 words, all the truthful rishis returned to their hermitages in happy frames of mind.’
337(40)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When all those great-souled ascetics had departed, the illustrious lord Hara,270 the destroyer
of all sins and the one with the pinaka in his hand, assumed the form of a kirata, blazing like a kanchana tree271
and resplendent in form, like Meru among the mountains. He grasped his handsome bow and many arrows that
were like venomous serpents. He descended with great force, like a ﬂame, like a ﬁre consuming the undergrowth.
The illustrious one was accompanied by the goddess Uma,272 attired in the same way and observing the same
vow. All the beings, in their different forms, were then greatly delighted. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In his form of a hunter, and accompanied by thousands of women, he blazed forth. In an instant, that entire
forest became silent. The sounds of streams and birds stopped.
‘As he approached Partha of the unblemished deeds, he saw the extraordinary sight of Muka, a son of Diti.273
He had assumed the form of a boar and the supremely evil one wished to kill Arjuna. Phalguna picked up his Gandiva bow and arrows that were like venomous serpents. He strung his supreme bow and as the twang of the bowstring resounded, he said, “I have come here, without causing you any injury. But since you nevertheless desire to
kill me, I will ﬁrst send you to Yama’s abode today.” On seeing the ﬁrm-bowed Phalguna about to shoot, Shankara
in the form of the hunter suddenly restrained him, “I was the one who sought this one with the colour of a blue

cloud274 ﬁrst.” However, disregarding these words, Phalguna struck. At that very instant, the hunter also unleashed his immensely radiant arrow at the same target, like the crest of a ﬁre or like lightning. The arrows shot by
those two simultaneously struck Muka’s gigantic body, which was as solid as a mountain. The two arrows struck
him like the force of lightning and the roar of thunder descended on a mountain. He was pierced by more arrows
that were like serpents with ﬂames in their mouths. Assuming the terrible form of a rakshasa, he then gave up his
life.
‘On seeing the man with the golden complexion, dressed in the garb of a hunter and accompanied by women,
Kounteya Jishnu, the destroyer of enemies, was delighted and smilingly told him, “O one with the golden complexion! Who are you, wandering in this deserted forest and accompanied by women? This animal had been chosen by me. Why did you pierce it? When the rakshasa had arrived here, I was the one who had picked him ﬁrst.
Whether you did this from desire or with the intention of insulting me, you will not escape with your life. What
you have done towards me today is not in accordance with the rules of hunting. O one whose refuge is the mountains! Therefore, I will kill you today.” At Pandava’s words, the hunter laughed at him and told Pandava
Savyasachi in soft words, “He became my target ﬁrst. I was the one who chose him ﬁrst. It was my shot that
robbed him of his life. Insolent about your own strength, do not blame others for your own faults. O evil-minded
one! You have insulted me. You will not escape with your life. Stay there. I will shoot arrows like thunder at you.
Do the best you can and unleash your arrows at me.” Thereupon, both of them repeatedly shouted at each other.
They shot arrows that were like venomous serpents at each other. Arjuna covered the hunter with a shower of arrows. But in a happy frame of mind, Shankara received them all. For an instant, the wielder of the pinaka received
that shower of arrows, but stood there like an immobile mountain, unhurt in body. On seeing that his shower of arrows had no effect, Dhananjaya was extremely surprised and exclaimed, “Excellent! Excellent! Aha! This one with
the delicate body makes a home on the peak of the Himalayas. But he receives the iron arrows275 unleashed from
the Gandiva and is not moved. Who is he? Is he a god? Is he Rudra himself? Is he a yaksha or the lord of the gods?
The thirty gods often frequent this best of mountains. Except the god Pinaki, there is no one who can withstand the
force of the net of thousands of arrows I have created. As long as it is anyone other than Rudra who stands here, be
it a god or a yaksha, I will send him to Yama’s abode with my sharp arrows.” O king! Like the sun spreads out its
rays, Jishnu then shot iron arrows by the hundreds, capable of piercing one’s weak spots. But the illustrious god,
the one who brings fortune to the worlds and holds the trident in his hand, cheerfully received them, like a mountain withstands a shower of rocks. In a short while, all of Phalguna’s arrows were exhausted.
‘On seeing that all his arrows were exhausted, he began to tremble. Jishnu thought of the illustrious ﬁre-god,
who had earlier given him two inexhaustible quivers in Khandava. “What will I unleash from my bow now? My
arrows have been exhausted. Who is this man who swallows up all my arrows? I will kill him with the curved end
of my bow, like a terrible spear is used on elephants. Yama wields the staff and I will send him to his abode.”
Kounteya, the destroyer of enemies, then grasped him with the curved end of his bow. But the mountain-dweller
snatched away his divine bow. Bereft of his bow, Arjuna stood there, with a sword in his hand. Wishing to end the
ﬁght, he dashed at him with great force. With all the valour in his arms, the courageous descendant of the Kuru lineage276 struck at his head with the sharp sword, one that even mountains could not resist. However, on striking his
head, it shattered into pieces. Then Phalguna began to ﬁght with trees and rocks. But the gigantic and illustrious
god who was in the form of a hunter withstood the trees and the rocks. Smoke billowed from the immensely strong
Partha’s mouth. He struck that invincible one, who was in the form of a hunter, with ﬁsts that had the force of the
vajra. However, the illustrious one who was in the form of a hunter struck Phalguna with terrible ﬁsts that were
like Shakra’s thunder. As a result of this ﬁght with ﬁsts between Pandava and the hunter, the terrible sound of slapping arose there. That great and hair-raising battle with the ﬁsts went on for some time, like that ancient battle between Vritra and Vasava. The powerful Jishnu grasped the kirata and pressed his chest and the kirata struck Pandava with great force. As a result of the pressure of their arms and the pressing of their chests, a ﬁre with smoke and
embers emerged from their bodies. Then Mahadeva grasped his277 body ﬁrmly and attacked him with energy and
force, so that he was deluded of his senses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus oppressed by the god of the

gods, Phalguna’s body was bruised and became like a ball of ﬂesh. He lost control over his body. Oppressed by the
great-souled one, his breathing stopped. He fell down unconscious and Bhava was pleased.
‘The illustrious god said, “O Phalguna! I am pleased with you because of your matchless deeds. There is no
kshatriya who is equal to you in valour and endurance. O unblemished one! Your energy and valour has been equal
to mine today. O mighty-armed one! O bull among men! I am pleased with you. Behold me. O large-eyed one! I
will give you eyes.278 You have been a rishi earlier. You will triumph over all your enemies in battle, even if they
happen to be dwellers of heaven.” At that, Phalguna saw that immensely radiant god, the god Mahadeva
Girisha,279 who wields the trident, and the goddess.280 He knelt down on the ground and bowed down his head in
homage. Partha, the conqueror of the cities of enemies, gratiﬁed Hara.281 Arjuna said, “O Kapardin!282 O lord of
all the beings! O destroyer of Bhaga’s eyes!283 O illustrious god! O Shankara! Pardon my transgression. O illustrious one! It was in a desire to see you that I came to this great mountain, beloved by you, lord of the gods, and
the supreme abode of the ascetics. O illustrious god, worshipped by all the beings! Be pleased. O Mahadeva! Pardon my crime and my extreme bravery. Out of ignorance and insolence, I fought with you. O Shankara! I seek
refuge with you. Pardon me.” Then the immensely energetic Vrishabhadhvaja284 smiled, and grasping Phalguna’s
beautiful hands, said, “I have pardoned you.”’
338(41)

‘The illustrious god said, “You were Nara in an earlier body, the companion of Narayana. You spent many
ayuta285 years in fearful austerities in Badari.286 There is supreme energy in you, like that in Vishnu, supreme
among men. The universe is held up through the energy of the two of you, foremost among men. O lord! At the
time of Shakra’s consecration, you and Krishna oppressed the danavas and you took up the great bow that thunders
like clouds. O Partha! This Gandiva is ﬁt for your hands. O supreme among men! It was that which I snatched
from you, using my powers of maya. O Partha! These two quivers will again be inexhaustible, as they used to be
for you. O Partha! I am pleased with you. Truth is your valour. O bull among men! Accept a boon from me. What
is it that you desire? You are the one who shows respect. There is no one on earth who is your equal. Nor is there
anyone in heaven. O conqueror of enemies! The kshatriyas ﬁnd their chief in you.”
‘Arjuna replied, “O illustrious god! O Vrishadhvaja!287 O lord! If you wish to grant me that which I desire, I
wish for the terrible and divine weapon known as pashupata.288 It is known as brahmashira. It is fearful and is
terrible in prowess. When the terrible end of a yuga approaches, it destroys the entire world. Through this weapon,
I can burn down in battle danavas, rakshasas, spirits,289 pishachas, gandharvas and pannagas.290 When unleashed
with mantras, it releases thousands of spears, fearful clubs and arrows that have virulent poison in them. With it, I
will ﬁght in battle Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and the son of the suta,291 who always speaks very harshly. O illustrious god! O destroyer of Bhaga’s eyes! This is my ﬁrst wish. Through your grace, let me be empowered in my
pursuit.”
‘The illustrious god said, “O Pandava! I will give you the great pashupata weapon, dear to me. You will be capable of bearing, releasing and withdrawing it. The great Indra, Yama, the king of the yakshas,292 Varuna and Vayu
do not know it. How can it be known to humans? O Partha! But it must not be suddenly released at any man. If it is
released at someone who lacks in energy, it will destroy the entire universe. There is no one in the three worlds,
mobile or immobile, who cannot be killed by it. It can be released through thought, eyes, words or the bow.”’293
Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing this, Partha swiftly puriﬁed and composed himself. He went to the lord of the
universe, who said, “Learn.” Then he taught the best of the Pandavas the mysteries of this weapon, including its
withdrawal. It was like the embodied form of death. From then on, it waited on the great-souled one,294 as it did
on Tryaksha,295 the husband of Uma. Arjuna accepted it with a delighted heart. At that, the entire earth, with its
mountains, forests, trees, oceans, regions of groves, villages, cities and towns, began to tremble. When the moment
came, the sounds of thousands of conch shells, drums and kettledrums were heard. A great whirlwind296 occurred.
The gods and the demons saw the embodied form of the blazing and terrible weapon by the side of the immensely

energetic Pandava. Tryambaka297 touched the immensely energetic Phalguna and everything that was impure in
his body, was immediately destroyed. Then Tryambaka gave Arjuna permission to leave and go to heaven. Lowering his head in obeisance, Partha joined his hands in salutation and looked at the god. Then, the lord of the residents of heaven, the immensely wise Girisha, Shiva the husband of Uma, gave that supreme of men the great bow
known as Gandiva, the destroyer of demons and pishachas. In front of the eyes of that supreme of men,298 the
great god then rose up into the sky, accompanied by Uma, leaving that supreme of mountains, with its white peaks,
sides and caverns and frequented by birds and maharshis.’
339(42)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Like a setting sun before the eyes of the worlds, Pinaki Vrishabhadhvaja disappeared before
his eyes. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Arjuna, the slayer of enemy warriors, was extremely astounded. He
said, “I have seen the great Mahadeva in person. I am blessed and greatly favoured. For I have seen Tryambaka
Hara Pinaki, the granter of boons, in person and have touched him with my hands. I know that I have accomplished my objective. I have already defeated my enemies in battle. All my objectives have been attained.” Then,
lighting up all the directions, the handsome lord of the waters299 arrived. His complexion was like that of lapis
lazuli300 and he was surrounded by aquatic creatures, nagas, male and female rivers, daityas, sadhyas301 and
gods.302 Varuna, the self-controlled lord of all aquatic creatures, arrived in that region. Followed by yakshas, the
lord Kubera also arrived. His complexion was like that of gold and he arrived in a splendid chariot. The illustrious
lord of riches, extraordinary in form, came to see Arjuna, illuminating the sky. In similar fashion, the illustrious
Yama, the powerful destroyer of the worlds and the one who makes the worlds prosper, also came in person. He
was accompanied by the ancestors, embodied and disembodied. The destroyer of all beings, whose soul cannot be
fathomed, came with a staff in his hand.303 Dharmaraja, the son of Vivasvat,304 arrived in a chariot that brightened up the three worlds, with guhyakas, gandharvas and pannagas. He was like a second sun when the end of the
yuga has arrived. From that resplendent and multi-hued peak of that great mountain, they saw Arjuna there, engaged in austerities. In a short while, the illustrious god Shakra arrived. He was accompanied by Indrani305 and
was surrounded by masses of gods. He was seated on Airavata’s306 head. The white umbrella that was held aloft
his head shone like the lord of the stars307 amidst white clouds. He was praised by gandharvas, rishis and those
blessed with the power of austerities and having reached the peak of the mountain, he stood there like a rising sun.
‘Yama, supremely knowledgeable in dharma, was established in the southern direction. That intelligent one then
spoke these pure words, in a voice like the roar of clouds. “O Arjuna! Behold. All the protectors of the worlds have
assembled here. We will give you sight, because you deserve to see us. In the past, you were an immensely strong
rishi named Nara. O son! Instructed by Brahma, you have been born on earth. You have been born from Vasava,
who is immensely valorous and powerful. O descendant of the Kuru lineage!308 You will pacify kshatriyas who
are like ﬁre to the touch and are protected by Bharadvaja,309 immensely valorous danavas who have been born as
men and the nivatakavachas.310 The greatly valorous Karna is a part of my father, the sun-god, who heats all the
worlds.311 O Dhananjaya! He will be slain by you. You will kill in battle those parts of the gods, danavas and rakshasas that have been born on earth. O Kounteya! O dragger of enemies! They will then obtain their ends, as determined by the fruits of their own deeds. O Phalguna! Your fame will remain eternal in the world. You have pleased
Mahadeva himself in a great battle. Along with Vishnu,312 you will lighten the burden of the earth. O mightyarmed one! Accept the staff,313 my weapon that cannot be repulsed. With this weapon, you will accomplish great
deeds.” Partha, the descendant of the Kuru lineage,314 accepted it in accordance with the prescribed rites, with the
mantras for holding, releasing and withdrawing.
‘Varuna, the lord of aquatic creatures, was established in a western direction. His complexion was as dark as that
of a cloud. The lord then uttered these words, “O Partha! You are foremost among the kshatriyas and you are established in the dharma of kshatriyas. Behold me with your large and copper-red eyes. I am Varuna, lord of the wa-

ters. When discharged by me, Varuna’s noose315 cannot be resisted. O Kounteya! I am giving it to you. Accept it,
together with the mysteries and means of withdrawal. O brave one! At the time of the tarakamaya battle,316 I used
it to restrain thousands of great-souled daityas. O great-souled one! Accept it as a sign of my favour. Even Death
will not be able to escape, if you assault him with this. When you are armed with this weapon and roam in the ﬁeld
of battle, there is no doubt that the earth will be bereft of all kshatriyas.” After Varuna and Yama had given their
divine weapons, the lord of riches, who lives on the peak of Kailasa, spoke.
‘He said, “O mighty-armed one! O Savyasachi! Earlier, you were an eternal god. In an earlier era, your endeavours were always at our side. Accept this favourite weapon of mine, known as antardhana.317 It is energetic, vigorous and resplendent. O destroyer of enemies! It can put the enemy to sleep.”318 Then the mighty-armed Arjuna,
descendant of the Kuru lineage,319 accepted Kubera’s divine weapon in accordance with the rites.
‘The king of the gods now spoke to Partha, the performer of unsullied deeds. He paciﬁed him in gentle words, in
a voice that was like a cloud or a kettledrum, “O mighty-armed one! O one with Kunti as your mother! You are the
ancient Ishana.320 You have already obtained supreme salvation earlier and have personally gone the way of the
gods. O conqueror of enemies! You must now accomplish a great task for the sake of the gods. You will now ascend to heaven. O immensely radiant one! Prepare yourself. My chariot will descend to earth for you, driven by
Matali.321 O Kourava! I will give you divine weapons there.” Having seen the lords of the worlds assembled on
the peak of that mountain, intelligent Dhananjaya, Kunti’s son, was astounded. Then the immensely energetic Arjuna paid homage to the assembled lords of the worlds in accordance with the rites, with words, water and fruit.
The gods honoured Dhananjaya in return. All of them then returned as they had come, capable of going wherever
they wished, with the speed of thought. Having obtained the weapons, Arjuna, bull among men, was delighted. He
considered that his wishes had been satisﬁed and that his desires had been completely satisﬁed.’

Section Thirty-Two
Indralokabhigamana Parva
This section has 1175 shlokas and thirty-seven chapters.
Chapter 340(43): 38 shlokas
Chapter 341(44): 32 shlokas
Chapter 342(45): 38 shlokas
Chapter 343(46): 41 shlokas
Chapter 344(47): 12 shlokas
Chapter 345(48): 41 shlokas
Chapter 346(49): 43 shlokas
Chapter 347(50): 31 shlokas
Chapter 348(51): 29 shlokas
Chapter 349(52): 24 shlokas
Chapter 350(53): 21 shlokas
Chapter 351(54): 38 shlokas
Chapter 352(55): 13 shlokas
Chapter 353(56): 18 shlokas
Chapter 354(57): 23 shlokas
Chapter 355(58): 34 shlokas
Chapter 356(59): 25 shlokas
Chapter 357(60): 38 shlokas
Chapter 358(61): 125 shlokas
Chapter 359(62): 43 shlokas
Chapter 360(63): 24 shlokas
Chapter 361(64): 19 shlokas
Chapter 362(65): 37 shlokas
Chapter 363(66): 26 shlokas
Chapter 364(67): 22 shlokas
Chapter 365(68): 24 shlokas
Chapter 366(69): 34 shlokas
Chapter 367(70): 39 shlokas
Chapter 368(71): 34 shlokas
Chapter 369(72): 30 shlokas
Chapter 370(73): 28 shlokas
Chapter 371(74): 24 shlokas
Chapter 372(75): 27 shlokas
Chapter 373(76): 19 shlokas
Chapter 374(77): 29 shlokas
Chapter 375(78): 23 shlokas
Chapter 376(79): 29 shlokas
Indraloka means Indra’s world and abhigamana means to go or visit. So this section is about the visit to Indra’s world, meaning Arjuna’s visit to
Indra’s world.
340(43)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O Indra among kings! After the lords of the worlds had left, Partha, the destroyer of enemies, thought about the chariot of the king of the gods. As the intelligent Gudakesha was thinking, the immensely
resplendent chariot, driven by Matali, arrived. It removed the darkness from the sky and split the clouds. It ﬁlled
the directions with a roar like that of giant clouds. It was stocked with swords, terrible spears, fearful-looking

clubs, lances with divine power, giant ﬂashes of lightning, vajras, hudagudas with wheels,1 implements that created gusts of wind and sounded like peacocks and large clouds, and fearful nagas that were giant in form and tall as
white clouds and hard as rocks. The divine chariot, beautiful to the eye and full of maya, was drawn by ten thousand tawny horses that had the speed of the wind. He2 saw there the immensely radiant and extremely blue ﬂag
known as Vaijayanta, as dark as a blue lotus3 and with a staff that was ornamented with gold. He saw the charioteer seated on the chariot, adorned in molten gold. On seeing him, the mighty-armed Partha took him to be a god.
‘While Phalguna was thus debating, Matali approached and bowing low, addressed Arjuna in these words, “O
Shakra’s son!4 The illustrious Shakra desires to see you. Swiftly ascend this chariot that has been sent by Indra.
Your father Shatakratu, foremost among the gods, has told me, ‘The thirty gods must see Kunti’s son here in their
abode.’ Surrounded by the gods and masses of rishis and gandharvas and apsaras, Shakra himself is anxiously
waiting to see you. On the instructions of the chastiser of Paka, ascend with me from this world to the world of the
gods. Once you have obtained the weapons, you will return.” Arjuna replied, “O Matali! Let us go swiftly. Ascend
this supreme chariot that is difﬁcult to obtain, even through a hundred rajasuya and ashvamedha sacriﬁces. Even
immensely fortunate kings, who have performed sacriﬁces and given a lot of dakshina, or daivatas5 or danavas,
cannot ascend this supreme chariot. He who has not performed austerities cannot see this great and divine chariot,
or touch it. How can one ride it? O virtuous one! Once you have established yourself in the chariot and the horses
have been steadied, I will ascend it thereafter, like a performer of good deeds along the righteous path.” Having
heard these words, Matali, Shakra’s charioteer, swiftly ascended the chariot and controlled the horses with the
reins. After that, Arjuna puriﬁed himself by bathing in the Ganga. Then Kounteya, descendant of the Kuru
lineage,6 happily recited his prayers, in accordance with the rites. In accordance with the rites, he offered oblations
to the ancestors. Then he bid farewell to Mandara, king of the mountains. “O mountain! You are always the refuge
of righteous ones, those whose conduct follows dharma, the sages whose deeds are holy and those who desire to
traverse the road to heaven. O mountain! Through your favours, Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas attain heaven and devoid of afﬂictions, roam with the gods. O king of the mountains! O great mountain! You are the refuge of
sages and have places of pilgrimage. I have lived happily on you. But I must now leave, bidding you farewell. My
eyes have seen many of your peaks, groves, rivers, springs and sacred places of pilgrimage.” With these words,
Arjuna, the destroyer of enemy warriors, bid farewell to the mountain. He then ascended the divine chariot, blazing
like the sun. It resembled the sun in its form. It was divine and the performer of extraordinary deeds. In a delighted
frame of mind, the intelligent descendant of the Kuru lineage7 ascended upwards.
‘His path became invisible to mortal ones who roam on earth. He saw thousands of chariots that were extraordinary in form.8 There was no sun there, nor the moon, nor light, nor the ﬁre. Everything shone there with the
radiance of purity. Those are the brilliant regions that are seen in the forms of stars.9 Though they are very large,
because of the distance, they appear like lamps. Pandava saw them, full of radiance and beauty, resplendent in their
own ﬁres and established in their own abodes. There were rajarshis, siddhas, warriors slain on the ﬁeld of battle,
those who had obtained heaven through their austerities and had gathered in groups of hundreds, thousands of
gandharvas with an energy like that of the radiant sun, guhyakas, rishis and masses of apsaras. On beholding those
regions, with their own luminosity, Phalguna was astounded.
‘In a friendly tone, he asked Matali and Matali replied, “O Partha! These are the performers of good deeds. They
are established in their own abodes. O lord! From the earth, you have seen them in the form of stars.” Then he saw,
standing at the gate, the white elephant that is always victorious. This was the four-tusked Airavata, like Mount
Kailasa. Travelling along the road traversed by the siddhas, the supreme one of the Kuru and Pandava lineages,
shone, like the supreme king Mandhata in earlier times.10 The lotus-eyed one passed through worlds earmarked
for kings and then set his eyes on Amaravati, Shakra’s city.’
341(44)

Vaishampayana said, ‘He saw the beautiful city, frequented by siddhas and charanas. It was full of sacred trees that
ﬂower in every season. A fragrant breeze, mixed with the perfumes of sacred trees, intermingled with the sacred-

scented breeze and fanned him. He saw the divine grove of Nandana,11 frequented by masses of apsaras, and the
celestial blossoming trees there welcomed him. This world of sacred deeds cannot be seen by those who have not
burnt themselves with austerities, or those who do not maintain ﬁres,12 or those who have refrained from battle, or
those who do not perform sacriﬁces and follow falsehood, or those who have abandoned the sacred learning of the
Vedas, or those who have not bathed in the sacred waters of tirthas, or those who have been outside13 donating
gifts at sacriﬁces. The evil-minded ones who disrupt sacriﬁces, are mean, are addicted to drinking, violate their
preceptor’s bed,14 or eat meat, can never see it. Having seen the divine grove, resounding with celestial songs, the
mighty-armed one entered Shakra’s beloved city. He saw thousands of divine vimanas that were capable of going
anywhere at will. They were stationed and he saw tens of thousands15 of them moving around. Pandava was
praised by gandharvas and apsaras and he was fanned by sacred winds, redolent with the scent of ﬂowers. The
gods, gandharvas, siddhas and supreme rishis happily welcomed Partha, whose deeds were untiring. He was
blessed and praised, accompanied by the sound of divine instruments. The mighty-armed one advanced along the
starry path famous as suravithi,16 accompanied by the sound of conch-shells and drums. On Indra’s command,
Partha travelled along it and was praised in every direction. The Sadhya, Vishvas,17 Maruts, Ashvins, Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, unblemished brahmarshis, many rajarshis, the kings led by Dilipa,18 Tumburu,19 Narada and the
gandharvas Haha and Huhu20 were there. The descendant of the Kuru lineage21 showed homage to all of them in
the appropriate manner.
‘Then the mighty-armed Partha descended from the supreme chariot and saw in person his father Shatakratu, the
god Indra, the destroyer of enemies and the chastiser of Paka, the king of the gods. A beautiful white umbrella with
a golden staff was held above his head. A divinely-scented fan was whisked. He was praised by Vishvavasu and
the other gandharvas and foremost brahmanas chanted from the Rig, Yajur and Sama Vedas. Approaching near, the
mighty Kounteya lowered his head and Shakra also embraced him with his round arms. He grasped him by the
hand and made him sit on Shakra’s sacred throne, worshipped by the gods and the devarshis. When he was bowed
in obeisance, Indra of the gods, the slayer of enemy warriors, smelt his forehead and made him sit on his lap. At
the command of the god with the thousand eyes,22 Partha, whose soul was immeasurable, sat on Shakra’s throne
and appeared like a second Vasava.23 Vritra’s enemy24 affectionately touched Arjuna’s handsome face with his
sacred and fragrant hands and paciﬁed him. He gently caressed his long arms, hardened by the string of the bow
and as handsome as golden columns. The destroyer of Bala25 repeatedly caressed his arms with hands that were
marked from holding the vajra. The one with a thousand eyes kept looking at Gudakesha with a smile. The eyes of
Vritra’s destroyer dilated with delight and were not satisﬁed. Seated on the same seat, they made the assembly hall
shine, like the sun and the moon rising in the sky on chaturdashi.26
‘Headed by Tumburu, gandharvas, skilled in songs and chants, sang and chanted there and engaged in supreme
dancing. Ghritachi, Menaka, Rambha, Purvachitti, Svayamprabha, Urvashi, Mishrakeshi, Dundu, Gouri, Varuthini,
Gopali, Sahajanya, Kumbhayoni, Prajagara, Chitrasena, Chitralekha, Saha, Madhurasvara—these and other beautiful lotus-eyed ones danced there. They were engaged in captivating the minds of the siddhas. The sides of their
hips were wide and their breasts bounced. They stole the mind and the intelligence with their side-long glances,
gestures27 and sweetness.’
342(45)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Then knowing Shakra’s mind, the gods and the gandharvas welcomed Partha with a supreme
arghya. They offered the king’s son28 padya29 and achamaniya30 and guided him to the entrance to Purandara’s
abode. Having been shown such homage, Jishnu lived in his father’s house. Pandava learned about all the great
weapons and the means of withdrawing them. From Shakra’s hands, he received his beloved vajra weapon, impossible to withstand. This made a great roar and was like lightning, marked by the signs of clouds and peacocks.31
On receiving the weapon, Pandava Kounteya thought of his brothers. But on Purandara’s instructions, he lived

there happily for ﬁve years. When Partha became skilled in the use of all weapons and the right time had come,
Shakra told him, “O Kounteya! Now learn singing and dancing from Chitrasena. Learn the music that is only
known to the gods and is unknown in the world of men. O Kounteya! If you learn this, it will bring your own welfare.” Purandara then gave him to Chitrasena as a friend. Partha lived happily with him, free from all disease.32
‘One day, while travelling around, maharshi Lomasha went to Shakra’s abode, with a desire to see Purandara.
The great sage met and bowed in obeisance before the king of the gods. He saw Pandava seated on half of Vasava’s throne. Having obtained Shakra’s permission, the best of brahmanas, worshipped by all the maharshis, sat
down on an excellent seat.33 On seeing Partha seated on Indra’s throne, the thought occurred to him.34 How could
a kshatriya like Partha attain Shakra’s seat? What were his good deeds? What worlds had he won? How had he obtained a place worshipped by the gods? Shakra, the slayer of Vritra, divined his thoughts.
‘Shachi’s consort smilingly told Lomasha, “O brahmarshi! Hear about the thought that is passing through your
mind. Though he has been born as a kshatriya, this one is not a mere mortal. O Maharshi! This mighty-armed one
is my son, born from Kunti. He has come here for a speciﬁc reason, to obtain weapons. You have not recognized
him as that ancient and supreme rishi. O brahmana! Listen to me. I will tell you who he is and his purpose. Know
that those two supreme and ancient rishis, Nara and Narayana, are none other than Dhananjaya and Hrishikesha. O
brahmana! The sacred and famous hermitage named Badari,35 which cannot be seen even by the gods and the
great-souled rishis, was the place where Vishnu and Jishnu dwelt. Served by the siddhas and the charanas, that is
the place from where the Ganga arises. O brahmarshi! On my instructions, these two immensely radiant ones have
been born on earth. These two immensely valorous ones will remove the earth’s burden. There are the asuras
known as the Nivatakavachas. Deluded by the boon they have obtained, they are engaged in causing us injury. Insolent because of their strength, they are now talking about killing the gods. Having been granted the boon, they do
not show regard for the gods. Those terrible and immensely strong sons of Danu live in the nether regions. All the
armies of the gods together are incapable of ﬁghting with them. O supreme among brahmanas! Vishnu, the illustrious slayer of Madhu, the unvanquished god Hari, whose illustrious divine part lived on earth as Kapila and with an
instant glance destroyed the great-souled sons of Sagara36 who were digging towards rasatala, is alone capable of
this great task that has to be accomplished for our sake. There is no doubt that he, together with Partha, will undertake this great battle. This one37 is equal to all of them. Having killed them in battle, the warrior will again return
to the world of men. On my instructions, you should yourself return to earth. You will see the brave Yudhishthira
dwelling in Kamyaka. He has dharma in his soul and is always devoted to truth. Convey my words and message to
him. He should not be anxious on account of Phalguna. ‘He will soon return, after accomplishing the task of obtaining weapons. Without the sacred valour of his arms and without having obtained the weapons, he will not be
able to withstand Bhishma, Drona and the others in battle. The mighty-armed and great-souled Gudakesha has obtained the weapons. He has become skilled in divine dancing, music and singing. O lord of men! O destroyer of
enemies! You yourself, with all your brothers, should see all the venerated places of pilgrimage. O Indra among
kings! Having bathed at these sacred places of pilgrimage, you will be cleansed of sin and overcome your fever.38
Bereft of sin, you will enjoy the kingdom.’39 O best of brahmanas! O foremost among brahmanas! You have the
power of austerities. You should protect him as he travels the earth. Terrible rakshasas always live in the passes of
mountains and in uneven regions. Always protect him from them.” Lomasha, great in austerities, promised accordingly. He then left for earth, towards Kamyaka forest. He met there Kounteya Dharmaraja, the destroyer of enemies, surrounded everywhere by ascetics and his brothers.’
343(46)

Janamejaya asked, ‘O brahmana! What did the immensely energetic Dhritarashtra say when he heard of the extraordinary deeds of the inﬁnitely energetic Partha?’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having heard from Dvaipayana, best of rishis, that Partha had gone to Shakra’s world, the
king who was Ambika’s son40 spoke these words to Sanjaya, “O charioteer! O suta! By any chance, do you know
of the deeds of the intelligent Partha? Tell me everything in detail. My son is mad and follows the dharma of the

vulgar.41 He is evil in his soul and ﬁxed on sin. That one of wicked intelligence will destroy the earth. The words
of the great-souled one42 are always true, even in jest. He has Dhananjaya as his warrior and will win the three
worlds. When Arjuna shoots his barbed iron arrows, pointed at the tips and sharpened on stone, is there anyone
who has conquered death and old age so as to withstand him? All my evil-souled sons are under the sway of death.
A ﬁght with the invincible Pandava confronts them. I think about this all the time. Yet I do not see a charioteer
who can withstand Gandivadhanva in battle, even if Drona or Karna advance against him in battle, or Bhishma
himself. There is no doubt a great calamity confronts the world. But I do not see our victory. Karna is
contemptible43 and negligent. The preceptor is old and also his teacher.44 Partha is wrathful, driven by vengeance
and powerful, steady in valour. Since all these are incapable of being vanquished, a terrible battle will occur. All
these warriors are skilled in the use of weapons and all of them will attain great fame. None of them will wish for
the lordship of everything if that were to be obtained through defeat. Therefore, there will be certain peace only
when they have been killed, or when Phalguna is. But no one exists who can kill Arjuna, or even vanquish him.
How will his wrath towards the evil ones be paciﬁed? That warrior is the equal of the thirty gods and gratiﬁed
Agni in Khandava. He conquered all the lords of the earth at the great rajasuya sacriﬁce. O Sanjaya! O son!45
When a bolt of thunder strikes the peak of a mountain, it leaves some remnants. But the arrows shot by Kiriti leave
no remnant. Like the arrows of the sun scorch everything that is mobile and immobile, the arrows shot by Partha’s
arms will scorch my sons. It seems as if the armies of the Bharatas have already been scattered, frightened at the
roar of Savyasachi’s chariot. Kiriti stands like an assassin in battle, unleashing showers of arrows. The creator has
created him like the destroyer of everything. But that which is bound to happen cannot be avoided.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! What you have said about Duryodhana is exactly as you have stated it. O lord of the
earth! Nothing that you have said is untrue. On seeking the famous Krishna, their wife according to dharma,
brought into the assembly hall, the inﬁnitely energetic Pandavas have been ﬁlled with wrath. O great king! On
hearing Duhshasana’s words that have terrible consequences, and those of Karna, I think that they have not been
able to sleep. O great king! I have heard how Partha has used his bow in battle to satisfy Sthanu, who has eleven
forms.46 Kapardin, the illustrious lord of all the gods, himself fought with Phalguna in the disguise of a hunter, so
as to test him. It was then that the lords of the world showed themselves to Arjuna, the valorous bull among the
Kouravas, who performed austerities for the sake of weapons. There is no other man on earth, except Phalguna,
who can dare to see those gods in their direct forms. O king! What man can wear out in battle a warrior whom Maheshvara could not wear out in the form that he had assumed? Having oppressed Droupadi and angered the Pandavas, they have brought this terrible and hair-raising calamity on themselves. On seeing Duryodhana display his
thighs to Droupadi, Bhima’s lips trembled and he spoke these mighty words, ‘O evil one! O one who cheats with
dice! After thirteen years have elapsed, I will smash your thighs with my club, which is like the vajra.’ All of them
are supreme among warriors. All of them have inﬁnite energy. All of them are skilled in every weapon. All of them
are invincible, even to the gods. The Parthas are full of valour and vengeance. Because of their wrath, I think that
they will kill your sons in battle.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “O suta! What has Karna achieved by uttering those harsh words? It was extreme enmity
that brought Krishna to the assembly hall thus. How can my sons be other than evil-minded when their eldest
brother and superior47 is not established in propriety? O suta! On seeing that I lack eyes, that bringer of misfortune thinks I lack enterprise and intelligence, and does not pay heed to my words. And those evil advisers, Karna,
Soubala and the others, are bereft of intelligence and extend his many vices. Even if the inﬁnitely energetic Partha
shoots arrows playfully, they will scorch my sons, not to speak of when they are shot in wrath. Unleashed from the
great bow with the strength of Partha’s arms and energized with celestial mantras, they can strike down even the
gods. What can one who has Hari Janardana, the protector of the three worlds, as his adviser, protector and wellwisher, not conquer? O Sanjaya! This is a great wonder that has been heard, that Arjuna clasped Mahadeva with
his arms. All the worlds witnessed what had been done in Khandava earlier. With Damodara,48 Phalguna aided the
ﬁre. When Partha, Bhima, Vasudeva and the Satvatas49 are angered, nothing will be left of my sons, with their advisers and their relatives.”’

344(47)

Janamejaya said, ‘O sage! After having sent the brave Pandavas into exile, all these lamentations of King Dhritarashtra served no purpose. Why did the king agree with his son Duryodhana, whose intelligence is limited, and
anger Pandu’s sons, the maharathas? What did Pandu’s sons eat when they lived in the forest? Tell me whether it
was collected from the forest or cultivated.’
Vaishampayana replied, ‘Those bulls among men ate what was obtained from the forest and animals brought
down with pure arrows, after having ﬁrst offered it to the brahmanas. O king! When those great archers and warriors dwelt in the forest, brahmanas with ﬁre,50 and those without ﬁre, followed them there. There were ten thousand great-souled snataka brahmanas who knew about the means of salvation. Yudhishthira sustained them there.
After killing ruru deer, black antelopes and other sacriﬁcial forest-dwelling animals with his bows, he offered them
to brahmanas in accordance with the rituals. Not a single ill-complexioned or diseased person could be seen there.
Nor was there anyone who was thin, weak, miserable or frightened. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, supreme among the
Kouravas, maintained them like his beloved sons, relatives or brothers from the same womb. Like a mother, the
illustrious Droupadi ﬁrst served her husbands, then all the brahmanas, and then ate whatever food remained. For
the sake of the meat of the deer, they wielded their bows and always made that race decay51—the king52 towards
the east, Bhimasena towards the south, the twins towards the west and also towards the north. Thus did they live in
Kamyaka and ﬁve years passed. They were without Arjuna and were anxious about him. They engaged themselves
in studying, meditating and sacriﬁcing.’
345(48)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O bull among the Bharata lineage! Ambika’s son Dhritarashtra let out a deep and hot sigh.
He summoned suta Sanjaya and told him, “The two Pandavas, Nakula and Sahadeva, are greatly illustrious sons of
the gods and are like the king of the gods in their resplendence. They are steadfast in battle, can ﬁght from a distance and have resolution. Their hands are swift and they are steadfast in their anger. They are always ﬁrm and
speedy. When they advance in battle with Bhima and Arjuna at the forefront, they will be established with the valour of lions and will be as invincible as the Ashvins. O Sanjaya! I do not see any remnants of my soldiers left.
Those two sons of the gods are maharathas and cannot be repulsed in battle. Their anger at Droupadi’s oppression
will not be assuaged. The Vrishnis are great archers. The Panchalas are greatly energetic. They are protected in
battle by Vasudeva, who never wavers from the truth. The Parthas will burn down the armies of my sons in battle.
O son of a suta! Led by Rama53 and Krishna, when the Vrishnis advance in battle, even the mountains will not be
able to withstand the force. In their midst, is the mighty archer Bhima, whose valour is terrible. He will roam
around with an iron club that kills all warriors. The kings on my side will not be able to tolerate the roar of Gandiva, as loud as thunder, or the force of Bhima’s club. It is then that I will remember the words of my well-wishers,
which should have been remembered, but which I did not heed earlier because I was obedient to Duryodhana.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! That ignoring was your great transgression. Though capable, you were deluded and
did not restrain your son. Having heard that the Pandavas had been vanquished at dice, Achyuta Madhusudana
swiftly went to Kamyaka to show his respect to the Parthas. So did Drupada’s sons, with Dhrishtadyumna at the
forefront. So did Virata, Dhrishtaketu and the maharatha Kekayas. O king! Through a spy, I have learnt everything
that they talked about when they met the defeated Parthas and I have told you that. When they met, they decided
that Madhusudana would be Phalguna’s charioteer if there was a battle and Hari agreed.54 Krishna was also angered when he saw the Parthas in that state, attired in black deerskin for their upper garments. He told Yudhishthira, ‘At the time of the rajasuya, I witnessed the prosperity of the Parthas in Indraprastha, so difﬁcult to be obtained
by other kings. I saw all the lords of the earth there, terriﬁed because of the energy of your weapons—Vangas, Angas, Poundras, Udras, Cholas, Dravidas, Andhrakas, those who live along the shores of the ocean, those who live
in cities, Simhalas, Barbaras, Mlecchas, those who live in forests, those from the western kingdoms, hundreds
from along the ocean, Pahlavas, Daradas, all the Kiratas, Yavanas, Shakas, Harahunas, Chinas, Tukharas, Saindhavas, Jagudas, Ramathas, Mundas, those from kingdoms ruled by women, Tanganas and many others who came
to serve you at the sacriﬁce. O bull among the Bharata lineage! That prosperity was transient and has been taken

away. I will take away the lives of those who have robbed you of it. O Kouravya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With Rama,55 Bhima, Arjuna, the twins, Akrura, Gada, Samba, Pradyumna, Ahuka, the brave Dhrishtadyumna and Shishupala’s son,56 I will today kill Duryodhana in battle, together with Karna, Duhshasana,
Soubala and whoever else stands against us in battle. You will live in Hastinapura with your brothers. You will
possess the prosperity that the sons of Dhritarashtra have. You will rule over this earth.’ Then, in that assembly of
warriors, the king57 spoke to him and with the brave Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, they listened. ‘O Janardana!
I accept these words of yours to be true. O mighty-armed one! You will kill my enemies and their followers, but
only after thirteen years have elapsed. O Keshava! Let me be true to my word. In the midst of the kings I gave my
promise that I would dwell in the forest.’ On hearing these words of Dharmaraja, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, those present in the assembly gave their promise and paciﬁed the wrathful Keshava with sweet words that
were appropriate for the occasion. Then, in Vasudeva’s hearing, they told the unblemished Panchali,58 ‘O
queen!59 It is certain that Duryodhana will part with his life because of your anger. O beautiful one! We promise
that this will be true. Do not sorrow. O Krishna! There are those who laughed at you then, on seeing you angered.
Their ﬂesh will be devoured by laughing beasts and birds. Their blood will be drunk by vultures and jackals. There
were those who dragged you by the head60 at the assembly hall. O Panchali! You will see their bodies strewn on
the ground, dragged and devoured relentlessly by carnivorous animals. There are those who oppressed you and
others who ignored you. They will be beheaded and the earth will drink their blood.’ Such were the many words
that those bulls among men spoke. All of them were energetic warriors. All of them bore marks of battle. When
thirteen years have elapsed, those maharathas appointed by Dharmaraja will advance against us, with Vasudeva at
the forefront—Rama,61 Krishna, Dhananjaya, Pradyumna, Samba, Yuyudhana,62 Bhima, Madri’s sons, the
princes of Kekaya and the sons of Panchala, together with Dharmaraja. All these warriors of the world are greatsouled and invincible. They will be accompanied by their followers and soldiers. They will be like angry lions with
manes. Is there anyone who desires to live who can withstand them in battle?”
‘Dhritarashtra replied, “At the time of the gambling, Vidura told me, ‘O lord of men! If you defeat the Pandavas,
it is certain that this will bring about the end of the Kurus. A great fear will arise and there will be a torrent of
blood. O suta! I think that this will now happen, the way Kshatta had described it to me earlier. It is certain that
there will be a battle, after the time promised by the Pandavas has elapsed.’”’
346(49)

Janamejaya asked, ‘When the great-souled Partha went to Shakra’s world for the sake of the weapons, what did
Yudhishthira and the other Pandavas do?’
Vaishampayana said, ‘When the great-souled Partha went to Shakra’s world for the sake of the weapons, those
bulls among men lived in Kamyaka, together with Krishna.63 One day, the best of the Bharatas, together with
Krishna, were unhappily seated in a deserted spot. They sorrowed over Dhananjaya. There were tears in their
throats and they were miserable. All of them were ﬂooded with grief on account of the separation from Dhananjaya and were miserable because of the loss of the kingdom.
‘Then the mighty-armed Bhima spoke to Yudhishthira, “O great king! It was on your instructions that the bull
among men went. The lives of the sons of Pandu are established in Arjuna. If he is destroyed, there is no doubt that
we ourselves, the Panchalas and their sons, Satyaki and Vasudeva will be destroyed. That energetic one departed,
without thinking about the many difﬁculties he would confront. Bibhatsu went on your instructions. What can
cause greater grief than that? All of us have depended on the arms of that great-souled one, thinking that we will
triumph over our enemies and win the earth. It was the inﬂuence of the one with the bow that prevented me from
killing all of Dhritarashtra’s sons, together with Soubala, in the midst of that sabha. We have the strength of our
arms and we are controlling the anger for which, you are the reason. We are protected by Vasudeva. If Krishna and
we had killed the enemies led by Karna, we would have ruled the earth, conquered through the strength of our
arms. All of us are faced with this calamity because of your vice of gambling. O king! We do not lack in manliness. We are supremely strong among those who are strong. O great king! You must bear in mind the dharma of

kshatriyas. It is not the dharma of kshatriyas to reside in the forest. The learned have said that the supreme dharma
of kshatriyas is to rule over the kingdom. O king! You know the dharma of kshatriyas. Do not stray from that path
of dharma. O king! Let us kill the sons of Dhritarashtra before the twelve64 years have passed. Return from the
forest and summon back Partha and Janardana. O great king! O lord of the earth! Let us kill their armies and battle
formations in a great battle. I will send the sons of Dhritarashtra to another world. Together with Soubala, Duryodhana, Karna and whoever else wants to ﬁght back, I will kill all the sons of Dhritarashtra. After I have paciﬁed
them, you can return again to the forest. O lord of the earth! If we do this, no blame will be attached to you. O father!65 O destroyer of enemies! If a sin is committed, we can perform various sacriﬁces. O great king! Wiping it
off in that way, we can attain supreme heaven. O king! This is the way it should be, if our king is not foolish or is
not given to procrastination.66 Indeed, you are always devoted to dharma. But it is certainly the way of the wise to
kill those who are deceitful through deceitful means. There is no sin attached to killing deceitful ones through deceitful means. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O great king! Those who are learned in dharma say that in accordance with dharma, a day and a night are equal to an entire year. O illustrious one! O great king! We have heard
the words from the Vedas that in times of calamity, one entire year is equal to a day. O Achyuta!67 Therefore, if
the Vedas are the authority, regard the passage of thirteen years as equal to a single day. O destroyer of enemies!
This is the time to kill Duryodhana and his followers. O king! Otherwise, he will bring the entire earth under his
suzerainty.” When Bhima said this, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira inhaled the fragrance of the Pandava’s head and
spoke to him in tones of paciﬁcation, “O mighty-armed one! There is no doubt that you will kill Suyodhana, together with Gandivadhanva, but only after the thirteen years have passed. O Partha! O illustrious one! You have
said that the time has arrived. But I cannot utter a lie, because that ﬁnds no place in me. O Kounteya! O invincible
one! You will kill Suyodhana and his followers, but without resorting to deceit, because that will certainly be sin.”
While Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was speaking to Bhima, the immensely fortunate and great rishi Brihadashva
arrived.
‘He was a follower of dharma. And when Dharmaraja, with dharma in his soul, saw him arrive, he worshipped
him with madhuparka,68 as is prescribed in the sacred texts. When he was rested and seated, the mighty-armed
Yudhishthira looked at him and addressed him in these piteous words, “O illustrious one! I have been robbed of
my riches and my kingdom in gambling with dice. I was challenged by those who were skilled in deceit and skilled
in playing with dice. I am not skilled in dice and the deceitful ones had decided on a course of evil. My wife is
more precious to me than my own life and she was dragged into the sabha. Is there any king on earth who is as
misfortunate as I am? Have you seen anyone else? Have you heard of anyone else? I think that there is no man
who is more miserable than I am.” Brihadashva replied, “O great king! O Pandava! You have said you think that
there is no man more unfortunate than you are. O unblemished one! O lord of the earth! On this, I can narrate an
account, if you wish to hear it. This is the story of a king who was more miserable than you.” At this, the king69
told the illustrious one that he wished to hear the account. He wished to hear about the king who found himself in a
situation like his own.
‘Brihadashva said, “O king! O lord of the earth! O Achyuta! Then listen with your brothers. There was a king of
the nishadhas by the name of Virasena. He had a son named Nala, learned in the ways of dharma and artha. We
have heard that this king was deceitfully defeated by Pushkara and though he did not deserve it, lived unhappily in
the forest with his wife. When that king lived in the forest, he never had any horses, any chariots, any brothers or
any kin. But you are surrounded by your brave brothers, who are the equals of the gods and by the foremost among
brahmanas, who are like Brahma himself. Therefore, do not sorrow.”
‘Yudhishthira said, “O best among eloquent ones! I wish to hear in detail the account of that great-souled Nala.
Please tell it to me.”’
347(50)

‘Brihadashva said, “There was a strong king named Nala, the son of Virasena. He had all the good qualities and
was handsome. He was skilled with horses. He stood at the head of all the kings among men, like the king of the
gods. He was supreme to everyone and had energy like that of the sun. This brave king of the nishadhas was

learned in the Vedas and devoted to brahmanas. He was truthful and commanded a great akshouhini. He loved
dice. Beautiful women desired him. He was generous and had control over his senses. He was a protector and
supreme among archers. He was like Manu70 himself. Like him, there was in Vidarbha, Bhima, whose valour was
terrible.71 He was brave and had all the qualities. He had no offspring and desired to have offspring. For the sake
of offspring, with ﬁxedness of purpose, he made every endeavour. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A brahmarshi named Damana came to him. O Indra among kings! Bhima desired offspring and was knowledgeable about
dharma. With his wife, he offered homage to the greatly resplendent one and satisﬁed him. Gratiﬁed, Damana conferred a boon on him and his wife—a gem among daughters and three generous and extremely famous sons,
Damayanti, Dama, Danta and the immensely resplendent Damana. They had all the qualities and all of them were
fearful and terrible in valour.72 Damayanti was beautiful, energetic, famous and fortunate. The slender-waisted
one obtained fame in the world because of her good fortune. When she came of age, hundreds of ornamented slave
girls and friends waited on her, like Shachi herself. Among them, Bhima’s daughter, adorned in all the ornaments
and ﬂawless in her limbs, shone like a ﬂash of lightning. She was extremely beautiful and her large eyes were like
those of Shri. Such a beautiful one had not been seen or heard of before among gods, yakshas, men, or others. The
beautiful lady disturbed the minds of the gods themselves.
‘“Nala, tiger among men, was unsurpassed on earth. He was so handsome that he was like Kandarpa73 personiﬁed. In wonder, they repeatedly praised Nala in her74 presence and Damayanti before the king of Nishadha.75
Having incessantly heard about each other’s qualities, they desired each other, though they had not seen each other.
O Kounteya! That desire for the other became very strong. Nala became incapable of holding that desire in his
heart. He retired alone to a grove near the inner quarters.76 There he saw swans77 whose wings were golden. As
they were roaming in the grove, he grasped one bird. Then that roamer of the sky spoke to Nala, ‘O king! Do not
kill me. I will do that which will bring you pleasure. O king of the nishadhas! I will speak about you in Damayanti’s presence, so that she never thinks of any other man but you.’ Having been thus addressed, the king freed the
swan and the swans ascended and ﬂew to Vidarbha. Having arrived at the city of Vidarbha,78 the birds descended
from the sky before Damayanti and she saw them. On seeing those extraordinarily beautiful roamers of the sky,
and surrounded by her friends, she happily wished to grasp them. The swans spread in different directions in that
beautiful grove. Each lady then ran after a particular swan. The swan that Damayanti pursued took her to a secluded area and then addressed Damayanti in human language, ‘O Damayanti! There is a king of the nishadhas by the
name of Nala. He is like the Ashvins in beauty and there is no man equal to him. O beautiful one! O slender-waisted one! If you become his wife, your birth and your beauty will become successful. We have seen gods, gandharvas, men, serpents and rakshasas. But we have never seen one like him. One like him has not been seen before.
You are a jewel among women. Nala is supreme among men. The union of the special with the special has all the
qualities.’ O lord of the earth! Thus did the swan speak to Damayanti and she replied to the swan. ‘Speak this way
to Nala.’ O lord of the earth! The one who was born from an egg accordingly promised the lady from Vidarbha. He
returned to Nishadha and told Nala everything.”’
348(51)

‘Brihadashva said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having heard the words of the swan, on account of Nala,
Damayanti no longer had control over herself. Thinking about this, she became dejected, pale of complexion and
thin. Damayanti became prone to sighing deeply. She would cast her glance up at the sky. She looked like one demented. She found no pleasure in her bed, in her seats or in enjoyment. She did not rest during the day or the night
and continuously lamented and wept. Her friends saw her state and her form and knew from the signs that she was
ill. O lord of men! Damayanti’s crowd of friends reported this to the king of Vidarbha. They recounted her state.
On hearing about this from Damayanti’s crowd of friends, King Bhima began to think about the great task that he
would have to perform for his daughter’s sake. The king reﬂected on this and decided that his daughter had attained maturity. He saw that his task was to organize a svayamvara for Damayanti. O lord of the earth! O illustrious one! He invited all the brave lords of the earth to attend the svayamvara. On hearing that Damayanti’s svayamvara would be held, on Bhima’s instructions, all the kings came to King Bhima. The earth was ﬁlled with the roar

of elephants, horses and chariots. Those great-souled kings could be seen with their decorated armies, bedecked in
colourful garlands and ornaments.
‘“At this time, the two supreme and ancient rishis, the great-souled Narada and Parvata, who were greatly rigid
in their vows, were roaming around and those great-souled ones went to Indra’s world. They entered the palace of
the king of the gods and were received with homage. The lord with the thousand eyes79 worshipped them and
asked about their welfare, their health and about everything else. Narada said, ‘O lord! O god! O illustrious one! O
Maghavan!80 We are well in every respect. The entire world is well and so are the kings.’ Hearing the words of
Narada, the slayer of Bala and Vritra81 asked, ‘The righteous lords of the earth give up their lives in ﬁghting.
When the time for death arrives through weapons, they go towards it without hesitation. This eternal world is
theirs and every object of desire, as it is for me. But I no longer see those brave kshatriyas. Why do those kings no
longer come to me as my beloved guests?’ Thus addressed by Shakra, Narada replied, ‘O illustrious one! Listen as
to why these lords of the earth can no longer be seen. The king of Vidarbha has a famous daughter by the name of
Damayanti. In her beauty, she surpasses all the women on earth. O Shakra! Her svayamvara is due to take place
soon. All the kings and the princes are going there. O destroyer of Bala and Vritra! All the kings crave for this jewel of the world and desire her immensely.’ When they were conversing thus, the lords of the world,82 together
with Agni, all supreme among the immortals, came before the king of the gods. All of them then heard the great
words that Narada spoke. On hearing these words, they happily said that they would go too. O great king! With
their followers and with their vehicles, all of them went to Vidarbha, where all the lords of the earth had gone. O
Kounteya! On hearing about that gathering of kings, King Nala also set out, happy in his heart and with his mind
ﬁxed on Damayanti. On their way, the gods saw Nala on the ground. He was like Manmatha83 personiﬁed in his
richness of beauty. The lokapalas saw that he was as resplendent as the sun. They wondered at the richness of his
beauty and forgot about their resolution.84 The gods stopped their vimanas in the sky and descending from the sky,
addressed the king of Nishadha, ‘O Nala! O Nishadha! O Indra among kings! You are always devoted to the truth.
O supreme among men! Help us and become our messenger.’”
349(52)

‘Brihadashva said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Nala gave his promise to do so. He then joined his hands
in salutation and asked them, ‘Who are you? Who desires that I should be his messenger? What is the task that I
am required to perform? Tell me in detail.’ Thus addressed by Nishadha, Maghavan replied, ‘Know that we are the
immortals and that we have come here for Damayanti’s sake. I am Indra. This is Agni. This is the lord of the waters.85 O king! This is Yama, who brings an end to human bodies. Go and tell Damayanti that the lokapalas, together with Indra, are arriving with a desire to see her. The gods Shakra, Agni, Varuna and Yama wish to obtain
her. She should choose one of these gods for her husband.’ Thus addressed by Shakra, Nala joined his hands in
salutation and requested them not to send him for this purpose, as he had the same objective. The gods replied, ‘O
Nishadha! You have already promised to do our bidding. O Nishadha! How can you then fail to do what we ask.
Go immediately.’ Thus addressed by the gods, Nishadha again replied, ‘How can I enter a palace that is guarded so
well?’ Shakra again told him that he would be able to enter. Having been thus addressed, he went to Damayanti’s
residence.
‘“There he saw the daughter of Vidarbha, surrounded by a crowd of friends. She was radiant in her form and
fortune and was supremely beautiful. Her limbs were extremely delicate. Her waist was slender and her eyes were
beautiful. In her radiance, she seemed to dim the light of the moon. On seeing the sweet-smiling one, his desire increased. But bearing in mind the promise that he had given, he restrained his wishes. The beautiful ladies were bewildered on seeing Nishadha. They arose from their seats, overcome by his energy. Astounded, but extremely delighted, they praised Nala. But they did not say anything to him. They only thought about it in their own minds.
What beauty, what radiance, what fortitude exist in this great-souled one! Who is he? Is he a god, a yaksha or a
gandharva? The beautiful ladies were overcome by his energy and were bashful. They were not able to speak a single word to him. Damayanti was also struck with wonder. But she smilingly spoke to the brave Nala, who was also
smiling. ‘Who are you? All your limbs are ﬂawless and you are increasing my desire. O brave one! O unblemished

one! You have arrived like an immortal. I wish to know how you have entered. How is it that you have not been
noticed? On the strict instructions of the king, my palace is guarded well.’ Having been thus addressed by the
daughter of Vidarbha, Nala replied, ‘O fortunate one! Know me to be Nala. I have come here as a messenger of the
gods. The gods Shakra, Agni, Varuna and Yama wish to obtain you. O beautiful one! Choose one of those gods as
your husband. It is through their inﬂuence that I have been able to enter unnoticed. When I entered, no one saw me
and no one restrained me. O fortunate one! It is for this purpose that I have been sent by the supreme among the
gods. O beautiful one! Having heard this, make up your mind about what you wish to do.’”’
350(53)

‘Brihadashva said, “She bowed to the gods and smilingly told Nala, ‘O king! What can I do for you? Tell me with
love and respect. I, and whatever riches I possess, are all yours. O lord! Show me love with respect. O king! I have
been tormented by the words of the swan. O brave one! It is for your sake that I have assembled the kings here. O
one who shows respect! I love you. If you reject me, for your sake, I will have to ﬁnd refuge with poison, ﬁre, water or the rope.’86 Thus addressed by the daughter of Vidarbha, Nala replied, ‘How do you desire a man when the
lords of the worlds are here? I am not equal to the dust on the feet of those great-souled lords, the creators of the
worlds. Turn your mind towards them. A mortal one who causes displeasure to the gods wishes for death. O beautiful and unblemished one! Therefore, save me by choosing from the supreme among the gods.’ Then the sweetsmiling Damayanti, whose voice was choked with tears, replied to King Nala in soft words, ‘O lord of men! I see a
way, a way that will bring no sin. O king! Then no evil will be attached to you. O best of men! You and all the
gods, with Indra at the forefront, must come together to where my svayamvara takes place. O lord of men! O tiger
among men! There, in the presence of the lords of the world, I will choose you and no sin will be attached to you.’
O lord of the earth! Thus addressed by the daughter of Vidarbha, King Nala returned to where the gods had
assembled.
‘“The lords of the worlds, together with their lord,87 saw him return. On seeing him, they asked him about
everything that had happened. The gods asked, ‘O king! Did you see the sweet-smiling Damayanti? O king! O unblemished one! Tell us everything that she said.’ Nala replied, ‘As instructed by you, I entered Damayanti’s palace.
It had large and excellent rooms and was surrounded by elderly guards with staffs. When I entered, because of
your energy, no man saw me, except for the daughter of the king. I saw her friends and they saw me too. O lords of
the gods! All of them were astounded on seeing me. I told the one with the beautiful face everything about you. O
supreme among the gods! But she has set her heart on me and will choose me. The lady said, “O best of men! Let
all the gods come with you to my svayamvara. O supreme among men! O mighty-armed one! I will then choose
you in their presence and no sin will be attached to you.” O lords of the thirty!88 I have related to you exactly what
occurred there. But it is for you to decide what should be done.’”’
351(54)

‘Brihadashva said, “When the auspicious time and the sacred day and moment arrived, King Bhima summoned all
the lords of the earth to the svayamvara. On hearing this, all the lords of the earth, oppressed by love, swiftly went
there, hoping to win Damayanti. The kings entered the large arena, decorated with golden pillars and beautiful
gates, like lions entering a mountain. All the lords of the earth seated themselves on various seats, all of them
adorned with fragrant garlands and dazzling earrings encrusted with gems. That arena was ﬁlled with kings, like
Bhogavati89 with serpents, or a cave in a mountain with tigers. Their broad arms were seen to be like clubs, well
formed and with auspicious marks, like ﬁve-headed serpents. Their hair was beautiful and their noses were handsome. With these, the faces of the kings were as resplendent as stars in the ﬁrmament.
‘“Then the fair-faced Damayanti entered the arena and her radiance stole the eyes and the hearts of the kings. On
whatever part of her body the sight of those great-souled ones happened to fall ﬁrst, their glances remained ﬁxed
there, without straying away. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the names of the kings were being recounted, Bhima’s daughter saw ﬁve men who were identical in appearance.90 On seeing all of them there, undifferentiated in appearance, Vidarbha’s daughter was doubtful about which one of them was King Nala. Whichever

one she looked at, seemed to be King Nala. Thus the beautiful one reﬂected and debated in her mind. How will I
know which are the gods and how will I know which is King Nala? Vidarbha’s daughter thought in this way and
was afﬂicted with grief. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As she debated in this way, she remembered what
she had heard about the marks of the gods. ‘I have heard from the elders about the marks of the gods. But when
they are established on the ground in this way, those cannot be perceived.’ Having decided this and having reﬂected on this in many ways, she resolved that the time had come to seek refuge with the gods. Having shown homage
to the gods in mind and words, she joined her hands in salutation before the gods and said in a trembling voice,
‘On hearing the words of the swan, I have chosen the Nishadha to be my husband. If those words are true, then let
the gods direct me towards him. I have never deviated in my mind and my speech. If that is true, then let the gods
direct me towards him. If it is true that the gods themselves have decided that the king of Nishadha should be my
husband, then let the gods direct me towards him. The lords of the worlds and the great god91 should display their
own forms, so that I may know King Punyashloka.’92 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing Damayanti’s piteous lamentation and determining that she was supremely in love with Nishadha, pure in mind, intelligence,
devotion and love, the gods did what she had asked for and revealed themselves in their abilities to bear marks.93
She then saw all the gods, without sweat and with ﬁxed glances. Their garlands were untouched by dust and they
stood there, without touching the ground. And she also saw Nishadha, touching the ground, with his shadow next
to him. His garland was faded with dust and he was perspiring. He was also identiﬁed by the blinking of his eyes.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! She saw the gods and she also saw Punyashloka Nishadha. In accordance
with dharma, Bhima’s daughter chose him. Bashfully, the large-eyed one touched the end of his garment94 and
placed an extremely beautiful garland around his shoulders. Thus did the beautiful one choose him as her husband.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At that, the assembled kings suddenly let out sounds of lamentations. But the
gods and maharshis uttered cries of approval, and struck with wonder, spoke words praising King Nala.
‘“When Bhima’s daughter chose Nishadha, all the immensely energetic lords of the worlds were delighted. Together, they gave Nala eight boons.95 Shachi’s husband Shakra happily gave Nala the boon that he would be able
to see him96 at sacriﬁces and would attain the supreme of sacred goals. Agni gave him the boon that he would be
present whenever Nishadha desired it. Hutashana97 gave him worlds that were as resplendent as he98 himself.
Yama gave him the capacity to taste the essence of food and supreme establishment in dharma. The lord of the water99 promised to be present whenever Nishadha desired and also gave a fragrant garland. Thus did each give two
boons. Having granted these boons, the gods returned to the world of the gods. Having witnessed Damayanti’s
wedding in great wonder, the kings were extremely happy and returned whence they had come. O king! Having
obtained a gem among women, King Punyashloka pleasured with her, like the slayer of Bala and Vritra with
Shachi. The king was extremely happy and as resplendent as the sun. He pleased his subjects by protecting them in
accordance with the dharma of the brave. Like Yayati, the son of Nahusha,100 he performed ashvamedha and
many other sacriﬁces, offering large quantities of gifts. With Damayanti, Nala, like an immortal, again pleasured
himself in woods and groves full of ﬂowers. That lord of men sacriﬁced and sported thus. The lord of the earth
protected the earth and all its treasures.”’
352(55)

‘Brihadashva said, “After Bhima’s daughter had chosen Nishadha and the immensely energetic lords of the worlds
were returning, they saw Dvapara, together with Kali.101 On seeing Kali, Shakra, the slayer of Bala and Vritra,
asked him, ‘O Kali! Tell me where you are going with Dvapara.’ Then Kali told Shakra, ‘I am going to Damayanti’s svayamvara. My mind has gone out to her. On going there, I will choose her.’ Indra smilingly told him, ‘The
svayamvara is over. In our presence, she has chosen King Nala as her husband.’ Thus addressed by Shakra, Kali
was struck with rage. He spoke to all the gods and uttered these words, ‘In the midst of all the gods, she has chosen
a man as her husband. Because of that, she certainly deserves severe chastisement.’ When Kali spoke in this fashion, the gods replied, ‘It is with our sanction that Damayanti has chosen Nala. Since he possesses all the qualities,
who would not choose King Nala? He knows everything about dharma and observes all the vows. Truth, persever-

ance, generosity, austerity, purity, self-control and paciﬁcation can be found in him. It is certain that this king, tiger
among men, is the equal of the lords of the worlds. O Kali! Such are the qualities of Nala. The deluded one, who
wishes to curse him, only curses himself and kills himself. He suffers difﬁculties and immerses himself in a bottomless and great hell, without any means of crossing it.’ Thus speaking to Kali and Dvapara, the gods left for
heaven.
‘“When the gods had departed, Kali told Dvapara, ‘O Dvapara! I cannot control my anger. I will take possession
of Nala. I will dislodge him from his kingdom. He will not be able to sport with Bhima’s daughter. Help me by entering the dice.’”’102
353(56)

‘Brihadashva said, “Having made this agreement with Dvapara, Kali went to the place where the king of the
nishadhas was. Always looking for an opportunity to enter,103 he lived in the land of the nishadhas. After staying
there for twelve years, Kali found his chance. After having passed urine and touching water, nishadha performed
the evening ceremony,104 without purifying himself by washing his feet ﬁrst. Then Kali possessed him. Having
possessed Nala, he went to Pushkara105 and told him, ‘Come and play dice with Nala. With my help, you are certain to vanquish Nala in a game of dice. O king! Having vanquished King Nala, win over the Nishadha kingdom.’
Thus addressed by Kali, Pushkara went to Kali. Kali went to Pushkara and became a bull among cows.106
‘“Pushkara, the destroyer of enemy warriors, went to the brave Nala and repeatedly asked his brother to play
dice with the bull.107 At that, the great-souled king was incapable of refusing the challenge. Although Vidarbha’s
daughter108 looked on, he decided that the time for setting a stake had come. Having been possessed by Kali, Nala
then lost his silver, his gold,109 his vehicles, his yokes and his garments. So crazy was he about the dice that none
of his well-wishers could make him refrain from his insensible craving for gambling. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! All the citizens and all the advisers came to see the king so as to restrain the afﬂicted one. Then the
suta110 came and told Damayanti, ‘All the citizens are waiting at the gate with a speciﬁc purpose. Nishadha
should be told the reason why all the subjects have assembled. They know that the king is learned in dharma and
artha. They are miserable at his addiction.’ At that, Bhima’s daughter was oppressed with distress. Her mind was
overcome by grief. In a voice choked with tears she told Nishadha, ‘O king! The citizens are waiting at the gate
with a desire to see you. They are accompanied by the advisers and all of them are driven by devotion to the king.
They wish to see you.’ She said this repeatedly. But the king was possessed by Kali and did not reply at all to the
slim-waisted and bright-eyed one who was lamenting. Then all the citizens and all the advisers decided that his
standing was gone. In shame and misery, they returned home. O Yudhishthira! In this way, the gambling between
Pushkara and Nala went on for several months. Punyashloka kept on losing.”’
354(57)

‘Brihadashva said, “Then Damayanti saw that King Punyashloka had lost his senses and because of the gambling,
was like one maddened. O king! But Bhima’s daughter was not mad and was overcome by fear and grief. She
thought about the great task that should be performed for the sake of the king. She was alarmed at his sin and
wished to ensure his welfare. On seeing that Nala had lost all his possessions, she told her nurse, ‘O Brihatsena! As
if on Nala’s instructions, go and bring all the advisers here. Go and tell them what objects have been lost and what
riches still remain.’ Having heard of Nala’s summons, all the advisers remarked that their misfortune might have
been reversed and returned. Thus all the subjects arrived for a second time and when Bhima’s daughter reported
this, he still did not reply. On seeing that her husband did not utter a single sentence in reply, Damayanti was overcome by shame and returned again to her house. When she learnt that the dice were always being unfavourable towards Punyashloka and that Nala had lost all his possessions, she told her nurse, ‘O Brihatsena! O fortunate one!
As if on Nala’s instructions, go again and bring the suta Varshneya here. A great task has to be performed.’ On
hearing what Damayanti had said, Brihatsena summoned Varshneya through reliable servants.

‘“Bhima’s unblemished daughter was well versed about place and time. She knew that the time had come. She
told Varshneya in a soft voice, ‘You know that the king has always behaved properly towards you. Now that his
moment of distress has arrived, you should help him. The more the king is defeated by Pushkara, the more his addiction towards gambling grows. The dice behave as if in Pushkara’s control. Nala’s destruction through the dice is
thus seen. He does not listen to the sentences of his well-wishers and relatives, as he should. I think that nothing
will be left of the great-souled Nishadha. The king is so intoxicated that he does not welcome my words either. O
charioteer! I have sought refuge with you. Act in accordance with my words. My mind is not peaceful, in case he
is destroyed. Yoke Nala’s beloved steeds that have the speed of thought and taking the twins,111 go to
Kundina.112 Leave the horses, the chariot and the children there, with my relatives. Then stay there if you wish, or
go elsewhere.’ Varshneya, Nala’s charioteer, told Nala’s chief advisers about Damayanti’s words. O lord of the
earth! They met, decided and gave their permission. He placed the twins on the chariot and left for Vidarbha. The
suta left the horses and the excellent chariot there and also the daughter Indrasena113 and the son Indrasena. Distressed and unhappy, he informed King Bhima about King Nala. He then roamed around and went to the city of
Ayodhya. Extremely miserable, he presented himself to King Rituparna and was employed by the king as a charioteer.”’
355(58)

‘Brihadashva said, “After Varshneya left, because of Punyashloka’s gambling, Pushkara robbed him of his kingdom and whatever other riches remained. O king! When Nala had lost his kingdom, Pushkara laughingly told him,
‘Let our gambling continue. But what else do you have left as stake? Damayanti alone is left to you. Everything
else has been won by me. If you think it proper, let Damayanti be your stake now.’ Thus addressed by Pushkara,
Punyashloka was enraged. His heart seemed to be rent asunder and he said nothing in reply. Then the immensely
famous Nala was driven by great anger. He looked at Pushkara and took off the ornaments from everywhere on his
body. He wore only a single garment and was unclothed, increasing the misery of his well-wishers. Then, discarding his great prosperity, the king went out. Damayanti followed him, also attired in a single garment. With her,
Nishadha spent three nights outside.114
‘“O great king! Pushkara had an announcement made in the city. ‘I will put to death anyone who sides with
Nala.’ O Yudhishthira! Because of Pushkara’s words and because of his hatred, none of the citizens displayed any
homage towards him.115 Thus, though he was deserving of respect, he received no respect, though he was near the
city. The king lived there for three nights, surviving only on water.
‘“After several days had passed, Nala began to suffer from hunger. He saw some birds and their plumage
seemed to be made of gold. The powerful lord of Nishadha began to think that this would be his food now and also
his riches.116 He then covered them with the garment he was wearing. All of them grasped that garment and ascended into the sky. When they rose up, the birds saw Nala standing on the ground, naked, miserable and with his
face downcast. They uttered these words, ‘O greatly foolish one! We are the dice. We came here to take away your
garment. For we would have found no pleasure had you gone away with your garment.’ On seeing the dice depart
and himself naked, King Punyashloka told Damayanti, ‘O unblemished one! These are the ones whose wrath
robbed me of my riches. I cannot ﬁnd a means of livelihood. I am miserable and hungry. Because of them, those of
the Nishadha kingdom show me no homage. They have now become birds and have robbed me of my garment. I
am your husband and face this great calamity. I am miserable and have lost my senses. Listen to my words, because they are for your own welfare. There are many roads here that head in a southern direction. They pass Avanti
and Mount Rikshavat. There is the great mountain range of Vindhya and the river Payoshni that ﬂows into the
ocean. There are the hermitages of maharshis, with a lot of ﬂowers and fruit. This road leads to Vidarbha and that
one goes to Koshala. Beyond them, towards the south, is the region of Dakshinapatha.’117 Damayanti was oppressed by grief and her voice was choked with tears. She spoke these piteous words to Nishadha, ‘O king! My
heart trembles and my limbs are going numb, as I repeatedly think about your resolution. You have lost your kingdom. You have lost your riches. You are naked, hungry and fatigued. How can I leave you in this secluded forest
and leave? O great king! When you are fatigued and hungry and think about your earlier happiness in this terrible

forest, I will reduce your misery. I tell you truthfully. It is the view of physicians that for all kinds of misery, there
is no medicine that is equal to a wife.’ Nala replied, ‘O Damayanti! O slim-waisted one! What you have said is
certainly true. When a man is in misery, there is no medicine or friend equal to a wife. O timid one! Why are you
afraid? I do not wish to abandon you. O unblemished one! I would abandon myself before abandoning you.’
Damayanti said, ‘O great king! If you did not wish to abandon me, why did you point out the road that leads in the
direction of Vidarbha? O king! I also know that you should not abandon me. O lord of the earth! But since your
mind is deluded, you might choose to do that. O supreme among men! You have repeatedly pointed out the road to
me. O one with the radiance of immortals! That is the reason my sorrow is increasing. O king! If it is your intention that I should go to Vidarbha, then if you so desire, let us go there together. O one who shows respect! The king
of Vidarbha will show you homage. O king! Honoured by him, you will dwell happily in our house.’”’
356(59)

‘“Nala said, ‘There is no doubt that your father’s kingdom is my own. But I will never go there in these difﬁcult
circumstances. There was a time when I went there in my prosperity and increased your happiness. How can I go
there in my misery and increase your unhappiness?”’
‘Brihadashva said, “Thus King Nala repeatedly spoke to Damayanti. He comforted the fortunate one, now covered in only half her garment.118 With only a single garment between them, they roamed here and there. They
were hungry, thirsty and fatigued, and eventually arrived at a public dwelling house.119 On reaching that dwelling
house, the king who was the lord of Nishadha sat down with the daughter of Vidarbha on the bare ground. He was
naked and ﬁlthy. His hair was dishevelled and he was covered with dust. He was tired. With Damayanti, he slept
on the ground. The fortunate and delicate Damayanti, devoted to austerities, had suddenly been overtaken by misfortune. She slept. O lord of the earth! As Damayanti slept, King Nala could not sleep, as he had slept earlier, because his mind was agitated with grief. He thought about the loss of his kingdom and the desertion by all his wellwishers and the difﬁculties in the forest. He kept thinking about these. What will happen from my acting in this
way? What will happen from my not acting in this way? Is it better for me to die? Or should I abandon her? She is
devoted to me and has suffered this unhappiness for my sake. But without me, it is possible that she might go to
her relatives. If she is with me, this supreme one will certainly confront more unhappiness. But if I desert her, it is
possible that she might ﬁnd happiness. The lord of men reﬂected on these repeatedly in many ways. Then he decided that it would be superior if he deserted Damayanti. Realizing that he had no garments and that she had only a
single garment, the king thought that he would tear her garment in half. But how could one tear the garment without the beloved one waking up? Thinking thus, King Nala began to wander around that dwelling house. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Nala walked here and there. Then, near that dwelling house, he found an excellent and
unsheathed sword. That scorcher of enemies used it to slice off half the garment. Leaving the daughter of Vidarbha
asleep, he swiftly went away, bereft of his consciousness. But his heart was tied to her and he returned again to the
dwelling house. On seeing Damayanti there, the king of Nishadha wept, ‘My beloved one was earlier not seen by
the wind or the sun. She is now sleeping, without any protection, on the ground of this dwelling house. The sweetsmiling one is clad in a sliced-off garment. When she regains consciousness, the one with the beautiful hips will be
like one maddened. What will she do? Alone and deserted by me, how will this faithful and beautiful daughter of
Bhima roam in this terrible forest, frequented by animals and predators?’ Departing again and again, King Nala
returned to the dwelling house again and again. He was drawn away by Kali but was drawn back by his love. It
seemed as if the heart of the miserable one was divided into two. Like a swing, it went to the dwelling house and
back from it. But Nala was attracted by Kali and deluded. Lamenting piteously many times, he deserted his sleeping wife. Touched by Kali, his soul was tainted and without thinking about it, the king went away, abandoning his
miserable wife in that deserted forest.”’
357(60)

‘Brihadashva said, “When King Nala had departed, Damayanti awoke, having overcome her fatigue. The one with
the beautiful hips was terriﬁed in that deserted forest. She could not see her husband and was immersed in sorrow
and misery.

‘“Frightened because of Nishadha, she cried out aloud, ‘O great king! O protector! O great king! O lord! Why
did you forsake me? I am dead! I am destroyed! I am terriﬁed in this deserted forest. O great king! You have always been knowledgeable in dharma. You have always spoken the truth. How could you have uttered a falsehood?
While I was asleep, how could you have forsaken me in this forest? Why have you departed, abandoning a wife
who was obedient and devoted to you, especially when she has caused you no harm? You have been wronged by
your enemies. O lord of men! In earlier times, you had uttered some words in the presence of the lords of the
worlds. How can you possibly make them come true? O bull among men! There has been enough of this jest. Let it
not go any further. O invincible one! I am terriﬁed. O lord! Show yourself to me. O king! I have seen you! I have
seen you! O Nishadha! Stay there! I have seen you hidden behind the creepers. Why don’t you reply to me? O Indra among kings! You are cruel! O king! You see me lamenting in this state, but do not come and comfort me in
your arms. I am not sorrowing because of my own self, or because of anything else. O king! I am sorrowing because you will have to be alone. O king! In the evening, you will be thirsty, hungry and exhausted from labour.
You will be under a tree and how will you exist without seeing me?’ Thus she was immersed in terrible grief and
blazing in her anger. Weeping and miserable, she dashed here and there. In one instant, the lady would stand up. In
another instant, she would fall down unconscious. In one instant, she was frightened. In another instant, she wept
loudly. Bhima’s faithful daughter was tormented by terrible grief. She was distraught and sighed again and again.
Then she spoke in a tearful voice, ‘Nishadha is suffering because of the curse of some being and may he also be
miserable in grief. Whatever sorrow befalls us, may his sorrow be greater. May the evil-minded one who has done
this evil to Nala meet with greater sorrow. May he live a life that is full of unhappiness.’ Thus did the wife of the
great-souled king lament. She searched for her husband in that forest frequented by wild beasts. Bhima’s daughter
was like one maddened. She lamented and ran here and there, crying ‘Alas! O king!’ She dashed like one who had
lost her senses.
‘“She repeatedly sorrowed and lamented in piteous tones, like a female osprey, and dried up.120 Suddenly, Bhima’s daughter came upon a boa constrictor.121 As she came near, the giant one, who was hungry, grasped her. As
she was being devoured by the serpent,122 she was overcome by grief. She wasn’t sorrowful because of her own
self, but sorrowed more about Nishadha. ‘O protector! I am being devoured in this deserted forest by this serpent,
like one unprotected. Why don’t you rush here? O Nishadha! How will you live when my memories come back to
you? You will be freed from evil. You will again obtain your senses, your intelligence and your riches. O Nishadha! O tiger among kings! O giver of respect! When you are tired and hungry and exhausted, who will reduce your
fatigue?’ At that time, a hunter of animals was roaming in the deep forest. He heard the sound of her cries and
swiftly came to where she was. He saw the long-eyed one there, being devoured by the serpent. The hunter of animals swiftly came to her aid. With a sharp weapon, he severed the serpent’s head. The one who lived off hunting
slashed at the serpent until it was motionless. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The hunter freed her and
cleaned her with water. He comforted her and asked her if she had eaten some food. ‘O one with the eyes of a deer!
Whom do you belong to? Why have you come to this forest? O beautiful one! How is it that you have encountered
this great difﬁculty?’ O lord of the earth! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On his asking, Damayanti told him
everything, exactly as it had occurred.
‘“The hunter of animals saw that she was covered with only half a garment. Her breasts and hips were heavy.
Her limbs were unblemished and delicate. Her face was like the full moon. The lashes of her eyes were curved and
her speech was sweet. On seeing this, he was overcome by desire. In this state, the hunter123 spoke to her in soft
and gentle words. But the beautiful one saw that he was comforting her out of desire. Damayanti was devoted to
her husband. On realizing the wishes of the evil one, she was consumed by a terrible rage and seemed to blaze in
anger. The evil-minded and mean one was about to violate her out of desire, but saw that the inviolate one seemed
to be like the ﬂame of a blazing ﬁre. Deprived of her husband and her kingdom, the miserable Damayanti cursed in
her anger, since the time of using words had passed. ‘If I have never thought of anyone other than Nishadha, then
let this mean one, who makes a living out of animals, fall down dead.’ As soon as she had uttered these words, the
one who made a living out of animals fell down lifeless on the ground, like a tree consumed by ﬁre.”’
358(61)

‘Brihadashva said, “When the lotus-eyed one had slain the killer of animals, she entered another deserted and
dreadful forest, resounding with the sounds of many crickets. The forest was full of lions, tigers, boars, bears, rurus
and elephants. It was full of large numbers of diverse birds and was frequented by mlecchas and bandits. It was
dense with shala trees, bamboos, dhavas,124 ashvatthas,125 tindukas,126 ingudas,127 kimshukas,128 arjunas,129
arishtas,130 chandanas,131 shalmalas,132 jambus,133 mangoes, lodhras,134 khadiras,135 shakas,136 cane,
kashmaris,137 amalakas,138 plakshas,139 kadambas,140 udumburas,141 badaris,142 bilvas, nyagrodhas,143
priyalas,144 talas,145 kharjuras,146 haritakas147 and vibhitakas.148 She saw mountains that were full of a hundred different kinds of minerals, groves that resonated with the sounds of birds, caves that were extraordinary to
behold, rivers, lakes, ponds, many types of animals and birds, a large number of pishachas, serpents and rakshasas
that were terrible in form, pools, tanks, mountain peaks everywhere, streams and wonderful oceans. There the
daughter of the king of Vidarbha saw herds of buffaloes, boars, bears, monkeys and serpents. With supreme energy, fame, steadfastness and beauty, the daughter of Vidarbha began to roam around alone, looking for Nala. King
Bhima’s daughter was not frightened of anything. She wandered in that terrible forest, oppressed by her husband’s
misfortune. O king! Vidarbha’s daughter lamented in great misery. Her limbs suffered from sorrow over her husband and sought refuge on a slab of stone.
‘“Damayanti said, ‘O one whose chest is like that of a lion! O mighty-armed one! O ruler of the people of
Nishadha! O king! Where have you gone, abandoning me in this deserted forest? O brave one! You have performed sacriﬁces like ashvamedha and have given away large quantities of dakshina. O tiger among men! How is
it that you have been false towards me? O tiger among men! O immensely radiant one! O bull among kings! O fortunate one! Make the words you uttered in my presence come true. O lord of the earth! You should also remember
what the swans that roam in the sky said in your presence and what they said in my presence. O best among men!
The four Vedas, studied with their extended branches and sub-branches, can be on one side and truth alone can balance them on the other side. O lord of men! O destroyer of enemies! O brave one! Therefore, you should follow
the truth and make true what you promised in my presence. Alas, brave one! O unblemished one! Is it that I am no
longer desired by you? Why do you not reply to me in this terrible forest? This terrible and fearful king of the
forests is oppressing me with its wide-open jaws, as if it is hungry. Why don’t you save me? You always used to
say that I was your beloved and there was no second one who was dearer. O king descended from the Bharata lineage! O fortunate one! Make the words you uttered earlier come true. O ruler of men! Your beloved wife is lamenting, like one maddened. You desire her and she desires you. O protector! Why don’t you reply to me? I am thin,
miserable, pale and dirty. O lord of the earth! I am clad only in half a garment. I am alone and lamenting like one
unprotected. O large-eyed one! I am like a solitary deer that has strayed from its herd. O oppressor of enemies!
You are deserving of honour. But you do not honour me, when I am weeping thus. O great king! It is a faithful
wife who is alone in this great forest. It is your wife who is speaking to you. Why don’t you reply? O supreme
among men! You were born in a noble lineage and have good conduct. You are handsome in all your limbs. But I
do not see you today on this mountain. This great and terrible forest is frequented by lions and tigers. O ruler of
Nishadha! Are you sleeping, seated or standing here? O best of men! Or have you left, extending my misery? I am
oppressed by grief on account of you. In my misery, whom shall I ask “Have you by any chance seen King Nala
wandering in this forest?” Today, who will tell me if Nala is lost in the forest? He is handsome and great-souled.
He is the destroyer of enemy formations. I am looking for King Nala, with eyes like that of the lotus. Today, from
whom will I hear the sweet words that he149 is here? The tiger, the king of the forest, is advancing to meet me. He
is handsome, with four teeth and a mighty jaw. But I am not frightened of him. I will tell him, “You are the king of
the animals and the lord of this forest. Know me to be Damayanti, the daughter of the king of Vidarbha. I am the
wife of the king of Nishadha, Nala, the slayer of enemies. O lord of animals! I am alone and am looking for my
husband. I am oppressed by sorrow and I am thin. If you have seen Nala, please comfort me. O lord of the forest!
O supreme among animals! If on the other hand, you know nothing about Nala, then eat me up and free me from
this misery.” The king of animals hears my lamentations in this forest. But on his own, he makes his way towards
the sweet waters of the river that ﬂows to the ocean.

‘“‘This rocky mountain is sacred. It has many tall peaks. They are radiant and beautiful in their many hues.
They stretch up to the sky. It is full of many minerals and is adorned with a myriad stones. It rises up like a
ﬂagstaff of this great forest. It is frequented by lions, tigers, elephants, boars, bears and deer. It resounds on all
sides with the noise of many types of birds. It is adorned with kimshukas, ashokas, bakulas150 and pumnagas.151
There are many streams and peaks frequented by birds. I will now ask this king of mountains about the king.152
“O illustrious one! O best of mountains! O divine-looking one! O famous one! O bringer of much fortune! O one
who holds up the earth! I am seeking refuge with you and am bowing down before you. I am prostrating myself
before you. Know that I am the daughter of a king. I am the daughter-in-law of a king. I am the wife of a king. I
am famous by the name of Damayanti. My father is maharatha King Bhima, the lord of Vidarbha. He is the lord of
the earth and the protector of the four varnas. He has performed rajasuya and ashvamedha sacriﬁces and offered a
lot of dakshina. He is a revered one, best among kings. He has eyes that are large, beautiful and arched. He is like a
brahmana and observes righteous conduct. He follows the truth and is free from jealousy. He always follows good
conduct and has great prosperity. He is pure and observes dharma. He is a lord who has defeated masses of his enemies. He is one who completely protects the subjects of Vidarbha. O illustrious one! Know me, the one present before you, to be his daughter. O great mountain! My father-in-law is supreme among men and is the lord of Nishadha. He is famous by the name of Virasena, a name that was well chosen. That king’s son is brave and handsome
and truth is his valour. He inherited the kingdom from his father and rules it well. He is the destroyer of enemies
and is known by the names of Nala and Punyashloka. He is like a brahmana and is knowledgeable in the Vedas. He
is eloquent and the performer of sacred deeds. He is a drinker of soma and maintains the ﬁre.153 He performs sacriﬁces and is a giver. He is a warrior and rules fairly. O best of mountains! Know that it is his wife who has come
before you. I have lost my prosperity and I am without my husband. I am without a protector and I am beset by difﬁculty. I am looking for my husband, he who is supreme among the best of men. O supreme among mountains!
You have hundreds of peaks that reach up into the sky. Is there any chance that you have seen King Nala in this
terrible forest? His gait is like that of a king of elephants. He is valiant and wise. His arms are long and he is easily
angered. He is brave and follows the truth. My husband has forbearance and is immensely famous. Is there any
chance that Nala, king of the nishadhas, has been seen by you? O best of mountains! I am lamenting and I am
alone. I am desolate. Why don’t you console me now, as you would a miserable daughter?”
‘“‘O brave one! O valiant one! O one who is knowledgeable in dharma! O one who is devoted to the truth! O
lord of the earth! O king! If you are in this forest, then show yourself. When will I again hear Nishadha’s gentle
and deep voice, like the sound of the clouds and like nectar to me? Let the beautiful words of the great-souled king
address me as “Daughter of Vidarbha”. It is a voice that follows the sacred traditions,154 brings welfare and is the
dispeller of my sorrow.’”
‘Brihadashva said, “Having spoken in this way to the best of the mountains, Damayanti, the daughter of the
king, then left for the northern direction. After having wandered for three days and nights, the beautiful lady saw
an unequalled forest. It was as beautiful as a celestial garden and was populated by ascetics like Vasishtha, Bhrigu
and Atri. These ascetics were self-controlled, restrained in food and were calm and pure. They lived on water and
air. They only ate leaves. They were immensely fortunate and had controlled their senses. They were desirous of
seeing the path to heaven. They were clad in bark and deerskin. These sages had mastered their senses. She saw
that beautiful circle of hermitages, populated by ascetics. She saw the cluster of hermitages, frequented by many
kinds of animals and large numbers of monkeys, in addition to the ascetics.
‘“Her brows were lovely. Her hair was beautiful. Her hips were beautiful. Her breasts were beautiful. Her teeth
and face were beautiful. She was radiant and she walked ﬁrmly. Her ﬁrm gait was rolling. The one who was loved
by Virasena’s son entered the circle of hermitages. She was immensely fortunate and a gem among women. She
was the proud Damayanti. She bowed in obeisance before the aged ascetics and stood there in humility. All the ascetics uttered words of welcome. Those who were rich in austerities showed her homage in accordance with the
prescribed norms and asked her to seat herself. ‘Tell us what we can do for you,’ they said. Then the one with the
beautiful hips replied, ‘O unblemished ones! O immensely fortunate ones! How do the austerities, the ﬁres, dharma, the animals and the birds fare? Does everything proceed well? How about the following of your own dharma?’

They said, ‘O fortunate lady! O famous one! Everything goes well here. You are ﬂawless in all your limbs. Tell us
who you are and what you wish for. We are greatly amazed at seeing your supreme beauty and radiance. Do not
sorrow and be comforted. Are you the great goddess of this forest or this mountain or this river? O fortunate and
unblemished one! Tell us the truth.’
‘“She told the rishis, ‘O brahmanas! I am not the goddess of this forest or this mountain. Nor am I the goddess
of this river. O you who are rich in austerities! Know me to be a woman. If all of you listen, I will tell you my account in detail. In the land of Vidarbha, there is an immensely radiant king by the name of Bhima. O supreme
among brahmanas! All of you know me to be his daughter. The immensely famous and wise Nala is the king of
Nishadha. He is brave and victorious in battle and that lord of the earth is my husband. He devotes himself to worshipping the gods and takes care of the brahmanas. He is immensely fortunate and immensely radiant and is the
protector of the lineage of Nishadha. He observes the truth and is learned in dharma. He is wise and devoted to the
truth. He is the destroyer of enemies. He is like a brahmana and is devoted to the gods. He is prosperous and the
destroyer of the cities of enemies. That best of kings is named Nala and his radiance is the equal of that of the king
of the gods. He is my husband. His eyes are large and his face is like the full moon. He is the destroyer of enemies.
He has made offerings of the chief sacriﬁces and he is learned in the Vedas and the Vedangas. He is as resplendent
as the sun and the moon and he has killed his enemies in battle. That lord of the earth was devoted to true dharma.
However, he was challenged to a game of dice by some evil ones among men, those who were skilled in deceit and
wished him ill. He was defeated through their skills and deceit and he lost his kingdom and his riches. Know me to
be the wife of that bull among kings. Know that I am famous by the name of Damayanti and desire to see my husband. I am miserable and am wandering everywhere in these woods, mountains, lakes, rivers, ponds and forests. I
am sorrowfully searching for my husband Nala. He is great-souled, skilled in the use of weapons and learned in
war. O lords! By any chance, has a king by that name come to this beautiful hermitage? He is the lord of Nishadha
and his name is Nala. O brahmanas! It is for his sake that I have come to this dreadful, terrible, fearful and horrible
forest, frequented by tigers and animals. If I cannot ﬁnd King Nala in a few days and nights, I will ensure my own
welfare by freeing myself from this body. What is the purpose of my being alive, without that bull among men?
What will become of me now, oppressed as I am out of sorrow for my husband?’ Thus did Damayanti, Bhima’s
daughter, lament alone in that forest. The ascetics who always spoke the truth told her, ‘O fortunate one! O beautiful one! The consequence of all this will be fortunate. Through the powers of our austerities, we can see that you
will soon ﬁnd Nishadha Nala, the ruler of Nishadha and the destroyer of his enemies. O Bhima’s daughter! You
will see the best of those who uphold dharma. He will be freed from his fever and absolved of all his sins. He will
be adorned with all the gems. He will be in his supreme city and will defeat all his enemies. O fortunate one! You
will see your husband the king in fortunate circumstances, creating fear in the minds of his enemies and dispelling
sorrow from the minds of his well-wishers.’ Having thus spoken to Nala’s beloved queen, the daughter of a king,
the ascetics disappeared, together with their sacriﬁcial ﬁres and their hermitages. On witnessing this greatly extraordinary event, Damayanti, whose limbs were unblemished and who was the daughter-in-law of Virasena, was
astounded. Was it a dream that I saw? What had occurred here? Where are all the ascetics and where is that circle
of hermitages? Where are the pure waters of that beautiful river, frequented by many kinds of birds? Where is that
mountain now, adorned with fruits and ﬂowers? Bhima’s daughter, the sweet-smiling Damayanti, thought about
these for some time. She was miserable because of sorrow for her husband and her face turned pale.
‘“She went to another region. She lamented, her voice choking with sobs and her eyes ﬁlled with tears. Then she
saw an ashoka tree there. She went to that ﬂowering ashoka tree, supreme among trees. It was weighed down with
its branches and resounded with the notes of birds. ‘Alas! In the midst of this forest, there is this beautiful tree.
Burdened under its weight, it is as beautiful as the king of Dramida.155 O beautiful ashoka!156 Free me from my
sorrow. Is there any chance that you have seen the king, freed from sorrow and fear? He who is named Nala is
Damayanti’s beloved husband and the destroyer of enemies. Have you seen my beloved, the king of the Nishadhas? His body and skin are delicate and he is attired in only half a garment. Suffering through his vice, the brave
one has resorted to the forest. O ashoka! Act accordingly,157 so that I can go away from you without any sorrow.
O ashoka! Be truthful to your name. Be the one who removes sorrow and dispel my sorrow.’ Thus did the distressed one speak to the ashoka tree, and circled it thrice. Then Bhima’s beautiful daughter entered a region that

was even more terrible. She saw many trees and many streams there, many beautiful mountains and many kinds of
animals and birds. Wandering in search of her husband, Bhima’s daughter saw many valleys, slopes and extraordinary rivers.
‘“After the sweet-smiling Damayanti had travelled for a long time, she saw a large caravan with many elephants, horses and chariots. It was climbing along the banks of a beautiful river, with clear and pure water. The water was cool and the river was wide. It had pools and was covered with cane. It resounded to the noise of cranes,
ospreys and chakravakas.158 It was full of tortoises, crocodiles and large ﬁsh and adorned with sandbanks and islands. As soon as Nala’s famous wife saw that large caravan, the one with the beautiful hips approached it and entered among the people there. She was sorrowful and looked like one demented. She was covered in only half a
garment. She was thin, pale and dirty. Her hair was covered with dust. On seeing her thus, some of the men were
frightened and began to run away. Others began to think about this, while others cried out. Some laughed at her
and others showed their anger. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But there were some who took pity on her and
began to ask her questions. ‘O fortunate one! Who are you and whom do you belong to? What are you looking for
in this forest? We are sorrowful on seeing you. Are you by any chance a woman? Tell us truthfully. Are you the
goddess of the forest, the mountain or the region? O fortunate one! We are seeking refuge with you. Are you a yakshi, a rakshasi,159 or a beautiful woman? Comfort us in every way. O unblemished one! Protect us. O fortunate
one! Ensure in every way that this caravan can swiftly leave this place. Ensure this. We seek refuge with you.’
Damayanti, the king’s daughter, was thus addressed by the men from the caravan. Oppressed because of her husband’s vice, the faithful one then replied to the leader of the caravan, the caravan and the men who were there—
young and old and children, and the ones who were the guides for the caravan. ‘Know me to be a woman. I am the
daughter of a king of men. I am the daughter-in-law of a king and I am the wife of a king. I am yearning to catch
sight of my husband. The king of Vidarbha is my father. My husband is the king of Nishadha. He is immensely famous by the name of Nala and it is that unvanquished one that I am searching for. If you know about the king,
quickly tell me about my beloved Nala. He is a tiger among kings and the destroyer of masses of his enemies.’ The
leader of that large caravan was named Shuchi. On hearing the words of the unblemished one, he replied, ‘O fortunate one! Listen to my words. O sweet-smiling one! I am a merchant and the leader of this caravan. I have not seen
a man by the name of Nala. I have only seen this fearful forest frequented by elephants, leopards, buffaloes, tigers,
bears and deer. No men inhabit it. May Manibhadra, the king of the yakshas, favour us today.’ She then told all the
merchants and the leader of the caravan, ‘Please tell me where this caravan is going.’ The leader of the caravan
replied, ‘This caravan belongs to Subahu, the truthful king of Chedi. O daughter of a king! It is going swiftly to
that country for the sake of proﬁt.’”’
359(62)

‘Brihadashva said, “The one with the unblemished limbs heard the words of the leader of the caravan. Desirous of
seeing her husband, she accompanied him. After a long time and many days had passed, the merchants saw a pond
in the midst of that large and terrible forest. It was extensive and beautiful on all sides. It was fragrant with lotuses.
It was charming, with a lot of grass and kindling and had a lot of roots and fruit. It was frequented by masses of
many kinds of birds. They saw that the water was clean and delightful and brought pleasure to the mind. Since the
animals of transport were extremely tired, they resolved to rest there. With the permission of the leader of the caravan, they entered that supreme forest. When the day moved westwards, that great caravan settled down to rest.
When it was midnight, everything was quiet. The tired caravan was asleep.
‘“A herd of elephants arrived to drink at a mountain stream and the water overﬂowed with their musk. They saw
the supreme caravan asleep along their path, together with other elephants.160 They suddenly trampled them, as
they were asleep on the ground. A wail arose from the merchants as they sought for protection. They were blind
from sleep and in their great fear, dashed towards the creepers in the forest. Some men were killed by the tusks of
the elephants. Others were trampled by the feet. In great fear, a large number of cattle, donkeys, camels and horses
and those who were on foot, ﬂed. They injured each other. Uttering terrible roars, they fell down on the ground.
Some climbed trees and when those broke, fell down on the uneven ground. In this way, that prosperous group of

merchants was destroyed. When it was morning, the men who were still alive emerged from the creepers in the
forest and sorrowed over the slaughter that had taken place. O lord of men! They grieved for brother, father, son
and friend. The daughter of the king of Vidarbha lamented, ‘What evil act have I committed in the past? I found an
ocean of men in this deserted forest. Through my ill fortune, they have now been destroyed by a herd of elephants.
It is certain that I will suffer more, for a long time to come. I have heard from the aged that no one dies before the
time has come. Had that not been true, my miserable self would have been killed by this herd of elephants today.
Indeed, nothing befalls men, if not brought about by destiny. I committed no sin, not even as a child, or in deeds,
thought or words. What has brought about this misery? At the time of the svayamvara, the assembled gods who are
the lords of the worlds were rejected by me for the sake of Nala. It must be because of their inﬂuence that I suffer
this separation now.’ The beautiful-limbed one sorrowed and lamented in this fashion. O tiger among men! She left
with the brahmanas, learned in the Vedas, who had survived. She was miserable and overcome with sorrow.
‘“After travelling for a long time, she arrived in the evening at a great city. This belonged to Subahu, the truthful
king of Chedi. She entered that supreme city, clad only in half a garment. She was pale, thin and miserable. Her
hair was loose and had not been washed. She walked like one who was demented. The citizens saw her enter the
capital of Chedi in this way. In their curiosity, vulgar boys followed the lady. Surrounded by them, she approached
the royal residence. The king’s mother saw her from the palace, surrounded by these people. She restrained the
people. O king! In her amazement, she made Damayanti ascend into that supreme palace and asked her, ‘You have
clearly been overtaken by misfortune. How is your form so beautiful? You blaze like lightning in the clouds. Tell
me. Who are you and whom do you belong to? Even though you are shorn of ornaments, your form cannot be human. Your radiance is like that of an immortal or a brahmana. Though helpless, you have not been scared of these
men.’ On hearing these words, Bhima’s daughter replied thus, ‘Know me to be a woman who follows the same
vows as her husband. Know me to be a sairandhri161 of noble birth. I am a maidservant and live wherever I wish.
I live alone on fruits and roots and ﬁnd a bed wherever evening falls. My husband has innumerable qualities and
has always been devoted to me. I have always followed my valiant husband, like a shadow. It was through ill fortune that he was extremely addicted to gambling. He was defeated in a game of dice and left alone for the forest.
The brave one was clad in a single garment and was maddened with grief. So as to comfort him, I followed him
into the forest. One day, in that forest, the brave one was overcome by hunger and thirst and had to go elsewhere.
He was careless and lost even the single garment that he possessed. He was naked and maddened and lost whatever senses he possessed. I followed him, clad in my garment. But I could not sleep for many nights. Then, after a
long time, I fell asleep and he abandoned me, though I had done no harm. He sliced my garment into two. I have
been searching for my husband, tormented by grief, day and night. But I have not been able to ﬁnd my beloved,
who is the lord of my life and riches and like an immortal to me.’ Her eyes ﬁlled with tears, she lamented thus in
many ways. Bhima’s daughter suffered. The king’s mother, who herself suffered with her, then told her, ‘O fortunate one! Stay with me, I am pleased with you. O blessed one! My men will hunt out your husband. Or perhaps,
while he is roaming around here and there, he may arrive here on his own. O blessed one! Live here and you will
get your husband back.’ On hearing these words of the king’s mother, Damayanti replied, ‘O mother of brave
ones! I can live with you, but I will not eat leftover food. Nor will I wash the feet of others. I will never speak to
other men. If any man solicits me, he must be punished. But in the course of searching for my husband, I will see
brahmanas. If this can be done, I will certainly stay with you. But if it is otherwise, my heart will never allow me
to stay.’ The king’s mother told her with a happy mind, ‘I will do all this. A vow like this should be praised.’ O
lord of the earth! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing the words of Bhima’s daughter, the king’s mother told her daughter Sunanda, ‘O Sunanda! Though she will be a sairandhri, know her to be like a goddess. Always
enjoy yourself with her, without any anxiety in your mind.’”’
360(63)

‘Brihadashva said, “O lord of the earth! When King Nala had abandoned Damayanti, he saw a great forest ﬁre in
that deep forest. From the midst of the ﬁre, he heard the voice of a being. It cried again and again, ‘Come here,
Nala! Come here, Punyashloka!’ Nala replied, ‘Do not be afraid,’ and entered the centre of the ﬁre.162

He saw the king of the snakes lying there in coils. Trembling, the serpent joined his hands in salutation and told
Nala, ‘O king! Know me to a serpent named Karkotaka. O king! I had once captured an innocent brahmarshi who
was extremely great in austerities. O lord of men! He had cursed me in his anger. Because of his curse, I am unable
to move even a step from this place. If you rescue me, I will teach you that which will ensure your welfare. I will
be your friend and there is no serpent who is my equal. I will become very light. Pick me up swiftly and leave.’
Having spoken these words, the lord of the serpents became as small as a thumb. Grasping him, Nala went to a region that was free of ﬂames. He came to an open space that was free of the black-trailed ﬁre.
‘“He wished to let the serpent go. But Karkotaka again told him, ‘O Nishadha! Walk on and count your steps as
you proceed. O great king! I will ensure your great welfare when you do this.’ At that, he began to count and he
was bitten at the tenth step. As soon as he had been bitten, his form instantly changed. On witnessing his deformed
body, Nala stopped, looked at himself and was astounded. The lord of the earth saw that the serpent had assumed
his own form. Then the serpent Karkotaka consoled Nala and said, ‘I have brought this change in your form so that
no one may recognize you. O Nala! I have done this so that the person who has injured you with this great distress
will unhappily reside inside you, stung by my venom.163 O great king! As long as he does not free you, he will
hurt from my venom all over his body. He will suffer from misery as long as he lives there. O lord of men! You
were innocent and did not deserve to be harmed. I have protected you from the anger and envy of the one who has
cheated you. O tiger among men! O lord of men! You will no longer face any fear from enemies who have fangs or
from those who have knowledge of the brahman.164 O king! You will suffer no pain on account of the poison. O
Indra among kings! You will always be victorious in battles. O king! Go from here and say that you are the suta
Bahuka. Go to Rituparna, who is extremely skilled in gambling with dice. O lord of the nishadhas! Leave now for
the beautiful city of Ayodhya. In exchange for your skill with horses, that king165 will give you the skill with dice.
That prosperous one, descended from the lineage of Ikshvaku, will become your friend. When you have become
skilled with the dice, you will ensure your welfare and prosperity. You will be reunited with your wife. Banish all
sorrow from your mind. I tell you truthfully that you will obtain your kingdom and your children. O lord of men!
When you desire your own form back, recall me in your mind and clad yourself in these garments. On wearing
these garments, you will obtain your own form back.’ Having said this, he then gave him two divine garments. O
Kourava! O king! Having thus instructed Nala and given him the garments, the king of serpents disappeared, then
and there.”’
361(64)

‘Brihadashva said, “When the serpent disappeared, Nishadha Nala left for Rituparna’s city and entered there on the
tenth day. He went before the king and spoke these words, ‘I am Bahuka. I am skilled in driving horses and there is
no one on earth who is my equal. I am skilled and can be asked about all difﬁculties connected with artha. I also
know the art of cooking and especially on this, there is no one better than I am. If there is anything in this world
connected with artisanship or any other difﬁcult matter, I will seek to accomplish them all. O Rituparna! Therefore,
maintain me.’ Rituparna replied, ‘O Bahuka! O blessed one! Reside with me. You will do all this. My mind has always been particularly attracted to the question of speed. Devise some means of yoking so that my horses travel
fast. Be the superintendent of my stables and your salary will be a hundred thousand. Varshneya and Jivala166 will
always follow your instructions. O Bahuka! Spend your days happily with them and reside with me.’ Having been
thus addressed and honoured, Nala lived there in Rituparna’s city, in the company of Varshneya and Jivala.
‘“While living there, the king continued to think about the daughter of Vidarbha. Every evening, he recited a
shloka which said, ‘O ascetic! Hungry, thirsty, fatigued and miserable, where are you? Do you keep thinking about
that unfortunate one? Whom are you attached to now?’ Having heard the king recite this in the night, Jivala said,
‘O Bahuka! I wish to hear about the one over whom you always sorrow.’ Thus addressed, King Nala replied,
‘There was one who lost his senses. There was a lady he thought much of and she was ﬁrmer towards him. Because of a certain reason, that unfortunate one was separated from her. Separated from her, that evil-minded one
roams around, oppressed by unhappiness. Day and night, he is tormented by sorrow and cannot sleep. Remembering her at night, he recites this shloka. Having wandered around the entire earth and having obtained some things

somewhere, he has now settled down, though he doesn’t deserve to. Remembering her, he always sorrows. That
woman even followed the man into the difﬁculties of the forest. But the one with limited virtue abandoned her and
it is difﬁcult for her to be still alive. She is alone, young, inexperienced about the roads and unaccustomed to difﬁculties. She is hungry and thirsty and it is difﬁcult for her to be still alive. Predators always roam in that great and
terrible forest. O respected one! She was abandoned by the one with limited virtue, the evil-minded one.’ Thus did
the king of Nishadha remember Damayanti, while he lived a life of disguise in the king’s house.”’
362(65)

‘Brihadashva said, “When Nala had lost his kingdom and had left for the forest with his wife, Bhima sent brahmanas to search out and ﬁnd Nala. Bhima gave them a lot of riches and asked them to go and ﬁnd Nala and his
daughter Damayanti. ‘Accomplish this task and ﬁnd where the king of Nishadha is. I will give one thousand cows
to whoever does this. I will give him a village to live in and it will be the size of a city. Even if Nala and Damayanti are not brought back, but are only discovered, I will give riches equal to ten thousand cows.’ Having been thus
addressed, the brahmanas happily left in all the directions. They looked for Nishadha and his wife in many cities
and countries.
‘“There was a brahmana named Sudeva. In his search, he came to the beautiful city of Chedi and saw Vidarbha’s
daughter in the king’s palace. At that time, she was with Sunanda and it was the sacred time for the king to say his
prayers. Only a little bit of her great beauty could be seen, like the luminosity of the sun engulfed in a net of haze.
On seeing that large-eyed one, though she was extremely thin and dirty, he used different arguments to deduce that
she was Bhima’s daughter. Sudeva said, ‘This lady’s beauty is exactly like what I have seen before. After seeing
her, I have accomplished my objective today. She is like Shri and brings pleasure to the worlds. Her face is like the
full moon. She is dark. Her breasts are beautifully rounded. Through her radiance, this goddess dispels darkness in
all the directions. Her eyes are beautiful, like the lotus or the palasha. She looks like Manmatha’s Rati.167 She is
desired by all the worlds, like the rays of the full moon. Because of destiny and the adversity of fate, she has been
dislodged from the lake of Vidarbha. Her limbs are encrusted with dirt and mud, exactly like the stalk of a lotus.
Or she is like the night of the full moon when the moon has been swallowed up by Rahu.168 She is miserable and
despondent because of sorrow for her husband, like the course of a river that has run dry. She looks like a pond of
lotuses devastated by the trunks of elephants, with the ﬂowers decayed and the birds scattered in fear. She is delicate and her limbs are of noble lineage. She should be in a house that is a store of jewels. But she burns in the heat
like the uprooted stalk of a lotus. She has the qualities of beauty and generosity. However, though she deserves
them, she is not adorned in ornaments. She is like a sliver of the moon in the sky, when it is covered by dark
clouds. She is deprived of objects of desire. She has been separated from her loved ones and distanced from her
relatives. The miserable one sustains her body, in the hope of seeing her husband again. The husband is the
supreme ornament for a woman, even if she has no other ornaments. Without him, even a beautiful woman does
not seem beautiful. Without her, Nala must be facing great difﬁculties. How does he hold up his body, without immersing himself in sorrow? She is there, with eyes like a lotus with a hundred petals. She is one who deserves happiness. But seeing her unhappy, my mind also suffers. When will this radiant one reach the other shore, overcoming this unhappiness? When will this faithful one unite with her husband, like Rohini with the moon?169 The
Nishadha will certainly be delighted when he gets her back. The king who has lost his kingdom will regain it and
the earth with it. Nishadha deserves Vidarbha’s daughter and the black-eyed one deserves him. They are similar in
conduct and age. They are similar in lineage. She is anxious to see her husband and he is immensely brave and
powerful. It is my duty to comfort the wife. I will console the one with a face like that of the full moon. She has
never before witnessed the misery she is suffering now. Because of her sorrow, she is now reﬂecting all the time.’
Through different signs and arguments, he arrived at this conclusion.
‘“The brahmana Sudeva then approached Bhima’s daughter and said, ‘O Vidarbha’s daughter! I am Sudeva. I
am your brother’s beloved friend. I have come here on the instructions of King Bhima. I have come here looking
for you. O queen! Your father is well and so are your mother and brothers. Your son and daughter, who will have
long lives, are well. But because of you, though they are alive, the large numbers of your relatives seem to be

bereft of their senses.’ O Yudhishthira! Damayanti recognized Sudeva and one after another, asked him about all
her well-wishers. O king! On suddenly seeing Sudeva, the best of brahmanas and her brother’s friend, Vidarbha’s
daughter was overcome by grief and wept piteously. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Sunanda saw her weeping there, overcome by grief, and conversing alone with Sudeva. She sent a message to her mother, ‘Sairandhri is
weeping piteously, ever since she met a brahmana. If you think ﬁt, ﬁnd out the reason.’ Then the mother of the
king of Chedi left the king’s inner quarters and went to where the lady was meeting the brahmana. O lord of the
earth! The king’s mother summoned Sudeva and asked, ‘Whose wife is this beautiful one and whose daughter?
How has the one with the beautiful eyes been separated from her relatives and her husband? O brahmana! Do you
know how she has come to this state? I wish to hear everything from you in complete detail. I am asking about the
lady whose form is like that of a goddess. Tell me everything truthfully.’ O king! Having been thus addressed,
Sudeva, supreme among brahmanas, sat down in comfort and recounted the true story about Damayanti.”’
363(66)

‘“Sudeva said, ‘The king of Vidarbha has dharma in his soul. His name is Bhima and his valour is terrible. This is
his fortunate daughter, famous by the name of Damayanti. The king of the nishadhas has the name of Nala and he
is the son of Virasena. This fortunate one is the wife of the wise Punyashloka. In a game of dice, that lord of the
earth was robbed of his kingdom by his brother. He went away with Damayanti, without anyone knowing where
they had gone. We have been travelling the entire earth in search of Damayanti. I ﬁnally discovered the lady in
your son’s house. No other woman is known to have a beauty like hers. Between the eyebrows of this dark one
there is a natural mark.170 It is shaped like a lotus and I have seen it before. But it has disappeared now. It is covered in dirt, like the moon covered by white clouds. This mark of prosperity was given to her by the creator. It can
be faintly seen now, like the covered sliver of a moon on the ﬁrst day of the lunar fortnight. But though her body is
covered with dirt, her beauty has not been destroyed. Though she has not washed herself, it shines forth like gold.
This lady, this goddess, was identiﬁed by me from her body and from that mark, like a hidden ﬁre can be detected
from its heat.’”
‘Brihadashva said, “O lord of the earth! When Sunanda heard these words of Sudeva, she cleaned the dirt that
covered the mark. Having been cleansed of the dirt, Damayanti’s mark became visible, like the moon appears in
the clear sky. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing the mark, Sunanda and the king’s mother wept. They
embraced her and stood there for some time. Shedding tears, the king’s mother said in a soft voice, ‘From this
mark I know that you are my sister’s daughter. O beautiful one! Your mother and I are the daughters of the greatsouled Sudamna, the king of Dasharna. She was given to King Bhima and I was again given to Virabahu. I saw
you being born, in my father’s house in Dasharna. O beautiful one! This house of mine is like your father’s house.
O Damayanti! All my riches are like yours.’ O lord of the earth! On hearing these words, Damayanti’s mind rejoiced. She showed her respects to her mother’s sister and spoke these words, ‘Even though I was unknown, I lived
here happily. I received all the objects of my desire and was always protected by you. There is no doubt that my
stay here will now be happier still. O mother! But I have been away from home for a long time. Please give me
permission to leave. My children have been taken there and the young ones are living there. They must be sorrowful because they are without their father and without me. How are they? I wish to go to Vidarbha. If you wish to do
something that brings me pleasure, please give instructions that transport arrangements are made swiftly.’ O king!
On hearing these words, her mother’s sister happily agreed. With her son’s consent, the king’s mother arranged for
a handsome vehicle for her, carried by men.171 It was guarded by a large force. O best of the Bharata lineage! It
was stocked with plenty of food, drink and garments.
‘“Then, after a short while, the beautiful one arrived in Vidarbha and all her relatives happily welcomed her,
showing her homage. She saw that her relatives and her children were well, and so were her mother, her father and
all her friends. O lord of the earth! The famous one, the fortunate Damayanti, worshipped the gods and the brahmanas in accordance with the best of rites. The king was delighted on seeing his daughter. He satisﬁed Sudeva by
giving him a thousand cows, a lot of riches and a village. O king! The beautiful lady spent the night in her father’s
house. When she had rested, she spoke to her mother in these words.”’

364(67)

‘“Damayanti said, ‘O mother! I tell you truthfully. If you wish to see me alive, please arrange it so that Nala, the
brave one among men, is brought here.”
‘Brihadashva said, “Thus addressed by Damayanti, the queen was extremely distressed. O king! Her voice choking with tears, there was no reply that she could give. On seeing her in this state, everyone in the inner quarters began to weep and lament grievously. O great king! Then Bhima’s wife spoke to him. ‘Your daughter Damayanti is
sorrowing on account of her husband. O king! Unrestrained by shame, she herself told me this. Ask your messengers to make efforts to ﬁnd Punyashloka.’ Thus asked by her, the king sent brahmanas who were in his service in
every direction, with instructions that they should try to ﬁnd Nala. Thus instructed by the king of Vidarbha, the
bulls among the brahmanas came and told Damayanti that they were leaving. Bhima’s daughter then told them that
in every country and at every place where men gathered, they should repeatedly utter the following words. ‘O
gambler! O loved one! You are the one who sliced off half my garment. Where are you? You abandoned your
beloved wife in a deserted region. It is in accordance with your instructions that she is still awaiting you, clad only
in half a garment. The lady is tormented by grief. O lord of the earth! She repeatedly weeps because of that sorrow.
O brave one! Show her your favour and reply to her words.’ She told them that, as a mark of favour towards her,
these were the words that they should utter, because a ﬁre that has the wind with it burns down the forest. They
should also say, ‘The husband is always bound to protect and maintain his wife. You are learned in dharma. Why
do you ignore these duties? You are famous, wise and kind and have been born to a noble lineage. But I fear that
you have now become cruel and that is the reason my fortune has turned. O bull among men! O great archer! Show
compassion towards me. You have often told me that compassion is the supreme dharma.’ She told them that if
anyone responded to these words, they should ﬁnd out everything about that man and where he lived. ‘O supreme
among brahmanas! If any man replies to your words, convey those words immediately to me. After accomplishing
your task, you must return here immediately, so that he does not ﬁnd out that you are there on Bhima’s instructions. Whether he is rich or poor, or desirous of riches, you must ﬁnd out what it is that he desires.’ O king! Having
heard these words, the brahmanas went out in all the directions.
‘“They searched for the sinner Nala. They went to cities, countries, villages, places where there were cowherds
and hermitages. O lord of the earth! Everywhere, the brahmanas repeated exactly the words Damayanti had asked
them to utter.”’
365(68)

‘Brihadashva said, “After a long time, a brahmana by the name of Parnada returned to the city and told Bhima’s
daughter, ‘O Damayanti! I searched for Nishadha day and night and went to the city of Ayodhya. I presented myself before Bhangasvari.172 O beautiful one! In a public place, I repeated those words before the immensely fortunate Rituparna, exactly as you had asked me to. On hearing those words, Rituparna, lord of men, did not reply. Nor
did any of his courtiers respond, though those words were repeated by me several times. Then the king gave me
permission to leave. A man named Bahuka is in Rituparna’s service. He is the king’s charioteer and is deformed
and has short arms. He is skilled in driving vehicles swiftly and he is accomplished in cooking. When I was alone,
he spoke a few words to me. He sighed several times and wept repeatedly. He asked me about my welfare and then
addressed me in these words, “Though they confront great calamity, women of a good lineage protect themselves
through their own efforts and there is no doubt that they win heaven for themselves. Even if they are abandoned by
their husbands, they are never angry. He was trying to sustain his life and a bird stole his garment. He is tormented
by anguish and a dark one should not be angry. Whether she is treated well or whether she is treated badly, when
she sees her husband without his kingdom and without prosperity, a dark one should not be angry.” On hearing
these words of his, I instantly returned here. Having heard this, you decide and inform the king.’ O lord of the
earth! Damayanti listened to Parnada’s words with tears in her eyes.
‘“She went to her mother and secretly told her, ‘O mother! Bhima should under no circumstances get to know
about these words. In your presence, I wish to employ Sudeva, supreme among brahmanas. King Bhima should not
know what my intentions are. If you wish to bring about my pleasure, you must act in this way. Let Sudeva go
quickly. Let him perform the auspicious ceremonies that united me with my relatives. Let Sudeva go without de-

lay. O mother! Let him go to the city of Ayodhya and bring Nala back here.’ Later, after Parnada, supreme among
brahmanas, had rested, the beautiful daughter of Vidarbha worshipped him and gave him a lot of riches. She said,
‘O brahmana! When Nala comes here, I will give you even greater riches. O supreme among brahmanas! You have
done so much for me. No one else will ever be able to accomplish more. It is because of this that I will soon be reunited with my husband.’ Thus addressed by her, the high-minded one paid her his respects and pronounced auspicious blessings over her. Having accomplished his purpose, he returned home.
‘“O Yudhishthira! Then Damayanti summoned that brahmana173 again. In her mother’s presence and engulfed
by misery and sorrow, she told him, ‘O Sudeva! Go to King Rituparna who lives in the city of Ayodhya and tell
him, “Bhima’s daughter Damayanti wishes for a husband again and will again hold a svayamvara. All the kings
and the princes are going there. Having computed the time, this will be held tomorrow. O destroyer of enemies! If
it is possible, go there quickly. She will choose a second husband at the time of sunrise, because it is not known
whether the valiant Nala is dead or alive.”’ O great king! As he had been instructed, the brahmana Sudeva then
went to King Rituparna and told him what he had been asked to.”’
366(69)

‘Brihadashva said, “Having heard these words of Sudeva, Rituparna, lord of men, spoke these words to Bahuka, in
a comforting and soft voice, ‘O Bahuka! I wish to go to Vidarbha for Damayanti’s svayamvara. You are skilled
with horses. Do you think that it can be done in a single day?’ O Kounteya! Having heard these words from the
king, Nala’s mind was rent asunder with grief and the great-minded one was tormented with sorrow. He thought,
‘If Damayanti has decided to do something like this, she must be demented with grief. Or is it that she has thought
of a great means for my sake? Why has the ascetic daughter of Vidarbha decided to perform this cruel act? I am
mean and deceitful and my intelligence has been deluded by sin. In this world, feminine nature is ﬁckle. My sin
was also terrible. So must it then be. But will she act in this way and forget all her love? That slender-waisted one
is anxious for my sake and is despairing. But she can never act in this way, especially because she has children. It
is certain that we have to go there and truly ﬁnd out what is happening. I will accomplish Rituparna’s desires, because that is what I want too.’ Bahuka decided this in his mind. In a dejected state of mind, he went to King Rituparna. He joined his hands in salutation and said, ‘O tiger among men! O lord of men! I give you my word that we
will reach the city of Vidarbha in a single day.’ O king! Having obtained King Bhangasvari’s orders, Bahuka went
to the stables and inspected the horses.
‘“Bahuka was repeatedly rushed by Rituparna. He then selected horses that were lean, but capable on the road.
They were energetic and strong. They had been born in a noble lineage and were good in conduct. They were
bereft of all inauspicious marks. Their nostrils were wide and their jaws were big. They were pure and possessed
the ten locks of hair.174 They were from the region of the Sindhu and were as swift as the wind. On seeing them,
the king was a little angry and said, ‘What do you wish to do? You should not jest with me. How can these horses
of mine, weak and lifeless, bear us? How can we travel such a long distance with these steeds?’ Bahuka replied,
‘There is no doubt that these horses will reach Vidarbha. O king! But if you so desire, tell me which ones you
would like me to yoke.’ Rituparna said, ‘O Bahuka! You are the one who has knowledge of horses. You are the
skilled one. Yoke the ones that you think will be swift and capable.’ Then the skilled Nala yoked four horses to the
chariot. They were bred from a noble lineage and were of good conduct. Then the king swiftly ascended the chariot that had been yoked, as the supreme horses knelt down on the ground.
‘“O lord of the earth! Then the handsome King Nala, supreme among men, comforted the horses, which were
endowed with energy and strength. Nala controlled the reins and made suta Varshneya ascend the chariot. Then
those supreme horses were commanded by Bahuka in accordance with the rules. The chariot seemed to rise up into
the sky, confounding the occupants. The wise king of Ayodhya was extremely surprised when he saw those horses
carry them with the speed of the wind. Having heard the roar of the chariot and the control over the horses, Varshneya began to wonder about Bahuka’s mastery over horses, ‘Is this Matali, the charioteer of the king of the gods?
Those great signs can be seen in the brave Bahuka. Or is this Shalihotra,175 who knows about the breeding of
horses? Has he now assumed this beautiful human form?176 Or might it be King Nala, the destroyer of enemy

cities? Has that king come here?’177 He began to think in this way, ‘Or perhaps Bahuka knows some of the
knowledge that Nala possessed. The skills of Bahuka and Nala seem to be the same. Then again, his age seems to
be the same as Nala’s. This is not the immensely valorous Nala, but he has the same knowledge. Sometimes, greatsouled ones roam the world in disguise, driven by destiny, or malformed because of what has been said in the sacred texts. My mind is divided because of the deformity of his body. But it is my view that I should not decide in
the absence of proof. They are equal in age. It is the form alone that is the difﬁculty. But then again, Bahuka has all
the qualities and I think that he is Nala.’ O great king! Punyashloka’s old charioteer kept on thinking in his mind.
O Indra among kings! Together with the charioteer Varshneya, King Rituparna also kept thinking about Bahuka’s
expertise with horses. He was extremely delighted on witnessing his strength, valour, enthusiasm, control over
horses and diligence.”’
367(70)

‘Brihadashva said, “Like a bird travelling in the sky, he swiftly crossed rivers, mountains, forests and lakes. As the
chariot travelled, King Bhangasvari, the conqueror of enemy cities, saw that his upper garment had fallen down.
When he saw that the garment had dropped as they were speeding, the great-souled king told Nala, ‘I will go and
get it. O immensely intelligent one! Restrain these immensely swift horses. Varshneya can then go and retrieve the
garment.’ Nala replied, ‘Your garment fell down far behind. We have travelled more than a yojana since then. It is
not possible to get it back now.’ O king! While he was thus addressed by Nala, King Bhangasvari came to a forest
where there was a vibhitaka tree laden with fruit.
‘“On seeing the tree, the king immediately told Bahuka, ‘O suta! Now witness my great prowess at counting.
Everyone does not know everything. Indeed, there is no one who knows everything. O Bahuka! In this tree, the
number of leaves and fruits that are still on it is more than those that have fallen down by one hundred and one. O
Bahuka! There is one more leaf and one hundred fruit. Those two branches have ﬁve crore leaves. Take those two
branches and their twigs. The fruits there will number two thousand and ninety-ﬁve.’ At that, Bahuka descended
from the chariot and told the king, ‘O king! O oppressor of enemies! You have stated something that is beyond my
perception. O king! If I count, nothing will be left to supposition. O great king! Witness as I count the number of
vibhitakas. I do not know whether your statement is right or wrong. O lord of men! You will see as I count the
number of fruit. Let Varshneya handle the reins of the horses for the moment.’ The king told the suta,178 ‘We do
not have any time to delay.’ However, Bahuka told him with great humility, ‘Wait for only an instant. Or if you
wish to hurry, take Varshneya as your charioteer. From here onwards, the road is smooth.’ O descendant of the
Kuru lineage! Rituparana comforted him and said, ‘O Bahuka! There is no one on earth who is your equal as a
charioteer. You know about horses. I desired to go to Vidarbha with your help. I seek a favour with you. Please do
not create obstacles. O Bahuka! I will do whatever you wish, and whatever you tell me, if you take me to Vidarbha
today and show me the sunrise there.’ At that, Bahuka told him, ‘I will count the vibhitakas and then go to Vidarbha. Please do what I ask you to.’ Unwillingly, the king asked him to proceed with the counting. He dismounted
from the chariot and swiftly cut down the tree. He was extremely surprised that, on counting, the number of fruits
was exactly what the king had told him it would be. He said, ‘O king! This is extraordinary and I have seen your
powers. O king! I wish to know the learning through which you have known this.’ But the king was in a hurry to
leave and replied, ‘Know that I am versed with the heart of the dice and have expertise in counting.’ Bahuka said,
‘O bull among men! Give me that knowledge. And take from me the knowledge about handling horses.’ King Rituparna desired to imbibe the knowledge about horses and there was also the urgency of his task.179 So he told
Bahuka, ‘Let it be that way. Accept from me the supreme knowledge about the heart of the dice. O Bahuka! But let
my knowledge about horses remain in your heart as a trust.’ Having said this, Rituparna gave his knowledge to
Nala.
‘“When Nala had learned the knowledge of the dice, Kali emerged from his body, continuously vomiting from
his mouth Karkotaka’s virulent venom. The ﬁre of Kali’s curse, which had made the king thin and had oppressed
him for a long time, making him lose control over his own self, also issued out. Kali’s self was freed from the poison and he assumed his own form. Nala, lord of the nishadhas, was angry and wished to curse him. Kali was

frightened. He trembled and joined his hands in salutation. He said, ‘O king! Control your anger. I will give you
supreme fame. In anger, Indrasena’s mother180 had cursed me earlier, when you had abandoned her and I have
been sorely oppressed since then. O Indra among kings! O invincible one! I have lived inside you in great misery. I
have burnt day and night from the venom of the king of the serpents. If anyone from the world of men recounts
your deeds incessantly, he shall have no reason to be scared of danger from me.’ On hearing these words, King
Nala controlled the wrath in his soul. Then the frightened Kali quickly entered the vibhitaka. When Kali had been
conversing with Nishadha, he had been invisible to others.
‘“King Nishadha, the destroyer of enemy warriors, was cured of his fever. Kali had been destroyed and the king
had counted the number of fruit. He was extremely delighted and was again endowed with his earlier radiance.
Then the energetic one ascended the chariot and drove the swift steeds. Having been possessed by Kali, the vibhitaka has come to acquire a bad reputation. Nala’s heart was delighted. He repeatedly urged those supreme horses
and they travelled like birds. The great-minded king proceeded in the direction of Vidarbha. When Nala had gone a
long distance, Kali also returned home. O lord of the earth! King Nala was freed from his fever. O king! But
though he was free of Kali, he was still separated from his old form.”’
368(71)

‘Brihadashva said, “Rituparna, for whom truth was his strength, arrived in Vidarbha in the evening. The people informed King Bhima about his arrival. On Bhima’s words, the king entered the city of Kundina,181 ﬁlling all the
ten directions with the sound of his chariot. Nala’s horses182 heard the roar of the chariot and hearing this, rejoiced, just as they had in Nala’s company earlier. Damayanti also heard the roar of Nala’s chariot, which was like
the deep rumbling of clouds at the onset of the monsoon. Like the horses, Bhima’s daughter thought that the chariot roared as it used to before, when Nala used to control his horses. The peacocks in the palace, the elephants in the
stables and the horses heard the roar of the great king’s chariot. O king! On hearing the roar of the chariot, the peacocks and the elephants made expectant noises, because they thought the rains were imminent.
‘“Damayanti said, ‘The roar of the chariot ﬁlls up the entire earth and gladdens my heart. It must be King Nala.
Today, if I do not see the valorous Nala, whose face is like the moon and who possesses innumerable qualities,
there is no doubt that I will perish. If I am not engulfed today in the arms of that brave one, whose touch brings
pleasure, there is no doubt that I will perish. If Nishadha does not come to me today, with a voice like the roar of
the clouds and with a complexion of gold, there is no doubt that I will perish. If that Indra among kings, whose valour is like a lion and who can restrain a mad elephant, does not come to me, there is no doubt that I will perish. I
do not remember the slightest falsehood. I do not remember the slightest injury in him. The great-souled keeps all
his promises, made even in jest. My lord is forgiving, brave, gentle and generous and is in control of his senses. He
is not addicted to low vices. Nishadha has always behaved towards me like an impotent one.183 Remembering his
qualities, I am tormented day and night. My heart is about to be rent asunder because of the sorrow of being separated from that beloved one.’”
‘Brihadashva said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Lamenting in this way and desiring to see Punyashloka, she ascended that large palace, as if bereft of her senses. She saw the chariot in the centre,184 with King Rituparna, Varshneya and Bahuka on it. Then Varshneya and Bahuka dismounted from the supreme chariot. They unharnessed the horses and secured the chariot. O great king! King Rituparna alighted from the chariot and presented
himself before Bhima, whose valour was terrible. Then Bhima welcomed him with the best of honours. He had
suddenly come. The counsel of the women was not known.185 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! ‘You are welcome. What can I do?’ asked the king. He did not know that the king had come for the sake of his daughter. The
wise King Rituparna, whose truth was his valour, saw that there was no other king or prince there. There were no
signs of a svayamvara, nor had an assembling of brahmanas occurred. Then the king, the lord of Koshala, thought
about this in his mind and said, ‘I have come here to pay my respects.’ King Bhima began to reﬂect about this in
his mind. There had to be some other reason for travelling more than a hundred yojanas, passing through many villages. The reason for his arrival had not been correctly stated. The minor reason identiﬁed could not have been the
reason for his arrival. But the king showed him all due respect and repeatedly told him that he was tired and should

rest. Thus treated with friendly homage, the king was pleased. He happily followed the king’s servants and went to
the house that had been identiﬁed for him. O king! When King Rituparna had left with Varshneya, Bahuka grasped
the chariot and went to the place where chariots were kept. He freed the horses and tended to them, as instructed in
the sacred texts. Having comforted the horses himself, he sat down on a side of the chariot.
‘“The sorrowful Damayanti had seen King Bhangasvari, Varshneya the son of a suta and Bahuka, in that position. Vidarbha’s daughter began to think. Whose chariot roared in that way? The great sound was like Nala’s, but
Nishadha was not to be seen. Was it possible that Varshneya had acquired the knowledge? Was that the reason why
the roar of the chariot made a great sound like that of Nala’s? Or was it the case that Rituparna was the equal of
King Nala? The roar of the chariot seemed to be like that of Nishadha’s. O lord of the earth! Damayanti debated in
this way. O king! She then sent a lady messenger in search of Nishadha.”’
369(72)

‘“Damayanti said, ‘O Keshini! Go and ﬁnd out who the driver of that chariot is. He is seated by the side of the
chariot. He is malformed and has short arms. O fortunate one! Approach him and gently ask his about his welfare.
O unblemished one! Ask and ﬁnd out everything about this man. I have great anxiety that this is King Nala, because my mind is satisﬁed and my heart is calm. O one with the beautiful waist! In the course of the conversation,
use Parnada’s words. O unblemished one! Pay attention to his reply.’”
‘Brihadashva said, “Then that female messenger carefully went to Bahuka, while the fortunate Damayanti
looked on from the palace. Keshini said, ‘O Indra among men! Welcome. I wish you all welfare. Damayanti has
asked a question. O bull among men! Listen to it attentively. When did you leave? Why have you come here? Tell
me everything truthfully. The daughter of Vidarbha wishes to know.’ Bahuka replied, ‘The famous king of Koshala
heard that Damayanti will hold a second svayamvara tomorrow. O beautiful one! On hearing this, the king set out
with excellent steeds that are as swift as the wind and are capable of travelling a hundred yojanas. I am his charioteer.’ Keshini asked, ‘Who is the third man in your group? Whose is he and where has he come from? Why did this
task have to be performed by you?’ Bahuka replied, ‘He was the charioteer of Punyashloka and is famous by the
name of Varshneya. O beautiful one! When Nala ﬂed, he went to Bhangasvari. I am skilled in handling horses and
am an expert cook. Rituparna appointed me as his charioteer and his cook.’ Keshini asked, ‘Does Varshneya know
where King Nala has gone? O Bahuka! Has he said anything in your presence?’ Bahuka replied, ‘Having brought
the children of the evil-acting Nala here, he went away where he desired and has no knowledge of Nishadha. O famous one! There is no other man who knows anything about Nala. The lord of the earth roams the world in disguise, in a different form. Nala alone knows where he is, and the lady who is like his second self. Nala never reveals his signs in any way.’
‘“Keshini said, ‘The brahmana who earlier went to Ayodhya repeatedly uttered the words spoken by a lady “O
gambler! O loved one! You are the one who sliced off half my garment. Where are you? You abandoned your
beloved wife in a deserted region. It is in accordance with your instructions that she is still awaiting you, clad only
in half a garment. The lady is tormented by grief. O lord of the earth! She repeatedly weeps because of that sorrow.
O brave one! Show her your favour and reply to her words.” O immensely intelligent one! Speak and recount her
beloved tale. The unblemished daughter of Vidarbha wishes to hear those words. Ever since she heard the reply
you gave to the brahmana then, Vidarbha’s daughter has been desirous of hearing the words you uttered again.’ O
descendant of the Kuru lineage! When Keshini said this to Nala, his heart suffered and his eyes were ﬁlled with
tears. Having suppressed his grief, the tormented lord of the earth again spoke those words in a voice that was
choked with tears, ‘Though they confront great calamity, women of a good lineage protect themselves through
their own efforts and there is no doubt that they win heaven for themselves. Even if they are abandoned by their
husbands, they are never angry. Faithful women sustain their lives with their armour as character. He was trying to
sustain his life and a bird stole his garment. He is tormented by anguish and a dark one should not be angry.
Whether she is treated well or whether she is treated badly, she sees her husband without his kingdom and without
prosperity, hungry and addicted to vice.’ O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As he spoke these words, Nala was
extremely miserable. He could not restrain his tears and began to weep. Then Keshini went away and told
Damayanti everything that he had said, including the transformation that had come over him.”’

370(73)

‘Brihadashva said, “Having heard all this, Damayanti was overcome with grief. She suspected that he was Nala
and told Keshini, ‘O Keshini! Go and examine Bahuka in many ways. Do not say anything. But stay near him and
observe his conduct. O beautiful one! Whenever he does something, ﬁnd out the reason. In particular, notice if he
does anything attentively. O beautiful one! If ﬁre is to be given to him, place an obstruction. If he asks for water,
be in no hurry to give it to him. Observe everything about his conduct and come and tell me. Report to me everything about whatever else you happen to see.’ Thus addressed by Damayanti, Keshini left quickly. She determined
that he had the marks of someone who was skilled in horses and returned. She told Damayanti everything that she
had observed, everything about Bahuka, human and divine.
‘“Keshini said, ‘O Damayanti! Never before have I seen, or heard of, a man with conduct like this. He is ﬁrm
and pure in his conduct. When he comes to a short passage, he never lowers his head. But on seeing him, the passage is elevated, and he comfortably passes through. Thus a narrow opening becomes a wide opening for him. The
king sent a lot of many kinds of food for Rituparna and there was the ﬂesh of many animals. A vessel had been
provided for cleaning the meat. When Bahuka looked at the vessel, it ﬁlled up with water for cleaning. He then
wished to cook and grasped a handful of straw. He made it into kindling and held it up and suddenly, it blazed up
in ﬂames. On witnessing that extraordinary sight, I was astounded and came back here. I also saw another great
marvel there. O beautiful one! Though he touched ﬁre, it did not burn him down. The water ﬂowed rapidly on his
instructions. I witnessed yet another great wonder. He took some ﬂowers in his hand and pressed them gently.
When these ﬂowers were pressed in his hands, they became even more fresh and fragrant. Having witnessed these
extraordinary wonders, I have swiftly come back here.’ Having heard about the deeds performed by Punyashloka,
Damayanti decided that Nala was known through his acts and signs and had been regained.
‘“She guessed that her husband Nala had assumed the form of Bahuka. She wept and again told Keshini in a soft
voice, ‘O beautiful one! Go yet again. When Bahuka is inattentive, take from the kitchen some meat that he has
cooked and come back here.’ The one who performed desired actions went swiftly. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! When Bahuka’s attention was elsewhere, Keshini took some warm meat and instantly brought it to
Damayanti. In earlier times, she had often tasted meat prepared by Nala. On tasting it, she knew Nala to be the
cook. She wept in great sorrow, overcome by grief. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! She then washed her face
and sent Keshini with the twins. Bahuka recognized Indrasena186 and her brother. The king rushed to them, embraced them and placed them on his lap. Having regained his children, who were like divine children, Bahuka was
overcome by great grief and cried loudly. Thus, Nishadha repeatedly displayed his mental anguish. Suddenly, he
let his children go and told Keshini, ‘O beautiful one! These twins are just like my own children and on suddenly
seeing them, I began to shed tears. You have been coming here quite often and people may interpret these signs
wrongly. We are guests in your country. O beautiful one! Therefore, I bow down before you. Go away.’”’
371(74)

‘Brihadashva said, “Having seen all the agitations of the wise Punyashloka, Keshini quickly returned and reported
it to Damayanti. Damayanti was sad and anxious because of the suspicion that this was Nala. She sent Keshini
again to her mother,187 ‘Suspecting him to be Nala, I have examined Bahuka in many ways. But I have doubts on
account of his appearance. I wish to know this for myself. O mother! Let him come to me, or let me go to him,
with or without my father’s knowledge.’ Thus addressed by the daughter of Vidarbha, the queen related this to
Bhima and the king got to know about his daughter’s plan. O bull among the Bharata lineage! With the sanction of
her father and mother, she had Nala brought to where she was staying.
‘“On suddenly seeing King Nala, the beautiful one was overcome with a terrible sorrow. O great king! She was
dressed in a red garment. Her hair was matted, dirty and caked with mud. Damayanti spoke these words to Bahuka,
‘O Bahuka! Have you ever seen any man, who is said to know about dharma, abandon his sleeping wife in a deserted forest? Who will forsake his beloved and innocent wife, when she is overcome by fatigue? Who but Punyashloka Nala will leave? What offence have I committed towards that lord of the earth? When I was overcome
with sleep, why did he desert me in the wilderness and go away? In earlier times, I had chosen him myself, in the
presence of the gods. She loved him and was devoted to him. She was the mother of his children. How could he

forsake her? He had accepted my hand in front of the ﬁre, following the words of the swans. He had promised to
sustain me. Where has that pledge gone now?’ O destroyer of enemies! When Damayanti was saying all this, tears
of sorrow welled up in her eyes and ﬂowed copiously. When Nala saw those tears of sorrow ﬂow copiously from
the black-pupiled and red-tinged eyes, he replied in words of sorrow, ‘O timid one! The loss of my kingdom was
not brought about by me. It was brought about by Kali and he made me abandon you. O you who are best in the
observance of dharma! In earlier times, when you were living in the forest and were miserable and sorrowful at my
having lost my garment, you had cursed him. Ever since then, tormented by the curse, Kali has resided in my body.
Burnt with that curse, he has been like kindling with ﬁre in it. Now he has been conquered with my perseverance
and austerities. O beautiful one! There will be an end to our miseries. Freeing me, that evil one has gone away. O
one with the wide hips! It is because of this that I came here, for your sake and for no other reason. O timid one!
But how could a woman like you abandon a husband who loved her and was devoted to her? How could you marry
another? On the king’s instructions, messengers have travelled all over the earth, proclaiming that Bhima’s daughter will choose a second husband. Like a wanton one, and acting on her own desires, she will choose one who is
her equal. On hearing this, Bhangasvari came here swiftly.’ When she heard Nala’s lament, Damayanti trembled
and was frightened. She joined her hands in salutation and spoke these words.”’
372(75)

‘“Damayanti said, ‘O ruler of Nishadha! O fortunate one! It does not behove you to be suspicious of sin or ﬁnd
fault with me. I rejected the gods and chose you. It was in order to bring you here that the brahmanas had gone in
all the directions, singing my words in verses in the ten directions. O king! At last, a learned brahmana named Parnada discovered you in Koshala, in Rituparna’s house. When I heard his words and the exact reply that you gave, I
saw this means of bringing Nishadha here. O lord of the earth! O lord of men! Other than you, who in this world is
capable of driving horses over more than a hundred yojanas in a single day? O lord of the earth! I touch your feet
in worship and swear that I have not been unfaithful towards you, not even in my thoughts. If I have committed
any sin, let the moving wind that courses through the world and is a witness to everything free me from my breath
of life today. If I have committed any sin, let the sun which always travels the world with its sharp rays free me
from my breath of life today. If I have committed any sin, let the moon which courses through all beings as a witness free me from my breath of life today. Let these three gods who hold up the three worlds relate the truth of exactly what has happened. Or let them abandon me today.’”
‘Brihadashva said, “Thus addressed, the wind-god spoke from the sky and said, ‘O Nala! I tell you the truth that
she has not committed any sin. O king! Damayanti has protected her treasure of good conduct and has increased it.
We have protected her for three years and are witness. This method that she has devised for your sake is unparalleled. But for you, there is no other man who can travel one hundred yojanas in a single day. O lord of the earth!
Bhima’s daughter has obtained you and you have obtained Bhima’s daughter. Do not have any doubts about what
you should do. Be united with your wife.’ While the wind-god was speaking, a shower of ﬂowers fell from above.
The drums of the gods sounded and a pure breeze began to blow. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On witnessing this marvel, King Nala, the destroyer of enemies, gave up all his doubts about Damayanti.
‘“Then the lord of the earth donned the garment that does not decay and recalled to his mind the king of the serpents. He regained his old form. When Bhima’s daughter saw her husband in his own form, the unblemished one
embraced Punyashloka and cried loudly. Radiant as before, King Nala also embraced Bhima’s daughter. He also
embraced his children in the proper way and was delighted. The one with the beautiful face and the large eyes
placed her head on his chest. Overcome with sorrow, she sighed heavily. The sweet-smiling one’s limbs were covered with dirt and tears ﬂowed down. She embraced that tiger among men for a long time.
‘“O king! Then the mother of the daughter of Vidarbha happily informed Bhima about everything that had transpired between Nala and Damayanti. The great king replied, ‘I will see Nala and Damayanti tomorrow, after he has
rested and performed his ablutions.’ O king! Then the happy couple conversed throughout the night about their
earlier wanderings in the forest. They slept happily. He was united with his wife in the fourth year. He obtained all
the objects of desire, attained all accomplishments and was supremely happy. Damayanti was extremely content at
having regained her husband, like the earth with half-grown crops is, on receiving showers. She was united with

her husband and all her fatigue had passed. Her fever was gone and her heart was ﬁlled with joy. All the desires of
Bhima’s daughter were met and she was as radiant as the night, when the moon had arisen.”’
373(76)

‘Brihadashva said, “After the night had passed, King Nala adorned himself in ornaments. With Vidarbha’s daughter by his side, he went and met the king at the right time. Then Nala paid his respects to his father-in-law. Then
the beautiful Damayanti also offered her respects to her father. Extremely delighted, Bhima welcomed him like a
son. The lord also showed him due homage and comforted Nala, together with his devoted wife Damayanti. Thus
honoured, King Nala also returned the honour in the proper way and offered his services to him.188 A great roar of
joy arose in the city. The people were delighted to see Nala return in this way. The city was decorated with ﬂags,
ﬂagstaffs and garlands. The streets were watered and the royal roads cleaned and adorned with ﬂowers. At every
door, the citizens placed ﬂowers that had been cut. The gods were worshipped in all the temples.
‘“When King Rituparna heard that Bahuka was Nala and that he had been reunited with Damayanti, he was delighted. King Nala had him brought and begged forgiveness of the king. He who was intelligent begged forgiveness because of several reasons. Thus honoured, the surprised king spoke to Nishadha, ‘I congratulate you that you
have been happily reunited with your wife. O Nishadha! O lord of Nishadha! If I committed any crime when you
lived in disguise in my house, if I committed an offence, knowingly or unknowingly, please pardon me.’ Nala
replied, ‘O king! You have not committed the slightest crime. Even if you had, I would not have been angered and
would have forgiven you. O lord of men! You have always been my friend and my relative. I have lived happily in
your house and you have always provided me with every object of desire, more in your house than in my own. O
king! Please exhibit your friendship in future too. Your knowledge about horses vests with me.189 O king! If you
so wish, I will happily impart it to you now.’ Having said this, Nishadha gave that knowledge to Rituparna. Having
performed the prescribed deeds, he accepted it. When King Bhangasvari had obtained the knowledge about horses,
he appointed another charioteer and left for his own city.190 O lord of the earth! After Rituparna had left, King
Nala did not reside in the city of Kundina for a long time.”’
374(77)

‘Brihadashva said, “O Kounteya! Nishadha lived there for a month. Then, with Bhima’s permission, he left for
Nishadha with a small number of attendants. He left with a single radiant chariot, sixteen tusked elephants, ﬁfty
horses and six hundred infantry. The earth trembled when the lord of the earth travelled speedily. Then the greatminded one entered, swiftly and wrathfully.
‘“Virasena’s son, Nala, went before Pushkara and said, ‘O Pushkara! Let us play with dice again. I have acquired a lot of riches. Damayanti, and everything else that I have acquired, will be my stake. The kingdom will be
yours. It is my certain resolution that the game of dice must occur again. O fortunate one! Let there be a single
stake. Let us offer our lives as stakes. When the other’s possessions, kingdom and riches, have been won, it has
been said that it is supreme dharma to have a counter-stake as the last one. If you do not wish to have a duel with
dice, let there be a duel with chariots. O king! Let either you or I ﬁnd peace. The aged have laid down the ordinance that an ancestral kingdom must be obtained back, through whatever means. O Pushkara! Choose one or the
other, according to your intelligence. Choose the game of dice, or bend your bow in battle.’ Having been thus addressed by Nishadha, Pushkara began to laugh. He was certain in his mind that he was going to win and replied to
the lord of the earth, ‘O Nishadha! It is your good fortune that you have obtained riches for a counter-stake. It is
your good fortune that Damayanti’s difﬁcult times have now come to an end. O king! O uprooter of your enemies!
It is your good fortune that you are still alive with your wife. I will win Vidarbha’s daughter, with all her ornaments and all these riches. She will then serve me, the way an apsara serves Shakra in heaven. O Nishadha! I have
always remembered you and have been waiting for your return. I ﬁnd no pleasure in gambling with those who are
not my well-wishers. Having won the beautifully-hipped and unblemished Damayanti today, I will have accomplished my objective. She has always been in my heart.’ Having heard the words of the mad and insolent one, Nala
was angered and desired to slice off his head with his sword.

‘“But though his eyes were copper-red with anger, the king smiled and said, ‘Let us stake. Why do you talk?
Talk after you have won.’ Then the gamble between Pushkara and Nala commenced. O fortunate one! With a single stake, he was defeated by Nala. Thus, in the stake, he lost his entire store of treasures and his life. Having defeated Pushkara, the king laughingly told him, ‘This entire kingdom is now mine. All its thorns have been removed. O stupid one! O sinful king! You will not be able to set your eyes on Vidarbha’s daughter. You and your
family have been reduced to the state of slaves. That I was earlier defeated by you was not because of your deeds.
That deed was done by Kali. But fool that you are, you did not understand this. I will never ascribe to you the offences committed by others. May you live in happiness. I grant you your life. O brave one! Let there be no doubt
about my affection for you. The fraternal love I have for you will never decrease. O Pushkara! You are my brother.
Live for a hundred years.’ Having thus comforted his brother, Nala, for whom truth was his valour, embraced him
repeatedly and sent him off to his own city. O king! Having been thus comforted by Nishadha, Pushkara joined his
hands in salutation and replied to Punyashloka, ‘May your fame be without decay. May you live happily for ten
thousand191 years. O lord of the earth! You have granted me my life and a place to live in.’ Thus honoured by the
king,192 the king193 lived there for a month. O king! Then Pushkara happily left for his own city, surrounded by
his relatives, with a large army and accompanied by humble servants. O bull among men! His appearance was like
that of the resplendent sun. After having sent Pushkara, the prosperous king, shorn of disease and laden with riches, entered his own city, which had been gorgeously decorated. Having entered, the lord of the Nishadhas comforted the citizens.”’
375(78)

‘Brihadashva said, “When the happy city had quietened down and a great festival had started, the king sent a large
army to bring Damayanti. Damayanti’s father Bhima, terrible in valour, the destroyer of enemy heroes and indomitable in his soul, sent her with due honours. After the arrival of Vidarbha’s daughter with her children, King
Nala spent his days in happiness, like the king of the gods in Nandana. The immensely famous king, having regained his kingdom, began to live there once more and became famous among all the kings of Jambudvipa.194 As
is prescribed, he performed many sacriﬁces and gave away a lot of dakshina. O Indra among kings! Soon, together
with your well-wishers, you will also spend this time. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O best of men! Thus did
Nala, the destroyer of enemy cities, confront this kind of unhappiness, together with his wife, because of gambling.
O lord of the earth! Nala, who was alone, suffered this terrible and great grief. But he regained his prosperity. O
Pandava! But you are accompanied by your brothers and Krishna.195 Thinking about dharma, you are enjoying
yourself in this great forest. O king! The immensely fortunate brahmanas, learned in the Vedas and the Vedangas,
are always with you. Where is the cause for sorrow? It is said that this account brings about the destruction of Kali.
O lord of the earth! On hearing it, a person like you is capable of being consoled. Thinking that human prosperity
is always transient, you should not sorrow over its coming and going. Those who recount Nala’s great tale and
those who listen to it often, are never confronted by calamity. He obtains riches and prosperity ﬂows towards him.
He who hears this eternal, supreme and ancient history, obtains sons, grandsons, animals and an exalted position
among men. There is no doubt that he is without disease and ﬁnds happiness. O king! I will destroy the fear that
you see, that you may be challenged again by someone skilled with dice. O king! I know the heart of dice. Truth is
your valour and I am pleased with you. O Kounteya! I will tell you. Learn it from me.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘The king196 was extremely happy and told Brihadashva, “O illustrious one! I wish to
know the secrets about the heart of the dice from you.” Then the great-souled one gave the Pandava the secrets of
the dice. Having given it, the immensely ascetic one went to Ashvashira197 to bathe. When Brihadashva had left,
he198 heard from wise ones, brahmanas and ascetics that Savyasachi Partha was engaged in terrible austerities,
surviving only on air. Those ones, who were rigid in their vows, had assembled there from large mountains and
tirthas. They said, “The mighty-armed Partha is engaged in fearful austerities and so terrible are these austerities
that the likes of them have not been witnessed before. Partha Dhananjaya is eternally engaged in the vows of an
ascetic. The fortunate one is living alone like a hermit and is like the god Dharma personiﬁed.” O king! On hearing

that his beloved brother Jaya199 was tormenting himself in the great forest through austerities, Pandava Kounteya
suffered on his account. Tormented in his heart, Yudhishthira sought refuge in the great forest and questioned brahmanas who were versed in different kinds of knowledge.’
376(79)

Janamejaya said, ‘O illustrious one! When my great-grandfather Partha left Kamyaka forest, what did the Pandavas200 do without Savyasachi? It seems to me that the great archer, the vanquisher of enemy armies, was their
refuge, like Vishnu is that of the Adityas. Without him, who is the equal of Indra in valour and has never withdrawn from the ﬁeld of battle, how did my brave grandfathers spend their time in the forest?’
Vaishampayana replied, ‘O son! When Pandava Savyasachi left Kamyaka forest, the Kouravas were immersed
in sorrow and grief. The Pandavas looked like jewels from a string that has been broken or birds whose wings have
been clipped. All of them were unhappy. Without the one whose deeds are undecaying, the forest became like
Chaitraratha201 when Kubera is not there. O Janamejaya! In his absence, the Pandavas, tigers among men, lived
joylessly in Kamyaka. O best of the Bharata lineage! Those valorous maharathas use pure-tipped arrows to kill
many kinds of sacriﬁcial animals for the brahmanas. Those destroyers of enemies, tigers among men, collected forest fare every day, and after having spread it out, offered it to the brahmanas. O king! After Dhananjaya’s departure, those bulls among men lived there, unhappy in their minds and anxious about him.
‘In particular, Panchali remembered the husband who was in the middle, the brave one who was absent. She told
the foremost of the Pandavas,202 “In the absence of the two-armed Arjuna, the equal of the many-armed
Arjuna203 and the best of the Pandavas, this forest seems cheerless to me. Wherever I look, the earth seems to be
empty to me. This forest, with its many marvels and blossoming trees, no longer seems to be attractive in
Savyasachi’s absence. This Kamyaka is as blue as monsoon clouds and is frequented by elephants in rut. But without Pundarikaksha,204 it has no charm. The twang of his bow is like the roar of the thunder. O king! I remember
Savyasachi and without him, I cannot ﬁnd any peace of mind.” O great king! On hearing this lamentation, Bhimasena, the destroyer of enemy warriors, told Droupadi, “O beautiful one! O slim-waisted one! The words that
you speak please the mind and they gladden my heart, like a sip of ambrosia. His arms were long and smooth and
thick like clubs. They were round and marked from the string of the bow. With swords, weapons and clubs, with
golden rings and arm-guards, they were like ﬁve-headed serpents. Without that tiger among men, the forest seems
to have lost its sun. Depending on that mighty-armed one, the Panchalas and the Kurus do not fear even the powerful gods in battle. All of us found refuge in the arms of that great-souled one. We considered that we had routed
our enemies and had obtained the earth. Without the brave Phalguna, I ﬁnd no mental peace in Kamyaka. As I look
upon this earth, it seems to me to be empty everywhere.” Nakula said, “He went to the northern directions and defeated immensely powerful ones in battle. Vasava’s son205 obtained hundreds of excellent gandharva horses. O
king! They had the colour of partridges and were dappled. They were as fast as the wind. He gave them to his
beloved brother at the time of the great rajasuya sacriﬁce. Without that terrible archer, Bhima’s younger brother,
without the one who is an equal of the gods, I no longer wish to live in Kamyaka forest.” Sahadeva said, “He won
riches and women in battle. He defeated maharathas. In earlier times, he brought them all to the king at the time of
the great rajasuya sacriﬁce. He is an immensely radiant one who vanquished all the Yadavas in the ﬁeld of battle.
With Vasudeva’s consent, he single-handedly abducted Subhadra. When I see that Jishnu’s seat is empty in our
house, there can never be any peace in my heart. O great king! I think we should no longer live in this forest. O destroyer of enemies! Without that brave one, none of us ﬁnds this forest to be attractive.”’

The third volume will complete Aranyaka (Vana) Parva, the story of the sojourn in the forest and will cover Sections 33 to 44 of the 100-parva classiﬁcation. This volume has detailed descriptions of tirthas and recounts the stories of Agastya, Rishyashringa, Kartavirya, Sukanya and Chyavana, Mandhata, Jantu, Shibi, Ashtavakra, Yavakrita, Jatasura, Markandeya and Arjuna’s slaying of the Nivatakavacha demons. The Kouravas are defeated by
the gandharvas and freed by the Pandavas. Droupadi is abducted by the
Kouravas (Jayadratha) and freed. Karna is robbed of his earrings by Indra.
Mahabharata: Volume 3 will be published in April 2011.

Acknowledgements
Carving time out from one’s regular schedule and work engagements to embark on such a mammoth work of translation has been difﬁcult. The past
tense should not be used, since only 20 per cent of the road has yet been traversed. Sometimes, I wish I had been born in nineteenth-century Bengal,
with a benefactor funding me for doing nothing but this. But alas, the days
of gentlemen of leisure are long over. The time could not be carved out
from professional engagements, barring of course assorted television channels, who must have wondered why I have been so reluctant to head for
their studios in the evenings. It was ascribed to health, interpreted as adverse health. It was certainly health, but not in an adverse sense. Reading
the Mahabharata is good for one’s mental health and is an activity to be recommended, without any statutory warnings. The time was stolen in the
evenings and over weekends. The cost was therefore borne by one’s immediate family, and to a lesser extent by friends. Socializing was reduced,
since every dinner meant one less chapter done. The family has ﬁrst claim
on the debt, though I am sure it also has claim on whatever merits are due.
At least Suparna does, and these volumes are therefore dedicated to her. I
suspect Sirius has no claim on the merits, though he has been remarkably
patient at the times when he has been curled up near my feet and I have
been translating away. There is some allegory there about a dog keeping
company when the Mahabharata is being read and translated.
Most people have thought I was mad, even if they never quite said that.
Among those who believed and thought it was worthwhile, beyond immediate family, are M. Veerappa Moily, Ashok Desai, Pratap Bhanu Mehta and
Laveesh Bhandari. And my sons, Nihshanka and Vidroha. The various re-

viewers of the ﬁrst volume have also been extremely kind. Incidentally, I
wouldn’t have been able to do it without Vaman Shivram Apte. When he
compiled the student’s Sanskrit dictionary more than a hundred years ago in
Pune, I am certain he had no idea that it would be used so comprehensively
to translate the Mahabharata.
Penguin also believed. My initial hesitation about being able to deliver
was brushed aside by R. Sivapriya, who pushed me after the series had been
commissioned by V. Karthika. And then Sumitra Srinivasan became the editor, followed by Paloma Dutta. The enthusiasm of these ladies was so infectious that everything just snowballed and Paloma ensured that the ﬁnal
product of the second volume was much more readable than what I had initially produced.
When I ﬁrst embarked on what was also a personal voyage of sorts, the
end was never in sight and seemed to stretch to inﬁnity. Now that 20 per
cent is over (and 10 per cent more is in the pipeline), the horizon can be
seen. And all the people mentioned above have had a role to play in this
journey.

1 Brahmana is a text and also the word used for the highest caste.
2 A class of religious and philosophical texts that are composed in the
forest, or are meant to be studied when one retires to the forest.
3 The six Vedangas are shiksha (articulation and pronunciation), chhanda
(prosody), vyakarana (grammar), nirukta (etymology), jyotisha (astronomy)
and kalpa (rituals).
4 Religion, duty.
5 Wealth. But in general, any object of the senses.
6 Desire.
7 Release from the cycle of rebirth.
9 Krishna or Krishnaa is another name for Droupadi.

1 Droupadi.
2 Depending on the context, dharma is translated as law, virtue or religion. None of these captures the exact nuance of dharma holding things up and dharma has therefore been retained in the translation.
3 Divine sage.
4 Narada was Brahma’s son, born from Brahma’s mind. He was a messenger of the gods, travelling back and
forth between the world of men and the world of the gods. He also had a tendency to create dissension and conﬂict.
5 Arghya, offerings made to those who are revered, including guests.
6 Sage.
7 Panchala was Drupada’s kingdom.
8 Demon. Asura or demon is used as the antithesis of sura or god.
9 Svarga (heaven), prithivi (earth) and patala (the nether world).
10 Actually, the Pandavas haven’t been told that Tilottama was an apsara. An apsara is a celestial maiden. Apsaras are sometimes described as Indra’s servants and sometimes as wives of the gandharvas. They are also
dancers and a bit like celestial courtesans.
11 Kunti.
12 Hiranyakashipu was the son of Kashyapa and Diti and his son was Prahlada. Vishnu killed him in his
narasimha incarnation.
13 The daityas are the sons of Diti and were demons. Danavas are the sons of Danu and are also demons.
Daitya, danava and asura are usually used synonymously, though the etymology is distinct.
14 Delusion.
15 Demon.
16 Koumuda is the month of Kartika and koumudi is a festival that is observed on the full moon day in Kartika
(sometimes the full moon day in the month of Ashvina), when everything is illuminated.
17 Magha is one of the twenty-seven lunar mansions or nakshatras, speciﬁcally, the tenth. Nakshatra can be
translated as star, but not all nakshatras are stars. Sometimes, they are constellations. For instance, Magha is actually a constellation with ﬁve stars.
18 The critical edition has dharma. Some other editions have varma or armour, in which case, the army would
have been clad in armour. Given the context, varma is more appropriate.
19 Bards.
20 Heaven needs explanation, the word used in Sanskrit is trivishtapa. More accurately, the word should be
translated as Indra’s world. There were thirty (or thirty-three) gods. Even more accurately, trivishtapa should be
translated as the world of the thirty.
21 Yakshas are a semi-divine species and companions of Kubera, the god of treasure.
22 Rakshas or rakshasas are demons and evil spirits, but a distinct species from daityas. Rakshas are also
guardians or protectors and that sense is more relevant in this context.
23 Serpants. Throughout the translation, we have used serpents for nagas and snakes for sarpas. Nagas are not
quite snakes. They are semi-divine, can assume human forms and live in speciﬁc regions. All these traits are uncharacteristic of snakes.
24 A mleccha is a barbarian, meaning that mlecchas do not speak Sanskrit and are not aryas.
25 Royal sages.
26 Garuda.
27 Siddhi means accomplishment. Siddhas are semi-divine species who have attained these superhuman accomplishments or faculties.

28 Rishis who know the nature of the brahman, the supreme being.
29 Literally, great god. Shiva.
30 The god of ﬁre.
31 The god of wind.
32 The moon-god Chandra.
33 The sun-god Aditya.
34 Parameshthi is an epithet for various gods—Brahma, Shiva, Vishnu and Agni. Since Brahma, Shiva and Agni
have been separately mentioned, here it probably means Vishnu.
35 Budha is someone who is wise, it is also a name for Mercury.
36 Hermits.
37 60,000 sages who were the sizes of thumbs. They preceded the sun’s chariot.
38 This must be a class of sages, but the meaning is unclear. Perhaps it means those who were descended from
Marichi, one of Brahma’s mental sons, that is, a son born through Brahma’s mental powers.
39 Great sages.
40 The architect among the gods.
41 Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth and prosperity.
42 Tila means a small particle, while uttama means best or excellent. The best of the small bits had been used in
creating Tilottama.
43 Brahma.
44 Mahadeva or Shiva.
45 Shiva.
46 Shiva’s.
47 Bala was a demon and Indra killed him. Thus, Indra is the slayer of Bala.
48 Brahma.
49 Semi-divine species, musicians of the gods.
50 Tall tree.
51 That is, ﬁrst in grasping Tilottama’s hand.
52 The word aditya has four different meanings. First, Aditya is the sun-god. Second, all the sons of Aditi are
known as adityas. Hence, aditya is a term for gods in general. Third, Aditya is also sometimes used as an epithet
for Vishnu. Fourth, there are twelve manifestations of the sun-god, known collectively as adityas. These shine together when the universe is destroyed. In this context, either the fourth or the second meaning is indicated, probably the fourth.
53 Brahmacharya is the ﬁrst of the four stages (ashramas) of life, the other three being garhasthya (householder
stage), vanaprastha (retirement to the forest) and sannyasa (renunciation). One who is in the brahmacharya stage
is a brahmachari. Brahmacharya is usually translated as celibacy, though anyone who follows the path of the brahman is a brahmachari.
54 The goddess of learning, also a river.
55 Sarasvati is often depicted with elephants anointing her.
56 The Pandavas were also descended from Kuru.
57 The four pursuits in life are dharma (righteous conduct), artha (riches), kama (desire) and moksha (salvation).
58 Arjuna’s name.
59 Arjuna.

60 Yudhishthira.
61 One without enemies, Yudhishthira’s name.
62 Arjuna’s name. Savyasachi means someone who is left-handed.
63 Arjuna’s name.
64 The six vedangas are shiksha (articulation and pronunciation), chhanda (prosody), vyakarana (grammar),
nirukta (etymology), jyotisha (astronomy) and kalpa (rituals).
65 Indra.
66 Gods of the wind.
67 Sacriﬁces to Agni. Agnihotra means maintenance of the sacred ﬁre and offering oblations to it.
68 Coincidentally, Kouravya means a descendant of Kuru, as does Kourava.
69 Agni.
70 Kunti’s son, that is, Arjuna.
71 Ananga. Ananga means one without a body and there is a story where the god of love lost his body because
he managed to annoy Shiva.
72 Yudhishthira.
73 The vajra is Indra’s weapon and Arjuna was Indra’s son.
74 Mahadeva is Uma’s consort.
75 A putrika is a daughter who is regarded as a son. After marriage, she lives in her father’s household. Her son
is regarded as her father’s son and becomes the heir.
76 Place of pilgrimage.
77 Kubera.
78 The word used is lokapala, which translates as protector or preserver of the worlds. In this context, it might
mean either Brahma or Vishnu. There are also eight lokapalas who are regarded as guardians of the eight directions. But that is clearly not meant.
79 The enemy of Madhu, Krishna’s name. Vishnu had killed a demon named Madhu.
80 Arjuna’s name. The name literally means fearsome or terrible.
81 Krishna.
82 Ancient sages, whose names invariably occur together. Narayana is also Vishnu’s name and nara also means
man. Narayana is equated with Krishna and Nara with Arjuna.
83 Krishna’s name, since Krishna belonged to the lineage of the Vrishnis.
84 Krishna’s name. Strictly speaking, Vishnu’s name.
85 Musical instrument, lute.

1 Hala means plough and Haladhara is the wielder of the plough, that is, Balarama. Revati is Balarama’s wife.
2 A gandharva is a celestial musician. But here, it probably means musicians in general.
3 Rukmini was married to Krishna and their son is Pradyumna.
4 Pritha’s son, Arjuna.
5 Though we have written it as Vasudeva, Krishna is actually Vaasudeva, because he is Vasudeva’s son. Bhadra
or Subhadra is Vasudeva’s daughter and is therefore Vaasudeva Krishna’s sister.
6 Though Krishna and Subhadra had Vasudeva as their common father, their mothers were different. Sarana and
Subhadra had the same mother too.
7 Krishna.
8 A ceremony where a bride chooses her husband from assembled suitors.
9 That is, Yudhishthira.
10 Arjuna.
11 Yudhishthira’s sanction.
12 The names of the two horses.
13 Presiding ofﬁcer for want of a better word. Sabha is an assembly hall and the word used in the text is sabhapala, meaning controller or presiding ofﬁcer of the assembly hall.
14 A maharatha is in general a mighty warrior. More speciﬁcally, a maharatha is skilled in the use of all
weapons and can take on ten thousand warriors single-handedly.
15 Jishnu is one of Arjuna’s names and means the victorious one.
16 Vanamali is usually a name for Krishna. But here it means Baladeva or Balarama.
17 Halayudha is Baladeva’s name and means one whose weapon is a plough.
18 Baladeva’s name.
19 Krishna’s name, meaning the one without decay.
20 Krishna’s name.
21 Krishna’s name.

1 Arjuna’s name.
2 That is, increased the honour.
3 Partha means Pritha’s (Kunti’s) son, but is usually used for Arjuna.
4 Satvata actually means a follower or worshipper of Krishna. Here it means the Yadavas.
5 Period of exile.
6 Yudhishthira.
7 That is, out of jealousy.
8 Droupadi.
9 Madhava is one of Krishna’s names.
10 Pundarika is a lotus, usually the white lotus. Pundarikaksha means one with lotus eyes and is Vishnu’s name,
used here for Krishna.
11 Balarama.
12 Nakula and Sahadeva.
13 Purandara is Indra’s name and means the sacker of cities.
14 A more literal translation is that he smelt Krishna’s head. This is a sign of affection displayed towards those
who are younger, Krishna being younger than Yudhishthira.
15 Bhima was also older than Krishna.
16 This means those who were younger or inferior to Yudhishthira.
17 Of riches.
18 Shakra is another name for Indra. Hence, Shakraprastha means Indraprastha.
19 Jayanta is Indra’s son. Indra’s wife is Shachi. Since she is Pouloma’s daughter, she is also known as Poulomi.
20 Abhi means extreme and manyu means anger.
21 An unrivalled warrior, whose valour is unlimited, greater than a maharatha.
22 Kind of tree used in sacriﬁces, said to contain ﬁre in its womb.
23 In the sense that all the Pandavas were indirectly his fathers.
24 Arjuna’s name, meaning the terrible or fearful one.
25 Indra.
26 Daughter of Panchala, Droupadi.
27 Bhima.
28 Prati means like or resembling.
29 Soma is the name of a plant and its juice and soma sacriﬁces are sacriﬁces at which soma juice is offered.
30 He should therefore be thus named, the word suta meaning son.
31 He should therefore be thus named, shruta means heard and karma means deed. Kiriti is one of Arjuna’s
names.
32 This connection is not clear.
33 The family priest.

1 Bhishma. Shantanu was Bhishma’s father.
2 Meaning good deeds.
3 Yudhishthira.
4 The king became like a fourth objective to be attained.
5 Varnas.
6 The goddess of wealth.
7 Literally, the lord of all beings. But more generally, the lord of creation. Though usually applied to Brahma,
the term is also used for Vishnu and for ten lords of the world created by Brahma. In this context, the reference is
to Brahma.
8 Since pura means a city, Purandara is the destroyer of cities and is Indra’s name.
9 Descendant of the Vrishni lineage, that is, Krishna.
10 Arjuna and Krishna respectively.
11 Though rarely used, Krishna is also one of Arjuna’s names.
12 The twin physicians of the gods.
13 That is, the morning sun.
14 Shakra is one of Indra’s names.
15 Prevent them from running away.
16 Indra’s name. Shatakratu means the performer of a hundred sacriﬁces.
17 The word used in the text is pishacha.
18 A lokapala is a protector (pala) of a loka or a world. The number of lokas is sometimes three, sometimes seven and sometimes fourteen. Here, the reference is to the three worlds of heaven, earth and the nether regions and
the waters have been added as a fourth world.
19 The name of the bow.
20 Vishnu’s weapon, usually translated in English as a discus, though disc is more appropriate. It is a circular
weapon, hurled like a missile.
21 Bhoumana is Vishvakarma’s name. Vishvakarma is the architect of the gods. The Sanskrit text of the critical
edition actually says Bhouvana, though many regional versions say Bhoumana. Bhoumana and Bhouvana are
synonymous.
22 A vimana is a celestial chariot and those who are virtuous get to ride on vimanas.
23 Vishnu’s club.
24 The sense is that no hole to escape could be found between the two chariots.
25 The eight cardinal points, plus above and below.
26 Indra has one thousand eyes.
27 Indra. Indra slew a demon named Vritra.
28 Harivahana is Indra’s name, because Hari is the name of Indra’s horse. The word hari means tawny, so that
was probably the horse’s colour.
29 Of chariots.
30 Indra slew a demon named Namuchi.
31 The word used is bhalla. The word is used for an arrow, as well as for a missile that is like a small spear.
32 Phalguna or Phalguni is Arjuna’s name. He was thus named because he was born when the nakshatra Phalguni was in the ascendant.
33 Suparna is Garuda’s mother.

34 It isn’t clear from the Mahabharata what kind of a weapon a bhushundi was. It was a weapon that was hurled
and could have been a simple rock. However, in descriptions of the Kurukshetra War, it seems to have been more
sophisticated than a simple rock.
35 The gods number thirty or thirty-three.
36 The staff of death.
37 A shibika is a palanquin, the god of wealth or Kubera’s weapon.
38 Noose.
39 This seems to be a special kind of chakra, though Shiva’s weapon is actually a trident. However, the word
Shiva is also used generically for any god.
40 Herbs.
41 Bow.
42 Club.
43 Spear.
44 Yama.
45 Battleaxe.
46 Mace.
47 Krishna and Arjuna. Achyuta means one who does not decay and is usually used for Krishna.
48 Paka was a demon killed by Indra.
49 Literally, those who move about (chara) in the night (nisha), but the term is also speciﬁcally used for goblins, jackals, owls and snakes.
50 Kinnaras are mythical and semi-divine species, with human bodies and heads of horses. They are the companions of Kubera.
51 Indra.
52 A demon killed by Indra.
53 The chataka birds, but also peacocks.
54 The term for this is urdhvareta, meaning those who hold up their semen.
55 Yama, the god of death.
56 In this context, this should be interpreted as a period earmarked for studying, rather than lifelong celibacy.
57 There are several hells (naraka). A son is named putra because he saves (trana) the father from the hell
named put. This hell is also called punnam, which means, by the name of put.
58 The former human wife.
59 The way of the birds.
60 The sacriﬁcial ﬁre is of three types—garhapatya (in the household), ahavaniya (used in sacriﬁces) and dakshina (the one placed facing the south).
61 The number eight has two possible interpretations. The ﬁrst is the ordinary ﬁre and the other seven consisting
of the sacriﬁcial ﬁre in seven different places—the wife’s position at the sacriﬁce, the soma altar, the general altar,
the seat of the priest who maintains the sacriﬁcial ﬁre, the area reserved for the assisting priests, the place where
the rituals are performed and the place where the worship is performed. The second and perhaps more convincing
explanation is the ordinary aggregated ﬁre and the seven ﬂames or tongues a ﬁre is supposed to have—karali
(frightful), dhumini (full of smoke), shveta (white), lohita (red), neelalohita (bluish red), suvarna (golden) and
padmaraga (red like a ruby).
62 Jataveda is one of Agni’s names and means that the Vedas are born from (jata) the ﬁre.

63 Dhata means creator and is also a term used for Brahma and Vishnu.
64 The preceptor of the gods. In earlier times, Brihaspati was also a term used for Indra.
65 The word yama itself means two or a couple and can therefore also be an adjective used for the two Ashvins.
However, if it is not an adjective, the two Yamas can only mean Yama and his sister Yami.
66 The god of wind or Vayu.
67 Hiranyareta, the one with the golden (hiranya) seed (reta) is a name used for the ﬁre and for the sun.
68 Pavana is the name of the wind and means the puriﬁer.
69 The word used in the text is Shukra. Shukra is the preceptor of the gods and is also the planet Venus. But it
means the virile one and is also a term used for Agni.
70 The time for destruction.
71 Jatharagni is the digestive ﬁre, that is the gastric ﬂuids, inside the stomach (jathara).
72 The god of the ocean or of water.
73 The tide goes away, bypassing houses on the shore. In that sense, the ﬁre should bypass the Sharngakas.
74 The truth.
75 Jarita.
76 Instead of wretch, the word kapurusha can also be translated as coward.
77 The saptarshis or seven (sapta) great sages (rishi) were born from Brahma’s mental powers and were
Marichi, Atri, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasishtha. They are also the seven stars in the constellation
Ursa Major. Arundhati was Vasishtha’s wife and is also a companion star to Vasishtha in Ursa Major. Arundhati
was a devoted wife, except for one transgression, which is why Arundhati is invoked in marriage ceremonies. The
star Arundhati is not as dazzling as the star Vasishtha, so it is often difﬁcult to make it out in the night sky and
there is also a belief that a person who is approaching death can no longer see Arundhati.
78 Agneya and vayavya are divine weapons, respectively associated with the gods of ﬁre and the wind. The former causes ﬂames, while the latter causes wind.

1 Architectural designs.
2 Maya.
3 Rice cooked with sweetened milk.
4 Cubits. Literally the word means a forearm; so the length or span of a forearm.
5 Kunti was his aunt on his father’s side. Krishna’s father was in Dvaraka.
6 Krishna, also used for Vishnu, meaning the lord of the senses.
7 Droupadi.
8 This can mean grain of any kind. But it is speciﬁcally used for threshed and winnowed rice that has not been
dehusked.
9 A name for Garuda, as well as for his elder brother Aruna.
10 The name of Krishna and Vishnu’s bow, the word signifying that it was made of horn.
11 A brief instant of time.
12 Lunar day.
13 They were yoked to the chariot.
14 A whisk or fan made out of a yak’s tail and a sign of royalty.
15 About the time of return.
16 Name for Vishnu or Krishna, meaning the brave one. Also a name for Balarama.
17 The word used in the text is bhanda, which means a vessel, as well as treasure. If the word is translated as
vessel, the jewels have been kept in a vessel. But the word transalted as treasure, seems more appropriate given the
context.
18 Vrishaparva is the king of the danavas. Since he is faithful to his promises, he would not have appropriated
the treasure.
19 Yuvanashva’s son. His name was Mandhatri and he was born from Yuvanashva’s belly.
20 Bhagiratha was King Sagara’s great grandson and needed to bring the celestial river Ganga down to earth, so
that his 60,000 ancestors, Sagara’s sons, might be freed. Accordingly, he performed penances.
21 That is, the sacriﬁcial stakes need not have been thus ornamented.
22 Meaning, Maya.
23 The word kimkara means servant. Literally, a kimkara is someone who asks what (kim) he should do (kara).
24 Lapis lazuli.
25 This may not be what is meant. The text uses the word dvija, which means any oviparous animal and can refer to ﬁsh, snakes or birds. Most translators have interpreted the word as bird (aquatic). But ﬁsh seems more
plausible.
26 This may also be a metaphor. The water on the lotus leaves may have been compared with dots of pearls.
27 They mistook it for land.
28 Ducks.
29 Geese.
30 The Greeks, but can also be applied to all foreigners or barbarians.
31 Indra.
32 The words used in the text are rourava and ajina. Ruru is a deer and rourava is its skin. Ajina can be used to
mean the hide of a tiger, lion or elephant too, but is commonly used for the hide of a black antelope.
33 Pradyumna.
34 Yuyudhana is one of Satyaki’s names.

35 Time. The word also means a cymbal. So an alternative translation is, knowledgeable in the playing of
cymbals.
36 Keeping time in music.
37 Yudhishthira.
38 Peace or alliance, war, marching or an expedition, halting or pausing, seeking shelter and duplicity.
39 The traditional four means are sama (conciliation or negotiation), dana (bribery), danda (punishment) and
bheda (dissension). To these one adds maya (delusion or deceit), upeksha (neglect) and indrajala (magic) to obtain
seven means.
40 The number fourteen isn’t clear. The most plausible explanation is the fourteen branches of knowledge—the
four Vedas, the six Vedangas, the Dharmashastras, the Puranas, Mimamsa and Tarka.
41 The eight royal duties—acceptance or seizure, giving of gifts, use of servants, prohibition, speech, conduct,
punishment and puriﬁcation.
42 One who looks after the fort, the executioner, the one in charge of law, the messenger, the priest and the
soothsayer.
43 There is a problem of translation here. The word used in the text is tirtha, which means several things, including a place of pilgrimage. Eighteen places of pilgrimage on the enemy’s side and ﬁfteen on one’s own side don’t
make a great deal of sense. However, the word tirtha, also means minister. It is not obvious why there should be
eighteen ministers on the enemy’s side, and who they are, and why there should be ﬁfteen on one’s own side.
44 The word used is patita, which can also be interpreted in the speciﬁc sense of having fallen from one’s caste.
45 Elephants, cavalry and infantry.
46 Respectively, the four techniques of conciliation, donations, chastisement and dissension, used to govern.
47 Elephants, cavalry, infantry and chariots.
48 Elephants, cavalry, infantry, chariots, charioteers, servants, allies and spies.
49 These pleasures are obviously intended for the later part of the day. They must presumably be known in the
forenoon so that arrangements can be made.
50 Unfortunately, one can’t readily deduce the rate of interest, per cent. One pratika is the amount that can be
bought with a coin known as karshapana, but the karshapana itself had different values.
51 The word used is varta, which in general, means the professions of agriculture, trade, animal husbandry and
moneylending. However, the word varta is also used for agriculture in particular.
52 The ﬁve ofﬁcers who are in charge of the city, the fort, the countryside, the treasury and punishing criminals.
53 The sense isn’t clear. It probably means knowing those (the spies) who are inside the enemy’s kingdom.
54 The day is divided into eight yamas, each yama consisting of three hours. The night consists of three yamas
and is therefore also known as yami or yamini.
55 The word used is paschima, which means last, as well as west.
56 The eight divisions of medicine—digestive, pediatrics, planetary inﬂuences, thorns, bites, secretions, sores,
poison and their treatment.
57 The three Vedas, the Atharva Veda not being counted.
58 A fee, remuneration or gift offered to brahmanas. A speciﬁc type of dakshina is offered to a teacher or preceptor on successful completion of one’s studies.
59 A pundarika is a lotus, usually the white lotus. But it is also the name of a sacriﬁce.
60 Covetousness on the part of those who should do the punishing, that is, there is no bribery.
61 Maintenance of the sacred ﬁre and rendering offerings to it.
62 Literally, Brahma’s staff. However, the expression is used more for the curse of a brahmana.

63 In this context, varna clearly means caste.
64 Yama is the king of the ancestors.
65 Kubera, the lord of treasure and wealth, lives in Kailasa.
66 Brahma.
67 Yama’s father is Vivasvat, the sun. Hence, Yama is Vaivasvata.
68 Descendant of Kuru. In this case, Yudhishthira.
69 A yojana is a measure of distance and is between eight and nine miles.
70 Shachi is Indra’s wife. Mahendra means the great Indra and is one of Indra’s ephithets. Shri and Lakshmi
were originally independent goddesses, but eventually became identical. Shri is the goddess of prosperity, while
Lakshmi is the goddess of wealth.
71 The word used is lohita, which can also be translated as copper.
72 These are feminine personiﬁcations of modesty, fame and radiance respectively.
73 Faith.
74 Wisdom.
75 The goddess of learning, also a river.
76 A stobha is a sacriﬁcial hymn.
77 Saptarshi or seven great sages.
78 Brahmana sages.
79 Region in north India, around Kumaon. Its capital was Alaka, located on the Alakananda river.
80 Sunitha has been mentioned before, so has Nala of Nishadha. It is of course possible that more than one person had the same name.
81 The region around the Punjab, though in the text the reference is to the king of the region.
82 That is, Rama, the son of Dasharatha.
83 That is, Parashurama, the son of Jamadagni.
84 Matsya and Virata are the names of the same kingdom, in today’s Rajasthan.
85 The name of a royal lineage, difﬁcult to identify beyond that.
86 The name of a royal lineage, difﬁcult to identify beyond that.
87 There were a hundred kings named Dhritarashtra.
88 There were eighty kings named Janamejaya.
89 There were one hundred kings named Brahmadatta.
90 It is not clear who these Iris were.
91 There were thousands of kings with this name.
92 Time or destiny, personiﬁed.
93 Death personiﬁed.
94 Agnishvatta, a term used for brahmanas.
95 All these are classes of ancestors.
96 Havyavahana, the ﬁre-god Agni.
97 Tree associated with cremation grounds.
98 The palasha tree is also called kimshuka.
99 Kind of grass.
100 Holy grass used in religious ceremonies.

101 Yama.
102 Pritha’s son, Yudhishthira.
103 Varuna’s queen and consort.
104 The name of a naga, not to be confused with the famous Krishna.
105 The name of a naga, not to be confused with Arjuna.
106 The name of a naga, not be confused with the famous Janamejaya.
107 Bali was the son of Virochana and Prahlada’s (or Prahrada) grandson. Vishnu subjugated him in his dwarf
(vamana) incarnation.
108 There are different accounts of Naraka, all agreeing that he was the demon-king of Pragjyotisha and that
Krishna killed him.
109 Dashagriva is Ravana’s name. But there is no indication that Ravana is meant here.
110 Not to be confused with the Bali mentioned earlier.
111 Vishnu killed two demons named Madhu and Kaitabha. But there is no indication that this is the same
Kaitabha.
112 Varuna’s weapon is the noose (pasha).
113 The word used for ocean is samudra. Actually, there are seven oceans, not four. However, the word samudra
also means four, perhaps explaining why four oceans are mentioned.
114 Another name for the Yamuna.
115 Vidisha is the capital of the Dasharna region, the eastern parts of Malava. Vidisha is located on the banks of
the rivers Vetravati (Betwa) and Kadambari. However, Vidisha is also a river and is probably the Beas, which joins
the Vetravati. However, the Beas is also mentioned separately later.
116 A river that joins the Krishna river.
117 Beas.
118 Sutlej.
119 Chenab.
120 Great river that has now dried up.
121 Jhelum.
122 Indus.
123 Devanada means the river of the gods. In the translation, Devanada has been listed as a separate river. But it
is also possible that this is an adjective for the Sindhu, describing it as the river of the gods.
124 The river Krishna. The river Venna, which joins the Krishna, has already been mentioned earlier.
125 Kubera. Kubera’s father was the sage Vishrava, Pulastya’s son. Hence, Kubera is known as Vaishravana.
Kubera’s mother was Idavida. However, Vishrava had another wife named Kaikasi and through her, had Ravana,
Kumbhakarna, Vibhishana and Surpanakha as offspring.
126 Semi-divine species, companions of Kubera.
127 Alaka is the name of Kubera’s capital.
128 Beautiful gardens. Speciﬁcally, also the name of Indra’s garden.
129 Offer homage to Kubera.
130 The yakshas are a distinct species, companions of Kubera. They are not gandharvas. But the text here is not
careful in maintaining these distinctions.
131 Kubera’s son.
132 Tryambaka, meaning three-eyed. One of Shiva’s names.

133 Pashupati is Shiva’s name and his consort is Uma. Umapati is thus Shiva’s name.
134 The name of a demon.
135 Uma.
136 The bhutas, spirits and goblins that are Shiva’s companions.
137 Shiva.
138 Kubera.
139 Brahma’s.
140 Aditya is the son of Aditi and refers to gods in general. In this context, it means the sun-god.
141 Yudhishthira.
142 Gopati, or lord of cattle, a term also used for Indra, Krishna, Shiva and Varuna.
143 The sun-god.
144 The twenty-seven nakshatras or constellations.
145 Preceptor of the demons. But here, Venus.
146 Preceptor of the gods. But here, Jupiter.
147 Mercury.
148 Mars. Literally, the red-coloured one.
149 Saturn. The text actually says Shanaishchara, meaning the slow-moving one.
150 This has no exact counterpart in the planets. Rahu is the demon that causes eclipses.
151 Here, mantra means a hymn from the Rig Veda and rathantara means a hymn from the Sama Veda.
152 The meaning of Harimat isn’t clear, though it might be a proper name.
153 Probably meaning wealth and riches, unless it is a proper name.
154 Meaning Indra.
155 Mitra-Varuna being an example.
156 Itihasa, usually equated with the two epics.
157 That is, the Savitri mantra.
158 The seven kinds of speech is a reference to languages spoken in seven different kingdoms, the languages
named after the kingdoms—Magadhi, Avanti, Prachya, Shouraseni, Ardhamagadhi, Bahlika and Dakshinatya.
159 Instant, measure of time equal to four-ﬁfths of a second.
160 Small measure of time, equal to one-sixth of a kshana.
161 Small measure of time, but also forty-eight minutes.
162 This probably means the four yugas or eras, with the intervening periods counted as a ﬁfth yuga.
163 The four quarters into which twenty-four hours are divided.
164 Semi-divine species, followers of Kubera.
165 Demons, also referred to as the kalakeyas.
166 The word used in the text is Vrishadvaja, meaning the one with the bull on his ﬂag. Vrishadvaja is one of
Shiva’s names.
167 Kubera.
168 Great rishis.
169 The word dvipa means island. But it also means a continent or terrestrial region, the sense in which the expression is used here. With Mount Meru in the centre, the earth was divided into four, seven, nine, thirteen or eigh-

teen dvipas, each dvipa separated from another with an ocean. Although the number of dvipas varies from description to description, seven is the usual number.
170 Royal sacriﬁce performed when a king instated himself as emperor over all other kings. An integral part of
a royal sacriﬁce was the payment of tribute by all other kings to the undisputed and universal emperor.
171 This isn’t Narada’s message to Yudhishthira. It is Pandu’s message to Yudhishthira, being conveyed through
Narada. The critical edition excises some shlokas available in other versions, where Pandu’s request to Narada to
act as a messenger is explicitly mentioned.
172 Brahma rakshasas are demons, but had been born as brahmanas. But they were evil, abducting other men’s
wives or stealing the property of brahmanas. Consequently, after death, they become demons.
173 A war is likely, since other kings are forced to offer tribute.
174 The Dasharhas are the Yadavas and the city of the Dasharhas is Dvaravati or Dvaraka.

1 Shatru means enemy and ajata means not being born. So Ajatashatru means someone for whom no enemy has
been born, one without foes.
2 The six types of sacriﬁcial ﬁres are named agnishtoma, kshatradhriti, vyushti, dviratri, saptapeya and
saptadashapeya.
3 That is, there is no need to wait for any prescribed date. Depending on one’s powers, the sacriﬁce can be started immediately.
4 Krishna.
5 Indrasena is Yudhishthira’s charioteer and is clearly the one who was sent as messenger.
6 Krishna.
7 Kunti.
8 Parashurama.
9 Pururava, the son of Ila and Budha, the ﬁrst king of the lunar dynasty.
10 Son of Vaivasvata Manu and the ﬁrst king of the solar dynasty.
11 The region around Mathura. Mathura was the land of the Yadavas and Jarasandha laid siege to it on eighteen
occasions.
12 Jarasandha. Since chatura means clever, Chaturyu may be a reference to Jarasandha’s wiliness. Jarasandha
was the son of Brihadratha. He was born in two halves that were united by a she-demon named Jara. Thus, the
child came to be known as Jarasandha, the word sandhi meaning to join.
13 Probably Vakra being repeated.
14 Greek. More correctly, Ionian.
15 This is odd. Elsewhere in the Mahabharata, Bhagadatta is said to rule in the east.
16 To Jarasandha.
17 Shishupala. This is repetition again, since Shishupala has been mentioned earlier.
18 There was a Vasudeva of Pundra who was known as Vasudeva and also sported Krishna’s signs. He is referred to a little later. In the text, Vasudeva of Pundra’s crimes are ascribed incorrectly to Shishupala, though the
commonality is that both were Krishna’s enemies.
19 The eastern part of Bengal.
20 Kiratas are mountainous tribes who lived through hunting.
21 Jarasandha has been referred to as Chaturyu earlier. This is clearly a different Chaturyu.
22 Kingdom in southern India, near today’s Tirunelveli. It was near the mountain Malaya and the river
Tamraparni.
23 Jarasandha was the king of Magadha. Magadha is the southern part of Bihar.
24 Because the Bhojas are a line of the Yadavas.
25 The king of Mathura and the son of Ugrasena. Devaki was Krishna’s mother and Kamsa was her cousin.
26 That is, he married Jarasandha’s daughters.
27 Krishna’s uncle.
28 Balarama.
29 Balarama.
30 The text uses the expression shatadha, which is a weapon that can kill a hundred at a time. More common is
the expression shataghni, which is also a weapon that can kill a hundred (shata) at a time.
31 Also known as Dimbhaka.
32 Name for Mathura.

33 Dvaravati.
34 Also known as Raivataka.
35 The Yadavas are descended from Madhu and are known as Madhavas. Madhavitirtha is the same as Raivata
and probably means the tirtha of the Madhavas, though Madhavatirtha would have been more appropriate.
36 The eighteen branches of the Yadavas.
37 Meaning Pradyumna, the son of Krishna and Rukmini.
38 Balarama or Baladeva.
39 Shouri is a name for both Krishna and Balarama. But since Krishna is doing the speaking here, the Shouri in
question is Balarama.
40 An atiratha is a warrior on a chariot who is unrivalled in battle.
41 There are thus ten maharathas.
42 The middle country is the region around Mathura.
43 Jarasandha’s capital in Magadha.
44 Meaning the Himalayas.
45 Meaning Jarasandha, the king of Magadha.
46 That is, through protecting his subjects.
47 Pashupati is Shiva, literally, the lord of animals. The sense is that the imprisoned kings have been prepared
like sacriﬁcial animals.
48 Jarasandha is waiting for the tally of imprisoned kings to become one hundred, which is when he will sacriﬁce them.
49 Arjuna.
50 Arjuna obtained the sabha in the sense that it was because of him that Maya built the assembly hall.
51 Of his enemies.
52 By becoming ascetics.
53 That is, if both sides are guided by good policy.
54 Jarasandha.
55 An akshouhini is an army and consists of 21,870 chariots, 21,870 elephants, 65,610 horses and 109,350
infantrymen.
56 Son of Vishrava. In this context, Kubera.
57 Brahma.
58 The root sandha (as in sandhi) means union or junction.
59 Brihadratha. A few lines later, Magadha will also be used for Jarasandha.
60 Meaning, kings.
61 That is, the ocean.
62 Jarasandha.
63 Rudra, Mahadeva and Hara are different names for Shiva. Tripura was a collection of three (tri) cities (pura),
constructed by Maya for the demons. Tripura was in the sky and the three cities were made out of gold, silver and
iron. Shiva burnt them down. Tripura is also the name of the demon-king who ruled over these cities.
64 All names of Yadava tribes.

1 There is a problem of translation here. The text says prana yuddha. Prana is the breath of life and yuddha is
battle. What ensues is a duel and wrestling match between Bhima and Jarasandha. Why is it described as a battle
of breath? Some regional versions say bahu (arm) yuddha, which ﬁts in with a wrestling match. Is it the case that
the strength of one’s breath is important in a wrestling match?
2 Arjuna.
3 In this case, Arjuna.
4 Krishna. Shouri is also a name for Balarama.
5 In this case, Arjuna.
6 Although used relatively infrequently, Krishna is also one of Arjuna’s names.
7 The sense probably is that forces must be directed to places where the enemy possesses weaknesses. Holes or
gaps are symbolic of weaknesses.
8 Krishna was the Pandavas’ cousin.
9 The word used is snataka, meaning a brahmana who has completed his period of celibate student life and is
about to step into the householder stage.
10 Literally, the forest (jangala) of the Kuru kingdom. It roughly corresponds to Haryana today.
11 Literally, a lake with lotuses.
12 A mountain towards the north.
13 Geographically, this cannot be in sequence. In sequence, the journey to Magadha would have involved crossing the rivers Gandaki, Sadanira and Shona, in that order.
14 The river Sarayu ﬂows through Koshala, a region around Ayodha. Again geographically, they should have
crossed the Sarayu earlier.
15 Charmanvati is today’s Chambal and actually takes them in a completely opposite direction. The next sentence takes them back to the right route.
16 The amaranth tree.
17 Obviously meaning the capital of Magadha, Girivraja or Rajagriha. Girivraja is surrounded by ﬁve hills, but
none of them is today known as Goratha. These hills will be named in the next chapter.
18 The word is usually used for a son, but has a more general meaning and can be applied to any student, child,
inferior or junior. It is a term of affection. The word is also used for a father or someone in similar paternal
position.
19 Rajagriha’s ﬁve hills are today known as Vipulagiri, Ratnagiri, Udayagiri, Shonagiri and Vaibhara (or
Vyahara).
20 Tree with red or white ﬂowers.
21 Tree, also known as piyala.
22 That is, there is never scarcity of rain. Mani is also known as Maniman.
23 There is clearly a problem with the text here, since the word used is masha, which means bean. Should it be
mamsa (meat), as it reads in some regional versions? Then, Brihadratha may have killed a meat-eating demon
named Rishabha. Nor is it clear that Rishabha is a proper name. The word also means a bull. In that case, why did
Brihadratha kill a bean-eating bull and why is it important enough to be mentioned?
24 The drums were made out of Rishabha’s skin. So perhaps it was a bull.
25 One of the ﬁve peaks.
26 As a metaphor, by scaling Chaitya.
27 Presumably, they broke down a fortiﬁcation on the mountain, rather than the mountain itself. The word
shringa, which is used, means the peak of a turret, as well as that of a mountain.

28 Known as madhuparka and customarily offered to a guest.
29 Krishna’s name.
30 On the throne. Sahadeva was Jayadratha’s son.
31 Vishnu’s name, and thus Krishna’s too.
32 A crowd had assembled to watch the duel and people had to back off if the wrestlers approached too close.
33 That is, Krishna didn’t directly speak to Bhima what he intended. Directly advising a warrior engaged in a
duel would have been improper. Krishna offered advice that seemingly meant one thing, but reading between the
lines, was interpreted by Bhima the way Krishna meant it to be interpreted. Bhima understood that Jarasandha was
now weakened.
34 Kunti’s son and, in this context, Bhima.
35 Bhima.
36 Bhima was the son of the wind-god.
37 The kings, some of whom must have been Yadavas.
38 Krishna.
39 Bhima and Arjuna.
40 A demon eventually killed by Kartikeya.
41 Garuda came and sat on the ﬂagstaff.
42 Krishna.
43 As the king.
44 Bhima and Arjuna.
45 Yudhishthira.
46 They had also come to Indraprastha.
47 Krishna.
48 Droupadi.
49 Arjuna.
50 Yudhishthira.

1 Another name for Kubera, the lord of wealth. Since this was to the north, Arjuna’s quest for victory was in a
northern direction.
2 Paka was a demon vanquished by Indra and Arjuna was Indra’s son.
3 Also known as Kulinda, but difﬁcult to pinpoint.
4 The region around Dvaraka.
5 Identiﬁed with Sialkot.
6 The word used in the text is dvipa, which not only means island, but also a continent or region of the earth.
The earth was commonly believed to be divided into seven continents.
7 Shakala had kings other than Prativindhya too.
8 Assam.
9 Should be identiﬁed with Tibet rather than China proper.
10 Presumably, the Bay of Bengal. The text is best translated as ‘surrounded’. However, the sense probably is
that these warriors also supported Bhagadatta.
11 Tone of affection towards a junior, not to be literally interpreted as son.
12 The tribute.
13 Kubera.
14 Brihanta.
15 It is not clear why Brihanta’s intelligence was limited. Some regional versions say that Brihanta was invincible and that certainly ﬁts the circumstances better.
16 Arjuna was aided in his next campaign by Brihanta.
17 Arjuna.
18 A wild tribe that lived in the Himalayas. The word utsava means festival and also means height or elevation.
It is not obvious how the name Utsavasamketa relates to the word utsava.
19 Arjuna’s name, meaning the one who wore a diadem.
20 Identiﬁed with what is West Bengal now.
21 The famous Cholas ruled in the south. So this must be a different set of Cholas.
22 The region around Punjab.
23 Another name for Arjuna, shorter form of Phalguna or Phalguni.
24 Area around the Hindu Kush, extending up to Ladakh and Tibet.
25 Famous battle between the gods and the demons. It took place after Chandra, the moon, abducted Tara, Brihaspati’s wife.
26 One who has no decay, a name usually used for Krishna.
27 Gandaki is a tributary of the Ganga and Videha is the region to the north-east of Magadha, including parts of
what is now Nepal.
28 Dasharna is the region around Vidisha and there is a geographical problem. Not only is Dasharna far from
Videha, it cannot be described as part of the east.
29 It was an unarmed wrestling match.
30 Kunti’s son. Here, Bhima.
31 In this context, Bhima.
32 Shishupala.
33 That is, accepted Yudhishthira as a sovereign.

34 The text says pashubhumi, translated as the land (bhumi) with animals (pashu). It is perfectly possible that
there might have been someone named Pashubhumi.
35 This broadly covers the territory of Bengal, that is, West Bengal and Bangladesh. It was to the west of Vanga.
36 Karna was the king of Anga.
37 Probably a wrestling match.
38 The name of a river, Koshi in Bihar.
39 Bengal, speciﬁcally the eastern part, mostly in Bangladesh now.
40 Capital of the Suhmas. Tamralipta is identiﬁed with today’s Tamluk. At that time, it was on the sea.
41 Pavana is the god of the wind and Bhima was his son.
42 The Brahmaputra River, so named because it had a reddish tinge.
43 Bhima.
44 The text says ten kotis and a koti is ten million.
45 There is a geographical inconsistency, since the Shurasenas refer to the region around Mathura.
46 Also known as Virata, in Rajasthan today.
47 Kuntibhoja.
48 Of the Pandavas.
49 The river Chambal.
50 The next sentence states that this son’s name was Bhoja.
51 There is a problem with the text of the critical edition here. It is not clear whom this tribute was extracted
from. Other versions have a sentence about Sahadeva defeating the Sekas. Had this sentence been included in the
critical edition, the tribute would have been from the Sekas.
52 The country around the Narmada. Its capital was Ujjayini (Ujjain), also known as Avantipuri.
53 The capital of the Chedi kingdom, adjacent to Avanti. In today’s Madhya Pradesh.
54 The critical edition excises shlokas that give the story. Agni seduced King Nila’s daughter and was caught in
the act.
55 Agni was in the form of a brahmana and the king did not recognize him.
56 As wives.
57 To one husband.
58 The word used is svairini. This means a woman who is her own mistress and is unrestrained. But speciﬁcally,
it is used for a wanton or unchaste woman.
59 One of Agni’s names. Literally, the puriﬁer.
60 Yudhishthira.
61 Sahadeva.
62 This is not a reference to the Tripura that is towards the east. The Chedis were known as the Traipuras and
their capital was Tripuri.
63 In today’s Gujarat.
64 Bhishmaka’s daughter Rukmini was married to Krishna.
65 Land between the rivers Narmada and Godavari.
66 This is a literal translation and clearly misses a nuance. For example, there may have been only footpaths in
the forest and ekapadi means a footpath. So ekapada might mean those who used footpaths, rather than men with
single legs.
67 Perhaps the Cholas.

68 Identiﬁed as residents of Antioch.
69 Identiﬁed as residents of Rome.
70 The yavanas.
71 Today’s Gujarat.
72 Ravana’s younger brother, the son of the sage Pulastya.
73 Sahadeva.
74 Vibhishana.
75 Krishna.
76 The Indus River.
77 Abhiras are cowherds.
78 That is, the river.
79 Nakula.
80 Vasudeva.
81 Nakula’s.
82 Nakula’s mother Madri was Shalya’s sister.
83 This can also be translated, instead of as a proper name, as barbaras, meaning those who were barbarians or
not Aryas.
84 Dvaraka is to the west and when Dvaraka was established, these regions were conquered by Krishna.

1 Yudhishthira.
2 Krishna.
3 A demon killed by Krishna.
4 Krishna.
5 Yudhishthira.
6 The Dasharhas were the Yadavas.
7 Yudhishthira’s.
8 Yudhishthira.
9 Yudhishthira.
10 Yudhishthira’s charioteer.
11 Bhima’s charioteer.
12 Sahadeva. Yudhishthira is speaking to Sahadeva.
13 The ofﬁciating priests are called ritvijas. There are four types of ofﬁciating priests—hotar (one who recites
from the Rig Veda), udgatar (one who recites from the Sama Veda), adhvaryu (one who recites from the Yajur
Veda) and brahman (one who recites from the Atharva Veda). This brahman is not to be confused with the supreme
soul (brahman or paramatman).
14 Dvaipayana or Vedavyasa.
15 He was thus the udgatar. This Dhananjaya is a lineage of brahmanas and is not to be confused with Arjuna.
16 Yudhishthira.
17 Sahadeva.
18 Nakula.
19 Drona.
20 Drona has already been mentioned once.
21 Another name for Drupada.
22 Balarama.
23 Assistant priests.
24 Heaven.
25 Bhishma.
26 Drona.
27 Ashvatthama.
28 One of Duryodhana’s brothers.
29 Vidura’s name. The word means the son of a kshatriya father.
30 The text doesn’t specify one thousand of what. The sense is that irrespective of the type of gift, the threshold
was at least one thousand.
31 The kings.

1 That is, the formal anointment or coronation at the end of the sacriﬁce.
2 Hari is Vishnu’s name and so is Pundarikaksha. Pundarika is a lotus, typically the white lotus, and aksha
means eye. So Pundarikaksha means lotus-eyed.
3 The gods.
4 Shambhu is one who brings prosperity. It is usually used for Shiva, and sometimes Kartikeya and Ganesha too.
But here, it is being used for Vishnu.
5 Shishupala is addressing Yudhishthira.
6 Bhishma, who was Ganga’s son.
7 Krishna is Vaasudeva, that is, Vasudeva’s son. Krishna has been written as Vasudeva, not Vaasudeva, to make
the reading easier. In most instances, there is no danger of confusion, this being an exception. Krishna’s father, Vasudeva, is also present.
8 This is a reference to either Kamsa or Jarasandha. But Krishna did not directly kill Jarasandha.
9 Though not explicitly mentioned, these words are clearly being uttered by Vaishampayana.
10 In this context, meaning Bhishma.
11 Satvata is a name for Vishnu, and Krishna.
12 Alternatively, son-in-law, as indicative of someone who deserves to be honoured.
13 Those born from wombs and eggs, plants and those born from sweat (insects and worms).
14 Because he doesn’t have the intelligence.
15 Demon killed by Krishna.
16 Of kings.
17 Another name for Shishupala.

1 Indra’s name.
2 Krishna.
3 Vishnu and Krishna’s name.
4 Krishna.
5 This is a reference to Bhishma’s vow of celibacy. By the third state, Bhishma is being called an eunuch.
6 Ogress killed by Krishna.
7 That is, those who are childlike in intelligence.
8 Putana assumed the form of a vulture.
9 Demons killed by Krishna. Keshi was in the form of a horse (ashva) and Arishta was in the form of a bull
(vrishabha).
10 One of Krishna’s feats as a baby. He was asleep under the cart.
11 Krishna held up the mountain to provide shelter from the pouring rain.
12 Vrishabha.
13 Putana.
14 A bird that lives off carrion. It picks out bits of meat from the mouths of predators.
15 This is a reference to Dvaipayana fathering Dhritarashtra and Pandu.
16 Bhishma has not served his ancestors, because he did not have a son.
17 Fish.
18 Another bird.
19 Krishna.
20 That is, refused the food.
21 The Ganga ﬂows in heaven, earth and the nether regions.
22 The great god. In this context, Shiva.
23 Another name for Kartikeya.
24 Shishupala.
25 Bhima.
26 Shishupala.
27 Shishupala.
28 Balarama.
29 Shishupala’s father was married to a princess from the Yadava clan.
30 Damodara is one of Krishna’s names.
31 That is, sunk into the forehead and disappeared.
32 The word used is nandana, meaning son. But the word also means someone (or something) that brings delight and pleasure. Therefore, it can also be interpreted as Krishna, the one who brings pleasure to the Yadu
lineage.
33 Bhishma is speaking to Bhima.
34 Since it is so meagre.
35 Drona’s son, that is, Ashvatthama.
36 Implying, censure and worship of those one doesn’t have complete information about.
37 Kamsa was the king of Bhoja and Bhoja is one of Kamsa’s names.
38 The Yadavas.

39 Horse sacriﬁce.
40 Another name for Akrura.
41 She was to have been married to Karusha.
42 Krishna’s wife.
43 Rukmini was the daughter of King Bhishmaka of Vidarbha. Her father had promised her in marriage to
Shishupala. However, Rukmini loved Krishna and sent him a letter. At that, Krishna and Balarama arrived, defeated Rukmini’s brother Rukmi, and took Rukmini away.
44 They were undecided.
45 Yudhishthira.
46 Yudhishthira again.
47 Shishupala’s.
48 In general, a bow made of horn. Speciﬁcally, the name of Vishnu’s bow.
49 The text has the word avavritha. This is the ceremonial bathing at the end of any sacriﬁce, for purposes of
puriﬁcation.
50 Yudhishthira’s name.
51 Drupada.
52 Subhadra’s son was Abhimanyu.
53 As has been mentioned before, the word nandana also means beloved. So, this can also be translated as—O
beloved of the Kuru lineage!
54 The text says Tarkshya, which is one of Garuda’s names.
55 Parjanya. Indra is the god of rain, so Parjanya is one of Indra’s names. The word parjanya can also mean
clouds in general and that translation, without invoking the god of rain, is also possible.
56 Indra.
57 Shakuni was the son of Subala, king of Gandhara.

1 The word used is nandana, which can also be translated as beloved.
2 Nagasahrya is another name for Hastinapura.
3 Duryodhana.
4 Yudhishthira. At the end of the last chapter, it was mentioned that only Duryodhana and Shakuni remained.
Since the Pandavas were still there, this means that these were the only two among the invited guests who
remained.
5 Duryodhana took the land to be water.
6 In this context, Yudhishthira.
7 Gaja, naga and hasti, all mean elephant. Gajasahrya is another name for Hastinapura.
8 Shakuni’s sister was Gandhari, Duryodhana’s mother.
9 Arjuna’s horses were white.
10 Yudhishthira.
11 The expression in the text translates as the onset of shuchishukra and there is repetition. Shuchi means the
months of Jyeshtha and Ashada and would have sufﬁced. Shukra means the month of Jyeshtha.
12 Yadavas, the foremost one being Krishna.
13 Yudhishthira.
14 Yudhishthira.
15 The sons of Dhritarashtra, the Kouravas.
16 Ashvatthama.
17 Karna, who was brought up by a suta or charioteer. The charioteer’s wife was Radha, explaining Karna’s
name of Radheya.
18 Kripacharya, who was descended from the Goutama lineage.
19 Bhurishrava, the son of Somadatta.
20 The Pandavas.
21 Dyuta is the act of playing or gambling. Here, the text uses the word for a dice, that is, aksha.
22 Referring to Dhritarashtra.
23 Yudhishthira.
24 Duryodhana’s mother was Gandhari.
25 The word nandana is again used, so it can also be translated as beloved of the Kuru lineage.
26 Also known as kadala.
27 A vatadhana is a brahmana, who has been born of a brahmana mother and a father who is a brahmana but an
outcast.
28 A kharva is simply a very large number, 1 followed by 10 zeroes, or 10 billion.
29 Water pots used by ascetics.
30 The word used in the text is madhu.
31 The pots.
32 A reference to the Pandava conquests.
33 That is, large numbers of brahmanas were continuously being fed.
34 Kubera.
35 Of the dice.
36 Yudhishthira.

37 Shakuni.
38 Vidura.
39 The pros and cons of the decision.
40 The advent of kali yuga was imminent.
41 The word sons is being used in a broad sense, as the Pandavas are also like Dhritarashtra’s sons.
42 He went to Bhishma, Ganga’s son.
43 Vyasa’s student is Vaishampayana. Vaishampayana had recounted the story to Janamejaya. But it was retold
again in Naimisha forest by Lomaharshana’s son Ugrashrava. The suta here is Ugrashrava, retelling the story for
the beneﬁt of the sages.
44 The word used is mahakavi, or great kavi. Kavi is a wise one, the meaning of a poet is a secondary one.
45 Distant and divine lake.
46 Presumably Arjuna.
47 Yudhishthira’s.
48 This chapter, and the ones that follow, are repetitive. Duryodhana has already related this to Shakuni. He now
recounts it to Dhritarashtra. One gets a clear sense that these chapters were later interpolations. They lack continuity and coherence.
49 A kind of antelope.
50 The word used is pilu.
51 The word used is shami.
52 The inguda nut.
53 Govasana brahmanas look after cattle and dasamiya brahmanas are ﬁt to be servants. When relating the story
to Shakuni, Duryodhana mentioned vatadhana brahmanas.
54 Kamandalu.
55 In Gujarat today.
56 A kind of antelope.
57 That is, those who live in dry areas.
58 The word used is ashma, meaning either iron or stone. The word also means sapphire, but that use is rarer.
59 A reddish insect, sometimes identiﬁed with a ﬁreﬂy.
60 The text uses the word indrayudha, meaning Indra’s weapon. The speciﬁc weapon in question is the bow and
the rainbow is known as Indra’s bow.
61 The word used is sandhya, which can mean evening as well as dawn.
62 These were wild horses that had been seized, as opposed to domestically bred horses.
63 Yudhishthira.
64 Identiﬁed as Scythians.
65 Inhabitants of Odra, today’s Orissa.
66 Identiﬁed as Bactria.
67 Ranku is a kind of antelope.
68 Rishti.
69 Implying the west.
70 Identiﬁed as Romans.
71 Arbuda.

72 Iron arrows.
73 It is not clear who this king is. It could be Bhagadatta, but Bhagadatta went away without entering.
74 The text uses the expressions kichaka and venu. The latter is bamboo, while the former is hollow bamboo.
75 The ants dug up the gold from the earth. Pipilika is an ant. There is a reference in Herodotus to ants that dug
up gold in the desert regions.
76 The Brahmaputra.
77 A speciﬁc type of sandalwood.
78 Identiﬁed as Persians.
79 A river.
80 The kings.
81 Yajnasena’s daughter, Droupadi.
82 Droupadi, the princess of Panchala, was married to the Pandavas.
83 Vedanta is the end (anta) of the Vedas and usually refers to the Upanishads. The term is also used for the six
schools of philosophy that followed.
84 Yudhishthira.
85 The king of Kamboja.
86 Shishupala.
87 Shishupala again.
88 Since Jarasandha had already been killed, this is Sahadeva.
89 The king of Pamshu.
90 Virata.
91 Of the chariot.
92 From the Vrishni lineage.
93 Alternatively, Asita-Devala. These are two ancient sages, Asita and Devala, who are always referred to
together.
94 The actual act of coronation or anointing by sprinkling sacred water.
95 Parashurama.
96 Yudhisthira.
97 Yudhishthira.
98 This is a reference to the conquest of the Pandavas.
99 These eight didn’t become unconscious.
100 Pradyumna killed a demon named Shambara. Pradyumna was the son of Krishna and Rukmini. However,
there is no account of this Pradyumna having undertaken any great sacriﬁces. But Pradyumna is also a name for
Kama, or the god of love, and he is also known as the killer of Shambara. The reference could therefore be to
Kama.
101 The Pandavas.
102 The Kouravas.
103 This is an odd statement, since Dhritarashtra is not reported to have had any other wives. Dhritarashtra
probably means that Gandhari is older than Kunti and Madri.
104 The other sons.
105 A demon killed by Shakra (Indra).

106 Ajamidha is Dhritarashtra’s name, in addition to being Yudhishthira’s name.
107 Yudhishthira.
108 Some chapters, including this one, are repetition. Vidura has already been consulted in Chapter 45.
109 On which the game is played.
110 The word used is nandana.
111 The word used for a straw-mat is a kata and there is probably an unintended pun, since kata is also a particular throw of the dice.
112 Assembly hall where the game will be played.
113 The servants.
114 A measure of distance equal to one-fourth of a yojana.
115 Yudhishthira.
116 Yudhishthira’s.
117 Vidura.
118 Dhritarashtra’s sons.
119 The word used is duradara. This means a gambler, which is probably what is intended. But the word also
means the stakes used in gambling and the box in which dice are kept.
120 This can also be translated as cheats.
121 Alternatively, cheats.
122 Alternatively, cheats.
123 The sense is that Vidura is like a father and Vidura will have the welfare of the Pandavas in mind. Therefore, Yudhishthira will agree because of what Vidura says, not because of what Dhritarashtra wants.
124 Alternatively, shameless.
125 That is, robs the eye of sight.
126 Ashvatthama.
127 The fourth of the twenty-seven nakshatras, Aldebaran.
128 Dhritarasthra. The word father is to be interpreted in a broad sense.
129 Because he was blind.
130 This has been translated literally and the gesture is a sign of affection.
131 The word used is nandana.
132 Yudhishthira has already been welcomed.
133 Droupadi’s name.
134 They awoke.
135 The gamblers.
136 The sense is that Yudhishthira uses his wealth for the sake of brahmanas. Therefore, Shakuni should limit
his winnings.
137 The gems were presumably pearls.
138 Gold is mentioned twice and two different words are used, hiranya and jatarupa. Since both words mean
gold, the distinction between them isn’t clear. However, since hiranya also means a golden vessel, as distinct from
gold, that might be the distinction. Alternatively, hiranya also means silver, or any other precious metal.
139 The word used is padmini, which can also mean that they have lotus marks on them. However, for elephants, padmini means the elephants are spotted. The word padmini also denotes a female elephant.

140 The word in the text actually means the shaft of a carriage or a plough, not any shaft.
141 That is, monsoon clouds.
142 The word used is kambukeyura. Keyura is an armlet or upper bracelet. Kambu means a conch shell or a
bracelet. Therefore, ‘armlets made of conch shells’ is also an acceptable translation. However, armlets and
bracelets seem more correct.
143 The number isn’t speciﬁed here, but clearly means one thousand or thousands.
144 The king of the gandharvas.
145 The one with the Gandiva as a bow. One of Arjuna’s names.
146 Vidura is addressing Dhritarashtra.
147 Shukracharya’s name. Shukracharya is the preceptor of the demons.
148 The collector of honey has climbed a tree and is liable to fall down.
149 Duryodhana.
150 There is a break in continuity in the critical edition. Some regional versions have an additional shloka, to the
effect that it is normal royal practice to abandon an unworthy son.
151 Kamsa.
152 Duryodhana’s name.
153 That is, give up Duryodhana and resort to the Pandavas, and so on.
154 The name of a demon killed by Indra.
155 So that he could get all the gold at once.
156 Indra.
157 Shantanu’s father.
158 Without reproducing the Sanskrit, this is an impossible sentence (half of a shloka) to translate, because the
meaning is obscure. In all probability, it is a reference to Yudhishthira, who is composed.
159 Probably a reference to Arjuna.
160 Yudhishthira’s name.
161 Shakuni was from Gandhara, a mountainous region.
162 The sense is that Vidura’s secret inclinations now stand revealed.
163 The creator.
164 The creator.
165 Vidura is now speaking to Duryodhana.
166 The word used is nandana.
167 Referring to the Pandavas.
168 Ten thousand. These large numbers are not stated in ascending (or descending) order.
169 A million.
170 Ten billion.
171 One thousand billion.
172 One hundred million.
173 One hundred billion.
174 A billion.
175 Of riches.
176 The Indus River.

177 The other four Pandava brothers.
178 Shakuni is the one who is not loved by Yudhishthira.
179 Arjuna.
180 Indra.
181 Krishna and Panchali are both Droupadi’s names.
182 Droupadi.
183 Yudhishthira.
184 A bamboo has fruit only when it is old.
185 This is an allusion to an old story that is not recounted completely in the text, perhaps because it was a familiar one. Thieves stole a goat. But when they were ready to kill the goat, they couldn’t ﬁnd the knife, because it
had got buried in the ground. So they set the goat free. Prancing around, the goat unearthed the knife and got
slaughtered in the process.
186 The sense is that one who should know better, like the ascetic, is censured if he performs an evil act, but not
one who cannot differentiate between good and evil.
187 Gourds are light and ﬂoat. Gourds sinking conveys a sense of impossibility.
188 The word used is pathya, which not only means advice, but also medicine and right diet.
189 The word pathya is used again.
190 The attendant, usher.
191 The attendant was of the suta class, that is, a charioteer and bard.
192 Yudhishthira’s house. Since he was in Duryodhana’s service, the attendant had no choice.
193 A reference to Duryodhana.
194 There seems to be a break in continuity in the text. The Pratikamin was Duryodhana’s servant and Yudhishthira sent one of his own instead. As a result of this summons, Droupadi came to the assembly hall.
195 Meaning Dhritarashtra.
196 The Pratikamin.
197 Duryodhana’s.
198 Duhshasana. There is a logical incoherence in the text. In what follows, Duhshasana brings Droupadi to the
assembly hall. In that case, she couldn’t already have been in the assembly hall, as a result of the summons sent by
Yudhishthira through his trusted messenger. Different versions and different interpolations no doubt lead to this
inconsistency.
199 Dhritarashtra.
200 Duhshasana.
201 Jishnu means the victorious one and is a name for Indra, Vishnu and also Arjuna. Hari is Vishnu’s name.
Nara is an ancient sage, and also means a man. The words Nara and Narayana are often used for Arjuna and
Krishna respectively.
202 The Pandavas.
203 Yudhishthira.
204 Yudhishthira.
205 This probably means Dhritarashtra, though Vidura could also have been intended.
206 Duryodhana.
207 Shakuni.
208 Sahadeva is being asked because he kept the sacriﬁcial ﬁre for the Pandavas.

209 Vikarna is one of Duryodhana’s brothers.
210 Drona.
211 Yudhishthira.
212 He grasped his own shining arms.
213 The word used is nandana.
214 The critical edition excises some shlokas that exist in regional versions and in popular renderings of the story. Droupadi prayed to Krishna and he ensured that Droupadi wasn’t stripped.
215 Referring to Duhshasana.
216 Virochana.
217 The ashvattha tree.
218 The witnesses are false witnesses.
219 Indra.
220 Droupadi.
221 Parshata is Drupada and his son is Dhrishtadyumna, Droupadi’s brother.
222 The spirit or soul has departed from these bodies.
223 Duryodhana.
224 If Yudhishthira has been won and has no independent identity or property, he uttered a lie in staking
Droupadi. On the other hand, if Yudhishthira has not been won and has independent identity and property, he uttered a lie in staking himself. In either event, he is a liar.
225 Yudhishthira.
226 Dhritarashtra’s household.
227 Meaning Yudhishthira.
228 Yudhishthira.
229 Karna.
230 Karna was brought up by a suta, though he was Kunti’s son.
231 Yudhishthira.
232 Duryodhana was inviting Droupadi to come and sit on his left thigh, since the left thigh is the seat of the
wife. The right thigh is the seat of daughters and daughters-in-law.
233 The expression used is yogakshema. Both these words have diverse meanings. However, kshema means preserving what has already been acquired and yoga means obtaining that which has not yet been acquired.
234 Duryodhana.
235 As an ill omen. The agnihotra is the maintenance of the sacred ﬁre in a house.
236 Gandhari is Subala’s daughter.
237 Kripacharya, who was descended from Goutama.
238 Dhritarashtra. Clearly, only Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Vidura and Gandhari understood these to be ill omens.
239 Yudhishthira and Droupadi’s son.
240 An ancient sage.
241 In the sense of objectives or directions.
242 Bhima is now speaking to Yudhishthira.
243 Arjuna.
244 Or diet or regimen, the word used being pathya.

245 This is a repetition of what Arjuna has said.
246 Meaning the Kouravas.
247 Droupadi.

1 Duryodhana.
2 Duhshasana.
3 This is what Brihaspati said.
4 The Pandavas.
5 Yudhishthira.
6 Ashvatthama.
7 Though Vidura has already been mentioned by name, this means Vidura, who was the son of a vaishya
woman.
8 Bhishma.
9 Vidura.
10 Alternatively, bridge.
11 Dhritarashtra’s name.
12 Dhritarashtra.
13 Yudhishthira’s.
14 Addressing Yudhishthira.
15 Ascetics who live in the forest.
16 Unlike proper ascetics.
17 Duhshasana.
18 Shakuni.
19 Duhshasana.
20 Bhima.
21 Yudhishthira.
22 Duryodhana.
23 A lion is the king of deer.
24 Yama’s name.
25 Bhishma.
26 One of Dhritarashtra’s sons.
27 Kunti.
28 A sage.
29 Parashurama.
30 Shiva.
31 A river.
32 This is speciﬁcally addressed to Yudhishthira.
33 The Kouravas and the Pandavas.
34 Droupadi.
35 She was in her menses.
36 The city of the elephant, another name for Hastinapura.
37 Vidura’s.
38 One shouldn’t forget that Dhritarashtra is blind.
39 Yudhishthira.

40 Some regional versions say bharya (wife) instead of the arya of the critical edition. Given the context, wives
makes better sense.
41 Another name for the sacred kusa grass.
42 Parvani means the day of the full moon or the day of the new moon.
43 The Pandava kingdom.
44 Cannot be killed, is also a possible translation. But should not be killed, seems more appropriate.
45 This is speciﬁcally addressed to Duryodhana.
46 Sages. The story has been recounted in Volume 1.
47 Dhrishtadyumna.
48 Prishata is Drupada’s name.
49 From this it appears that Vidura is still describing the events to Dhritarashtra.
50 Drona.
51 Nothing happens to this instruction and there is disconnect with what happens next. The fortunate sons are
the Pandavas and Vidura doesn’t go to try and bring them back. If they decide to go to the forest, Dhritarashtra is
offering the Pandavas weapons, chariots and infantry. However, this doesn’t materialize. Both this chapter and the
next seem to have been added on later.
52 Dhritarashtra’s charioteer.
53 She was born from the middle of the altar.
54 Duryodhana.
55 Droupadi was in her menses.
56 Sanjaya.

1 Droupadi.
2 Droupadi.
3 Yudhishthira’s charioteer.
4 Kripacharya, who was descended from Goutama.
5 Dhritarashtra.
6 Another name for the Ganga.
7 The sacriﬁcial ﬁre.
8 Yudhishthira.
9 The hour is terrible because demons are most powerful then.
10 The Pandavas.
11 That is, the brothers cannot ﬁnd means of subsistence for the brahmanas.
12 Samkhya is one of the six schools of philosophy, attributed to the sage Kapila. Both samkhya and yoga will
be encountered later, in the Bhagavad Gita section. This entire section is reminiscent of the Bhagavad Gita.
13 Yoga has eight elements—yama (restraint), niyama (rituals), asana (posture), pranayama (breathing), pratyahara (withdrawal), dharana (retention), dhyana (meditation) and samadhi (liberation). That’s the reason the expression ashtanga (eight-formed) yoga is used.
14 Sacred texts that have been revealed, they have no author.
15 Sacred texts that have authors. They have been heard and memorized, and thus passed down the generations.
16 A royal sage, not to be confused with the Janaka who was Sita’s father.
17 Attachment is a more serious evil than the desire for material objects.
18 One who can see the faults of attachment, without withdrawing.
19 The thirst for material possessions.
20 The text does not state this explicitly. But this seems to be the place where Janaka’s quote ends.
21 Ascetics do not cook for themselves.
22 The grass or straw is for this.
23 The ground is for this.
24 To the guest, in the sense of paying attention to him or her.
25 Svapachas are chandalas or outcasts. Svapacha is sometimes translated as dog-eater, but this doesn’t follow.
Unlike others, chandalas kept dogs and were accompanied by them. Svapacha can also mean someone who cooks
in the company of dogs, or cooks for dogs.
26 Ten gods regarded as the sons of Vishva—Vasu, Satya, Kratu, Daksha, Kala, Kama, Dhriti, Kuru, Pururava
and Madravashva. Alternatively, the food offerings on the ground are for the Vishvadevas (counted as one), Agni,
Soma, Dhanvantari, Kuhu, Anumati, Prajapati, heaven, earth and Agni.
27 The mind and the ﬁve senses of hearing, touch, sight, taste and smell.
28 The way of the ancestors. Along this path, one has to be reborn.
29 The way of the gods. Along this path, one is freed and does not have to be reborn.
30 They do not have to be born again.
31 The sun-god.
32 Uttarayana, the movement of the sun to the north of the equator, the period from the winter to the summer
solstice.
33 Dakshinayana, the movement of the sun to the south of the equator, the period from the summer to the winter
solstice.

34 The moon.
35 Pungent, sour, sweet, salty, bitter and astringent.
36 This Bhima is not the same as Bhimasena.
37 The sun-god.
38 Of the sun.
39 The text actually says son of Aditi.
40 Actually, 109 names are mentioned, which means that one of these is an adjective rather than a proper name.
But it is not possible to determine which one is the adjective.
41 One of the sun’s names, meaning one who gives light.
42 A prayer to the sun-god has been given and ends here.
43 At Yudhishthira’s prayers.
44 The critical edition excises some shlokas here. In these missing shlokas, the sun-god presents Droupadi with
a copper vessel. Until Droupadi had eaten, the copper vessel would remain full and others could be fed. But once
she had eaten, the vessel would become empty.
45 Yudhisthira had immersed himself in the water to pray to Surya.
46 Fruit, roots, meat and vegetables.
47 Vighasa means leftover food, or half-eaten morsels.
48 Prishata’s (Drupada) daughter, Droupadi.
49 Yudhishthira.
50 Dhritarashtra.
51 Since Dhritarashtra was blind, this means inner sight.
52 This sounds like a contradiction, because Dhritarashtra was tormented, but was happily seated. However, typos in Sanskrit are also possible and sukha (happiness) can be confused with duhkha (unhappiness). Alternatively,
happily might be an adjective referring to the comfortable seat, rather than Dhritarashtra’s state of mind.
53 Since Bhargava means descendant of Bhrigu, it is not clear who is meant. It could be either Shukracharya or
Parashurama.
54 The Pandavas.
55 Referring to the Pandavas.
56 Dharma, artha and kama.
57 The Pandavas.
58 Duryodhana.
59 Yudhishthira.
60 Karna.
61 All three are famous rivers.
62 If the Gandiva is lost in such a match.
63 Ajamidha is a name that is usually used for Yudhishthira or Dhritarashtra. It is now being used for Vidura.
64 The word used is pathya, which also means the diet and regimen in times of illness.
65 Pathya again.
66 Yudhishthira.
67 The word used is nandana. So this can also be translated as beloved of the Kuru lineage.
68 Dhritarashtra.

69 Duryodhana.
70 Dhritarashtra’s.
71 Dhritarashtra.
72 That is, a neutral position.
73 Duryodhana.
74 When the Pandavas have been killed.
75 Vedavyasa.
76 Dhritarashtra.
77 The name of a famous cow that yielded everything one desired. Also, the divine cow that was the mother of
all cows.
78 One of Indra’s names.
79 There are two bulls yoked to the plough.
80 Dhritarashtra had one hundred sons through Gandhari. In addition, he had Yuyutsu as a son, through a
vaishya woman.
81 Dhritarashtra.
82 The forest region around Kurukshetra.
83 The word used can be translated more literally as the central pillar to which bulls are tethered when threshing
work is undertaken.
84 The word used is nandana, so it can also be translated as beloved of the Kuru lineage.
85 Dasyus are a class of evil beings that are enemies of both man and god and were slain by Indra. The word
also means outcast and bandit, or a villain in general.
86 The Pandavas.
87 Kirmira.
88 Prishata’s son. Prishata is Drupada and Drupada’s son is Dhrishtadyumna, Droupadi’s brother.
89 The sense is that only gods would contemplate such a confrontation.
90 The text says vayu, which means wind or air. There is probably a typo here. Touching the water is a preparatory ritual before a curse is pronounced. Therefore, instead of air, it should probably have been var, or water.

1 The Pandavas.
2 Cranes ﬂying in the cloud.
3 A bear is riksha. But riksha also means a star or constellation. More speciﬁcally, riksha originally meant Krittika or the Pleiades. Subsequently, it came to mean the constellation saptarshi or Great Dipper, part of Ursa Majoris
or Great Bear. Because the text uses the singular, clearly either of the two speciﬁc constellations is meant.
4 Droupadi.
5 The story has been recounted in Section 10, Volume 1. Baka was killed in Ekachakra, but the capital of the
kingdom was named Vetrakriyagriha.
6 Hidimba’s.
7 This great asura is Vatapi and the story of Agastya and Vatapi will be told in Section 33.
8 A vyama is a measure of length. It is the distance between the tips of the ﬁngers of the two hands, when the
arms are extended out.
9 Bhima.
10 Indra.
11 Kirmira. Bhima hit Kirmira on the head with the tree.
12 Yama’s name, meaning the one with a staff (danda) in his hand (pani).
13 This is a story from the Ramayana.
14 Rahu’s name. Rahu swallows up the sun, causing an eclipse.
15 A reference to Pandu.
16 This suggests that the Dvaita forest was the same as the Kamyaka forest.
17 Yudhishthira.
18 Dhritarashtra.

1 Though the plural is used, this essentially means Dhrishtadyumna.
2 Krishna’s.
3 Arjuna.
4 Meaning, earlier lives.
5 This is not a literal translation. The text uses the word yatrasayamgriha. This means a hermit who ﬁnds a
home (griha) wherever (yatra) evening (sayam) ﬁnds him. So that hermit has no home.
6 This is the hermitage (ashrama) of Badari, known also as Badarika and Badarikashrama. This is one of the
several sources of the Ganga and the hermitages of Nara and Narayana are located there.
7 Naraka or Narakasura was a demon who was born from the earth (bhumi) and known as Bhoumya. He ruled in
Pragjyotisha. He stole Aditi’s earrings. Krishna killed Naraka and recovered these earrings. Krishna also freed the
16,000 ladies Naraka had imprisoned.
8 Indra. Shachi is Indra’s wife.
9 Both Narayana and Hari are Vishnu’s names.
10 The moon.
11 The creator. This is also a name used for Brahma and Vishnu.
12 The ﬁre.
13 The wind.
14 Vaishravana is the son of Vishrava. Here, Kubera is meant.
15 Destiny, or time.
16 A sacriﬁce designed to ensure non-attachment.
17 Since the word used is nandana, this can also be translated as descendant of the Yadavas.
18 The twelve Adityas are sons of Aditi and in this list, Vishnu is younger than Indra.
19 This is a reference to Vishnu’s vamana or dwarf incarnation, explaining why the word child is used. Bali was
a generous demon and granted the dwarf incarnation a boon. Using the three steps, the dwarf covered the three
worlds and Bali had no option but to go to the underworld.
20 It is now impossible to know who the Mauravas and the Pashas were.
21 Not the Pandava Bhimasena.
22 Rukmini was the daughter of King Bhishmaka of Vidarbha, Bhoja being another name for Vidarbha. Rukmini was to be married to Shishupala. But she loved Krishna and wrote him a letter. Krishna arrived with Balarama
and defeated Rukmini’s brother Rukmi. Krishna then carried Rukmini away and married her.
23 The city of Dvaraka is on the ocean and the Yadavas moved from Mathura to Dvaraka.
24 The Dasharhas are the Yadavas.
25 The one without decay, Krishna’s name.
26 The rishis approach Krishna in their own hearts.
27 When there is destruction.
28 The word vairaja is used for anything belonging to the brahman.
29 Droupadi.
30 These words are being spoken by Droupadi.
31 Parashurama.
32 Because these rajarshis have overcome the desire to ﬁght.
33 She was in her menses.
34 Jaya is a synonym for wife and is derived from the root of being born.

35 The youngest is Sahadeva.
36 Duryodhana.
37 Duryodhana.
38 Bhimasena.
39 Duryodhana’s.
40 Kunti.
41 Duryodhana.
42 Yudhishthira.
43 The rakshasa woman is Hidimbaa, though we have written it as Hidimba. Her brother is Hidimba. But despite the names being written in the same way, there should be no confusion, since the context makes it clear
whether brother or sister is meant.
44 Vasava is Indra and Vritra is a demon killed by Indra.
45 The lady Hidimbaa.
46 Kunti.
47 Droupadi. Krishna is really Krishnaa, while Vasudeva is Krishna. But there is no danger of confusion, since
the context will make it clear whether it is Vasudeva or Droupadi.
48 Balarama.
49 Indra is the slayer of Vritra.
50 Krishna is speaking to Yudhishthira.
51 Dhritarashtra.
52 Dhritarashtra.
53 Virasena’s son is Nala, the story is recounted in Section 32.
54 Whatever remains of riches.
55 Kouravya refers to Yudhisthira here.
56 The word used is nandana. So, beloved of the Kuru lineage is also possible.
57 The word used is pathya, which can also be translated as diet or regimen.
58 The region of Sourashtra or Surat.
59 Satyaki’s name.
60 The word used is nandana. So, beloved of the Vrishni lineage is also possible.
61 Soubha was a city that ﬂew in the sky.
62 Krishna is actually Vaasudeva and the son of Vasudeva, though we have written both as Vasudeva. The context will make clear who is meant and there is no danger of confusion between father and son.
63 Those who live in the Anarta region.
64 Shishupala wasn’t Shalva’s brother. The use of the word brother therefore signiﬁes no more than that Shishupala was close to Shalva.
65 The word used is nandana. So, it can also be translated as beloved of the Kuru lineage.
66 Krishna’s conch shell.
67 One of Shishupala’s names.
68 The word used is nandana.
69 Soubha was airborne.

70 The word used is kachagrahani, meaning catchers or graspers (grahani) of hair (kacha) and it is difﬁcult to
make sense of this, though it is possible to visualize war instruments that grasped enemy soldiers by the hair. The
word might very well be chakragrahani, in which case one means instruments that grasp enemy soldiers. That
would make better sense.
71 The word used is ushtrika, which means she-camel, as well as a vessel for storing wine or water and made in
the shape of a she-camel. Given the context, water vessel seems more appropriate. Since elephants and horses are
not being mentioned here, why should she-camels be speciﬁcally mentioned?
72 It is impossible to precisely determine what this weapon was, except that it could kill a hundred people at one
time.
73 Measure of distance equal to one-fourth of a yojana.
74 To make it difﬁcult for the invading army.
75 That is, permission.
76 Ugrasena’s name.
77 Chariots, elephants, cavalry and infantry.
78 Anthills have snakes in them. The word chaitya has several meanings—sacriﬁcial shed, temple, altar, sanctuary and a tree that grows along the road.
79 The number nine can’t be explained, unless there were nine mountains around Dvaraka.
80 The word used is nandana.
81 Indra has one thousand eyes.
82 Samba was Jambavati’s son. Jambavati was one of Krishna’s wives.
83 Kshemavriddhi’s.
84 Indra.
85 Charudeshna.
86 Soubha ﬂew in the sky.
87 The word used is nandana.
88 Pradyumna. Both Pradyumna and Charudeshna were Rukmini’s sons. They were brothers.
89 Makara can be translated as crocodile, but that isn’t quite accurate. A makara is a mythical sea animal, bearing some resemblance to both a crocodile and a shark.
90 The makara.
91 Indra. This was the Bali who was humbled by Vishnu in his vamana incarnation.
92 Shalva.
93 That is, beneath their running feet.
94 The word used is nandana.
95 Daruka is Krishna’s charioteer. Daruki is Daruka’s son and is Pradyumna’s charioteer.
96 Souti is a suta’s son. A suta is a charioteer and also a bard or raconteur.
97 The word used is nandana.
98 Pradyumna.
99 Satyaki.
100 Kritavarma.
101 Krishna.
102 The word used is nandana.
103 The word used is nandana.

104 The word used is nandana.
105 Pradyumna.
106 Repulsing Shalva’s weapons.
107 Shalva.
108 Kubera.
109 The word used is nandana.
110 Kritavarma.
111 Ugrasena.
112 Vasudeva’s name, Krishna’s father.
113 More literally, the navel of the ocean.
114 Krishna’s bow, made of horn.
115 The word used is nataparva. Parva is the feathered shaft of the arrow and nata means bent or curved down.
116 The word prajna means intelligence or wisdom.
117 The word used is nandana.
118 Shura’s son is Vasudeva, Krishna’s father.
119 The word used is nandana.
120 Indra.
121 Krishna’s father Vasudeva.
122 This story has been recounted in Section 1, Volume 1.
123 The word used is shakuna, alternatively shakuni. Speciﬁcally, this is a vulture, kite or eagle. But the word
can also be used for any bird in general.
124 There was no need to see the object, which was invisible.
125 Pragjyotisha is far to the east and Shalva has no association with Pragjyotisha. However, Pragjyotisha was
associated with asuras. Or perhaps the idea is that Soubha travelled to the east, not necessarily all the way to
Pragjyotisha.
126 There is a sudden jump and lack in consistency and continuity over whether Krishna used the agneya
weapon or the chakra. The agneya weapon is left abruptly.
127 Sudarshana is the name of Krishna’s chakra.
128 Maheshvara is Shiva. Shiva destroyed Tripura, which was inhabited by demons.
129 Hastinapura, the city of the elephant.
130 Yudhishthira.
131 Yudhishthira was his senior in age.
132 The king is Yudhishthira. This is a sign of affection shown towards someone younger. Both Yudhishthira
and Bhima were senior to Krishna in age.
133 Subhadra and Abhimanyu left with him. Subhadra was Krishna’s sister and Abhimanyu was the son of Arjuna and Subhadra.
134 Name for the Yadavas in general. In this case, Krishna.
135 Prishata is Drupada’s name.
136 Shuktimati was the capital of Chedi. Dhrishtaketu’s sister Karenumati was married to Nakula.
137 Krishna is the lord of the Dasharhas.
138 Droupadi.

139 Dhoumya.
140 Literally, Bhutapati means the lord (pati) of beings (bhuta) and is one of Shiva’s names. The Pandavas
looked like Shiva because they were dressed in skins and had matted hair.
141 They were already in the forest. So they left for another forest.
142 That is, the brahmanas.
143 This is odd. The text says pitan, which means yellow. Arrows can be yellow if they are made of brass, but
that seems unlikely. Perhaps the text should have said diptan, meaning blazing or radiant. That ﬁts better.
144 Yudhishthira’s charioteer.
145 Droupadi.
146 Yudhishthira.
147 The citizens are saying this.
148 This is a reference to Arjuna.
149 Yudhishthira.
150 Droupadi.
151 Autumn as a synonym for year.
152 Vedavyasa.
153 Narada.
154 The ashoka tree.
155 Nipas and kadambas are the same trees, similar to the ashoka.
156 Tree similar to the shala.
157 Name of a tree.
158 Name of a tree.
159 Datyuhas and chakoras are similar birds, the former is the gallinule and the latter is the Greek partridge.
Chakoras are believed to feed on moonbeams.
160 The Sarasvati river. Bhogavati is also the name of the Ganga in the nether worlds.
161 Yudhishthira.
162 Shakra is Indra. Heaven is a loose translation. The text says trivishtapa, meaning Indra’s world.
163 A charana is a singer or bard. But the word also means a pilgrim, more appropriate in this context.
164 Entered the forest.
165 Indra is the one with a thousand eyes. Indra defeated a demon named Maya and killed another demon
named Namuchi.
166 Dasharatha’s son, Rama.
167 The word used is alarka, which means a mad or angry dog.
168 The name of a rishi.
169 Each name in the list is a lineage descended from a famous sage.
170 Prahlada’s son was Virochana and Virochana’s son was Bali. Vishnu appeared before Bali in his vamana
(dwarf) incarnation in the form of a brahmana. But that apart, we don’t get to know details of the story about how
Bali allied with brahmanas and later oppressed them.
171 That is, a kshatriya.
172 The text says an elephant without an ankusha or goad.
173 Yudhishthira.

174 The sacker of cities, Indra’s name.
175 Duryodhana.
176 Meaning Yudhishthira.
177 The word used is chira, which also means bark.
178 The many-armed Arjuna is Kartaviryarjuna, king of the Haihayas. He had a thousand arms because of a
boon obtained from Dattatreya. He was Ravana’s contemporary and was eventually killed by Parashurama.
179 Bali is asking this. The word used is tata, which means father, but not only in the narrow sense. It can be
used for any superior, including a grandfather.
180 The word used is tata again. This means not only son in the narrow sense, but anyone younger in a broad
sense.
181 That is, punish.
182 Duryodhana.
183 Bhishma.
184 Drona.
185 Ashvatthama.
186 Duryodhana.
187 Dhata and Vidhata are often synonyms, standing for the creator. To the extent they are being listed separately, Vidhata is more the creator and Dhata is more the preserver.
188 Signifying honoured ones.
189 Exclamations made when offering oblations to the gods.
190 Exclamations made when offering oblations to the ancestors.
191 The word used is louha and it can also be translated as copper.
192 An offering made to the vishvadevas, or gods in general, before meals.
193 Ishvara.
194 Ishana is being used here for the supreme god. Both Shiva and Vishnu are referred to as Ishana.
195 Duryodhana.
196 That is, wise.
197 Marichi was Brahma’s son and Kashyapa was Marichi’s son.
198 The word used is nihara, which also means dew. But mist seems more appropriate.
199 Those without life.
200 The idea of ascent doesn’t become very clear. It probably refers to ascent to a higher form of life after
rebirth.
201 Vidhata.
202 Dhata.
203 Referring to that which one possesses.
204 Chance and destiny.
205 Implicitly, one who is an enemy.
206 This reference to the brahmana is irrelevant and is required only because Droupadi is a woman and therefore, should not normally be so knowledgeable.
207 The preceptor of the gods.
208 Yudhishthira.

209 Arjuna.
210 Droupadi.
211 This is probably a reference to Dhrishtadyumna.
212 Dharma and kama.
213 This means the time of the day, dharma in the morning, artha during the day and kama in the evening.
214 Kama in the ﬁrst part of one’s life, artha in the subsequent stage and dharma at the end.
215 The word used is nandana. So it can also be translated as beloved of the Kuru lineage.
216 Born as a kshatriya.
217 Dhata.
218 Shalyaka, one with a spear. A hunter with a spear offers bait and obtains his food.
219 The asuras, speciﬁcally the daityas, are the offspring of Diti. The gods, speciﬁcally the adityas, are the offspring of Aditi. Both Diti and Aditi were married to Kashyapa.
220 Duryodhana.
221 The word used is nandana. So it can also be translated as beloved of the Kuru lineage.
222 Hastinapura.
223 Indra killed Vritra.
224 The Panchalas.
225 Shakuni was from Gandhara, a mountainous region.
226 Ayuja is odd and yuja is even. These are numbers thrown up by the dice.
227 The word tata means son, but can be used for anyone who is a junior.
228 The word tata means father, but can also be used for anyone who is a senior. Duryodhana was younger to
Yudhishthira.
229 The land of the ﬁve rivers, the region of the Punjab.
230 To express delight at the discomﬁture of the Pandavas.
231 The word used is kala. This means small fragment or fraction. But speciﬁcally, it also means a sixteenth
part.
232 The word used is patatrina, which etymologically, means the one with wings. Speciﬁcally, patatrina means
a bird or an arrow, but the latter ﬁts the text better.
233 Collyrium is a black pigment applied to the eye with a stick or pencil. The word sucha is used. This means
needle, but it also means a pointed shoot or blade of kusa grass. Since collyrium is applied to the eye, blade of
grass seems to be a better translation than needle.
234 Time.
235 A king.
236 Kunti.
237 Droupadi. Prativindhya is Droupadi’s son.
238 A kind of herb.
239 From violating the agreement.
240 Ashvatthama.
241 Vis-à-vis the Kouravas and the Pandavas.
242 Because they are in the employment of the Kouravas.
243 Karna.

244 Vyasa is Parashara’s son.
245 Kubera.
246 Yama.
247 The reference is to Nara, with whom Arjuna is often equated.
248 Lokapala literally means lord or protector (pala) of the world (loka). There are eight Lokapalas in charge of
the eight directions and they are Indra, Agni, Yama, Nairita, Varuna, Marut (or Vayu), Kubera and Isha.
249 Pure arrows, probably means sharp arrows. But it could also mean non-poisonous arrows.
250 Dhanu means bow and veda means knowledge. But dhanurveda means the science of war. There are two
reasons why dhanurveda has four parts, the ﬁrst being the fourfold division of the army into elephants, infantry,
chariots and horses. The second concerns four types of weapons—mukta, amukta, muktamukta and yantramukta.
Mukta weapons like a chakra were released from the hand. Amukta weapons like swords were never released from
the hand. Muktamukta weapons like spears could either be released or held in the hand. And yantramukta weapons
like arrows were released from an implement (yantra).
251 Ashvatthama.
252 The word used is tata, which can be used in the sense, among others, of any junior.
253 Indra’s name. Literally, the destroyer of cities.
254 Droupadi.
255 This is what he had been taught by Yudhishthira, who had in turn been taught by Vyasadeva.
256 Literally, Indra’s mountain.
257 Indra has a thousand eyes.
258 Shiva.
259 The Pandavas, that is, the other four Pandavas.
260 Arjuna’s.
261 Shiva’s name. Literally, the one with three eyes.
262 Shiva.
263 Arjuna was Indra’s son.
264 Vaidurya.
265 That is, he ate after a period of six nights was over.
266 The word used is nandana, meaning beloved as well as son.
267 A pinaka is both a trident and a bow. In particular, pinaka means Shiva’s bow. Shiva is known as Pinaki. He
wields both a bow and a trident.
268 Shiva’s throat is dark because he consumed the poison thrown up during the churning of the ocean.
269 Sharva is one of Shiva’s names.
270 Shiva.
271 Kanchana means gold or golden. The word kanchana is applied to several different kinds of trees.
272 Shiva’s consort.
273 The sons of Diti were daityas or demons. Muka was a demon.
274 Referring to the boar.
275 The word used is naracha, which means an iron arrow.
276 The word used is nandana.
277 Arjuna’s.

278 So that Arjuna can see Shiva.
279 Lord (isha) of the mountains (giri), Shiva’s epithet.
280 Uma was with Shiva.
281 Shiva.
282 Kapardin is one of Shiva’s names. Kaparda or kapardaka means braided or matted hair and Shiva is named
Kapardin because his hair is matted.
283 At the time of Daksha’s yajna, Shiva uprooted the god Bhaga’s eyes.
284 Shiva’s name, the one with a bull (vrishabha) on his banner (dhvaja).
285 An ayuta is ten thousand.
286 The hermitage at Badari or Badarika, one of the sources of the Ganga.
287 Vrishadhvaja and Vrishabhadhvaja mean the same.
288 Pashupati is Shiva’s name.
289 The word bhuta means beings, but it also means evil spirits.
290 Nagas and pannagas are serpents. They are different from snakes, because they possess extraordinary powers, including that of assuming any form at will.
291 Karna is the son of the suta.
292 Kubera.
293 These divine weapons were based on mantras, the physical form was immaterial.
294 Arjuna.
295 Tryaksha is Shiva’s name, meaning the one with three (tri) eyes (aksha).
296 The word used is nirghata, which also means earthquake.
297 Shiva, the one with three eyes.
298 Arjuna.
299 Varuna.
300 Vaidurya.
301 Class of demigods.
302 Obviously meaning lesser gods.
303 This is a description of Yama.
304 Vivasvat is the sun and Dharmaraja Yama is the son of the sun.
305 Indrani is Indra’s consort, Shakra is Indra.
306 Indra’s elephant.
307 The moon is the lord of the stars.
308 The word used is nandana. So it can also be translated as beloved of the Kuru lineage.
309 Drona.
310 The nivatakavachas are demons. The story will be told in Section 35.
311 Yama is the son of the sun and so is Karna.
312 A reference to Krishna.
313 Danda.
314 The word used is nandana.
315 Pasha.

316 Famous battle that took place between the gods and the demons.
317 Antardhana means disappearance. This weapon enables the user to become invisible.
318 In its capacity to put the enemy to sleep, this weapon was also known as prasvapana.
319 The word used is nandana.
320 Ishana is the supreme god. Speciﬁcally, the term is used for both Shiva and Vishnu. It is being used in a
general sense here.
321 Matali is the name of Indra’s charioteer.

1 A hudaguda is an iron club. However, an iron club cannot have wheels. So what is probably meant is some
kind of battering-ram made out of iron.
2 Arjuna.
3 Indivara, a blue lotus.
4 Shakra is Indra and Arjuna was Indra’s son.
5 Daivata is a word used for the class of gods as a whole. In this context, it seems to mean the minor gods.
6 The word used is nandana. Hence alternatively, beloved of the Kuru lineage.
7 The word used is nandana.
8 The word used is vimana and vimanas are not ordinary chariots. They ﬂy through the sky and are therefore,
divine chariots.
9 By implication, from the earth.
10 Famous king whose story will be recounted in Section 33.
11 The name of Indra’s garden.
12 Sacriﬁcial ﬁres.
13 Translated literally.
14 That is, have intercourse with the preceptor’s wife.
15 Ayuta, meaning ten thousand. But ayuta can also mean a large number.
16 Suravithi literally means the road (vithi) of the gods (sura) and could be a reference to the Milky Way.
17 The Vishvadevas.
18 King of the solar dynasty, often described as an ideal king.
19 The name of a gandharva.
20 The critical edition’s text has Ahuhu. It should read Huhu.
21 The word used is nandana.
22 Indra.
23 Vasava is Indra’s name.
24 Indra killed a demon named Vritra.
25 Demon killed by Indra.
26 The fourteenth day of the lunar fortnight. Though not explicitly stated, the reference is probably to the dark
lunar fortnight.
27 Hava. Hava is not just any gesture, but a feminine coquettish gesture with amorous overtones.
28 Arjuna.
29 Water for washing the feet.
30 Water for washing the face.
31 The sense is that the vajra was like thunder and lightning. Consequently, there were clouds and peacocks ﬁgure because they dance when it rains.
32 The critical edition excises some sections that are part of popular renderings of the Mahabharata. That story
ﬁgures in regional versions and is a story about the apsara Urvashi’s desire for Arjuna. Arjuna spurned her because
she was like his superior’s wife or mother, the Puru dynasty having descended from Urvashi. Urvashi then cursed
Arjuna that he would have to live as a woman, bereft of his manhood. Indra reduced the duration of the curse to
one year.
33 The word used is vishtara. This means a seat, stool or chair. It is also the seat of the ofﬁciating priest at a sacriﬁce, usually made of kusha grass.

34 Lomasha.
35 Alternatively, Badarika.
36 The story of Sagara will be told in Section 33. He had sixty thousand sons. When he performed a sacriﬁce,
the sacriﬁcial horse was stolen by Indra and taken to the nether regions. The sons were sent in search of the horse
and proceeded to dig towards the nether regions. They falsely accused the sage Kapila of stealing the horse and
were burnt to ashes because of his rage. Subsequently, their souls were saved when their descendant Bhagiratha
brought down the Ganga to the nether regions. The nether regions are often known by the name of patala. However, there are seven nether regions—atala, vitala, sutala, rasatala, talatala, mahatala and patala. Patala is thus the
lowest of the seven nether regions and rasatala is an intermediate one.
37 A reference to Arjuna.
38 The word jvara should not be interpreted as physical fever only. It also means mental fever and distress.
39 The quotation marks signify that this is a message from Indra to Yudhishthira.
40 Dhritarashtra was Ambika’s son.
41 The word used is gramya, which means vulgar, as well as rustic.
42 Yudhishthira.
43 The word used (ghrini) means both compassionate and contemptible. Since Karna is being described disapprovingly, contemptible is more appropriate than compassionate.
44 The preceptor is Drona. Since Drona is Arjuna’s teacher, the implication is that Drona will not ﬁght properly
with Arjuna.
45 The word used is tata. While this means son, it can generally be used for anyone who is a junior.
46 Sthanu is Shiva’s names. Shiva has eleven manifestations in the form of the eleven Rudras.
47 Meaning Duryodhana.
48 Krishna.
49 The Yadavas.
50 That is, brahmanas who maintained the sacriﬁcial ﬁre.
51 That is, killed the deer.
52 Yudhishthira.
53 Balarama.
54 This is odd. Choosing a charioteer for Arjuna is premature and the question shouldn’t arise at this stage. This
reinforces the general impression that this chapter was a later addition and doesn’t quite belong.
55 Balarama.
56 Shishupala’s son is Dhrishtaketu.
57 Yudhishthira.
58 Droupadi.
59 The word used is devi. This is a honoriﬁc form of address and doesn’t mean goddess alone.
60 Speciﬁcally, the hair.
61 Balarama.
62 Satyaki.
63 Droupadi.
64 This should really be thirteen years.
65 The word used is tata. This means father, but is also used for any elder or superior.
66 Alternatively, childish.

67 This is being addressed to Yudhishthira. So Achyuta is in the sense of one without decay.
68 A mixture based on honey that is offered to guests. It is made of ﬁve ingredients—curds, clariﬁed butter, water, wax and candied sugar.
69 Yudhishthira.
70 There were fourteen Manus, who were lords of the earth in fourteen different eras. Because of descent from
Manu, a human is known as manava.
71 Though not explicitly stated, Bhima was the king of Vidarbha. This Bhima is not to be confused with the
Pandava Bhima.
72 Obviously this means the three sons.
73 The god of love.
74 Damayanti’s.
75 Nala was the king of Nishadha.
76 Of his palace.
77 Or geese.
78 Meaning the capital city of Vidarbha, named Kundina.
79 Indra.
80 Maghavan is Indra’s name.
81 Bala and Vritra were demons killed by Indra.
82 The lords (pala) of the worlds (loka) are eight in number—Indra, Vahni (Agni), Yama, Nairrita, Varuna,
Maruta, Kubera and Isha (Ishana). Sometimes, Vayu is listed instead of Indra. However, especially since Agni is
mentioned separately, in this context, the word lokapala is being used in a less speciﬁc sense. As will become clear
later, only Indra, Agni, Varuna and Yama are meant.
83 The god of love, Kandarpa is another of his names.
84 That is, they gave up the intention of soliciting Damayanti for themselves.
85 Varuna.
86 That is, will have to kill myself.
87 A reference to Indra.
88 The thirty gods.
89 Bhogavati is the capital city of the nagas and is located in the nether regions.
90 The four gods, Shakra, Agni, Varuna and Yama had assumed forms that were identical to that of Nala.
91 Indra.
92 Punyashloka is one of Nala’s epithets.
93 That is, divine marks. Gods do not perspire. Nor do their eyes blink. Their feet do not touch the ground and
they do not have any shadows.
94 As a mark of choosing him.
95 Each of the four gods gave two boons.
96 Indra.
97 Agni.
98 Agni.
99 Varuna.
100 Yayati ﬁgures in several sections, such as Section 33.

101 In the four yuga cycle, dvapara and kali are the third and the fourth yuga, with dharma progressively declining as one moves down the yugas. Here, the third and the fourth yugas have been personiﬁed.
102 Dvapara is also the side of a dice marked with two points, satya or krita with four points, treta with three
points and kali with one point.
103 Enter Nala’s body. An act of sin would permit Kali to enter Nala’s body and make Nala addictive towards
gambling and dice.
104 The word used is sandhya, which means both dawn and dusk, and the attendant ceremonies. In the translation, we have used the evening sense.
105 Pushkara was Nala’s brother. The word pushkara also means intoxication.
106 This imagery is difﬁcult to understand. It probably means that Kali became the chief dice with which the
game would be played.
107 The bull is the dice with Kali inside it.
108 Damayanti.
109 The words hiranya and suvarna are separately used. However, hiranya also means silver or any other precious metal. Since the two words are separately used, we have translated hiranya as silver.
110 Nala’s charioteer Varshneya.
111 Nala and Damayanti’s son and daughter.
112 Kundina is the capital of Vidarbha, that is, Damayanti’s father’s capital.
113 That is, Indrasenaa, to distinguish from the boy Indrasena.
114 Outside the city.
115 Nala.
116 The ﬂesh would be his food and the plumage his riches.
117 The southern part of India, the region of the Deccan.
118 Damayanti had shared her garment with Nala.
119 The word used is sabha. This means an assembly hall or council. It also means a place where gambling occurs. But it is also generally used for any place frequented by the public.
120 That is, she became tired.
121 An ajagara. An ajagara is so named because it swallows goats (aja).
122 The word used is graham, normally used for a crocodile or shark.
123 The word used is lubdhaka, which means a hunter, but can also be a proper name. It also means someone
who is covetous.
124 Kind of tree.
125 The sacred ﬁg tree.
126 Kind of tree.
127 Tree used for medicinal purposes.
128 Tree with red blossoms.
129 Kind of tree.
130 The soap-berry tree.
131 Sandalwood trees.
132 The silk-cotton tree.
133 The rose-apple tree.
134 Tree with red or white ﬂowers.

135 Kind of tree.
136 Teak.
137 Kind of plant.
138 Myrobalan.
139 Fig trees.
140 Flowering tree.
141 Kind of tree.
142 The jujube tree.
143 Indian ﬁg tree.
144 Name of a tree, also known as piyala.
145 Palmyra trees.
146 Date trees.
147 A green herb.
148 Kind of myrobalan tree.
149 Nala.
150 Kind of tree with fragrant blossoms.
151 Name of a tree with fragrant blossoms, also known as nagakeshara.
152 Nala.
153 That is, maintains the sacriﬁcial ﬁre.
154 More speciﬁcally, follows the Vedas.
155 It is not obvious what Dramida is. It could be that Dravida is meant. Alternatively, there might be a typo,
because some regional versions have parvata instead of Dramida. In that case, the tree would be compared to a
king of the mountains.
156 The ashoka tree has red ﬂowers and is believed to blossom when it is struck by the feet of beautiful women.
Shoka means sorrow and the tree’s name literally means without sorrow. It is so named because it removes sorrow
from the mind of anyone who looks at the tree. That’s the reason Damayanti asks the tree to alleviate her sorrow.
157 In accordance with your name.
158 The ruddy goose.
159 The feminine of yaksha and rakshasa respectively.
160 The elephants who were part of the caravan.
161 A sairandhri is a female servant who works in the inner quarters and is therefore superior to a common
slave girl. This was also the name Droupadi used when she became a servant to Sudeshna, King Virata’s wife. By
describing herself as a sairandhri, Damayanti is signifying her desire to work in the palace.
162 Nala had a boon that a ﬁre would do him no harm.
163 This is a reference to Kali, who is inside Nala.
164 The sense is not clear. Perhaps it is a reference to those who possessed secret knowledge.
165 Rituparna was the king of Ayodhya.
166 Rituparna’s charioteers. Varshneya is Nala’s old charioteer, who has found employment with Rituparna.
167 Manmatha is the god of love and Rati is his consort.
168 Rahu is a demon who sought to drink amrita, but was caught, and resolved vengeance on the sun and the
moon. Consequently, as one of the nine planets, Rahu swallows up the sun and the moon at the time of eclipses.

169 Rohini is the fourth nakshatra. While all the nakshatras are married to the moon, Rohini is the favourite
wife.
170 A birthmark. Alternatively, a mole.
171 It was a palanquin.
172 Another name for Rituparna.
173 Sudeva.
174 Avarta, an auspicious lock of hair on the back of a horse, curling backwards.
175 A famous authority who wrote about horses.
176 This is strange, because Bahuka is deformed.
177 Since Varshneya is Nala’s old charioteer, he knows Nala well. The only difﬁculty is that Nala’s form is now
different.
178 Bahuka.
179 Of reaching Vidarbha in time.
180 Meaning Damayanti.
181 The capital of Vidarbha.
182 The ones that were in Vidarbha, not the ones Nala was driving.
183 It is not clear what this means. Perhaps it means that Nala has never made excessive demands on Damayanti. Perhaps it means that Nala has behaved like an impotent person towards other women.
184 Of the palace.
185 Was not known to Bhima. So Bhima wondered why Rituparna had suddenly come.
186 This is the daughter Indrasenaa. The son is Indrasena. But given the way names have been written in this
translation, Indrasenaa is also written as Indrasena.
187 With a message.
188 To Bhima.
189 Nala had held it in trust.
190 Bahuka (Nala) could no longer be his charioteer. Varshneya was Nala’s charioteer and would therefore stay
on with Nala.
191 The word used is ayuta, meaning ten thousand. But here, many years, rather than a precise number, are
meant.
192 Nala.
193 Pushkara.
194 One of the seven continents (dvipa) that surround Mount Meru. Bharatavarsha is part of Jambudvipa.
195 Droupadi.
196 Yudhishthira.
197 A sacred tirtha.
198 Yudhishthira.
199 Jaya is one of Arjuna’s names and means victory. Jaya is also one of Yudhishthira’s names.
200 Meaning the other Pandavas.
201 Kubera’s park or pleasure garden.
202 Yudhishthira.
203 The many-armed Arjuna is Kartavirya Arjuna, the king of the Haihayas who was killed by Parashurama.

204 Pundarikaksha means lotus-eyed, since pundarika is a white lotus and aksha means eye. Pundarikaksha is a
proper name for Vishnu, and Krishna. Pundarikaksha is not quite a proper name for Arjuna, unless he is equated
with Vishnu or Krishna. Perhaps Droupadi simply means that Arjuna has eyes like those of a lotus.
205 Vasava is Indra and Arjuna is Indra’s son.

PENGUIN BOOKS
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Books India Pvt. Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi 110 017, India
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA
Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, M4P 2Y3, Canada
(a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.)
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Ireland, 25 St. Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd)
Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division
of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd)
Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore 0632, New Zealand (a division of
Pearson New Zealand Ltd)
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, Block D, Rosebank Ofﬁce Park, 181 Jan Smuts Avenue,
Parktown North, Gauteng 2193, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Ofﬁces: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
First published by Penguin Books India 2010
Translation copyright © Bibek Debroy 2010
Cover design by Nitesh Mohanty
All rights reserved
ISBN: 978-01-4310-014-0
This digital edition published in 2012.
e-ISBN: 978-81-8475-403-2
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent,
resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher’s prior written consent in any form of
binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including this
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser and without limiting the rights under copyright
reserved above. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording
or otherwise), without the prior written permission of both the copyright owner and the above-mentioned publisher of this book.

The Mahabharata
Volume 3
(Sections 33 to 44)
Translated by
BIBEK DEBROY

PENGUIN BOOKS

Contents
About the Translator
Dedication
Family tree
Map of Bharatavarsha
Introduction
SECTION THIRTY-THREE
TIRTHA-YATRA PARVA
Journey to the sacred places of pilgrimage
SECTION THIRTY-FOUR
JATASURA-VADHA PARVA
Slaying of the demon named Jatasura
SECTION THIRTY-FIVE
YAKSHA-YUDDHA PARVA
Bhima ﬁghts with yakshas and rakshasas and kills the rakshasa Maniman
SECTION THIRTY-SIX
AJAGARA PARVA
Bhima is grasped by Nahusha in the form of a boa; a dialogue between Yudhishthira and Nahusha
SECTION THIRTY-SEVEN
MARKANDEYA SAMASYA PARVA
A long conversation between the Pandavas and Markandeya
SECTION THIRTY-EIGHT
DROUPADI–SATYABHAMA-SAMBADA PARVA
A conversation between Droupadi and Satyabhama
SECTION THIRTY-NINE
GHOSHA YATRA PARVA
An expedition undertaken by the Kouravas to see the ghoshas in Dvaitavana, where the Pandavas are residing
SECTION FORTY
MRIGA-SVAPNA-BHAYA PARVA
Deer appear to Yudhishthira in a dream and tell him about their fears
SECTION FORTY-ONE
VRIHI-DROUNIKA PARVA
The story of Mudgala, who lived on a measure of rice and was generous enough to give it away
SECTION FORTY-TWO
DROUPADI HARANA PARVA
Droupadi’s abduction by Jayadratha
SECTION FORTY-THREE
KUNDALA-AHARANA PARVA
Indra asks Karna for his natural armour and earrings that make him invincible; in return, gives Karna an invincible spear
SECTION FORTY-FOUR
ARANEYA PARVA
Failing to answer a yaksha’s questions, Nakula, Sahadeva, Arjuna and Bhima are killed, but are restored to life when Yudhishthira answers the
questions correctly

Acknowledgements
Copyright Page

About the Translator
Bibek Debroy is an economist and is Research Professor (Centre of Policy
Research) and Contributing Editor (Indian Express group). He has worked
in universities, research institutes, industry and for the government. He has
published books, papers and popular articles in economics. But he has also
published in Indology and translated (into English) the Vedas, the Puranas,
the Upanishads and the Gita (Penguin India, 2005). His book Sarama and
her Children: The Dog in Indian Myth (Penguin India, 2008) splices his interest in Hinduism with his love for dogs. He is currently translating the remaining volumes of the unabridged Mahabharata.

Praise for Volumes 1 and 2
‘The modernization of language is visible, it’s easier on the mind, through expressions
that are somewhat familiar. The detailing of the story is intact, the varying tempo maintained, with no deviations from the original. The short introduction reﬂects a brilliant
mind. For those who passionately love the Mahabharata and want to explore it to its
depths, Debroy’s translation offers great promise in the ﬁrst volume.’
—Hindustan Times

‘[Debroy] has really carved out a niche for himself in crafting and presenting a translation
of the Mahabharata … The book takes us on a great journey with admirable ease.’
—The Indian Express

‘The ﬁrst thing that appeals to one is the simplicity with which Debroy has been able to
express himself and infuse the right kind of meanings … Considering that Sanskrit is not
the simplest of languages to translate a text from, Debroy exhibits his deep understanding
and appreciation of the medium.’
—The Hindu

‘Overwhelmingly impressive … Bibek is a truly eclectic scholar.’
—Business Line

‘Debroy’s lucid and nuanced retelling of the original makes the masterpiece even more
enjoyably accessible.’
—Open

‘The quality of translation is excellent. The lucid language makes it a pleasure to read the
various stories, digressions and parables.’
—The Tribune

‘Extremely well-organized, and has a substantial and helpful Introduction, plot summaries and notes. The volume is a beautiful example of a well thought-out layout which
makes for much easier reading.’

—The Book Review

‘The dispassionate vision [Debroy] brings to this endeavour will surely earn him merit in
the three worlds.’
—Mail Today

‘This [second] volume, as voluminous as the ﬁrst one, is expectedly as scholarly … Like
the earlier volume, the whole book is an easy read.’
—The Hindu

‘Debroy’s is not the only English translation available in the market, but where he scores
and others fail is that his is the closest rendering of the original text in modern English
without unduly complicating the readers’ understanding of the epic.’
—Business Standard

For Suparna
Ardha bhāryā manuṣyasya bhāryā śreṣṭhatamaḥ sakhā
Bhāryā mulam trivargasya bhāryā mitram mariṣyataḥ

Mahabharata (1/68/40)

Family Tree
Bharata/Puru Lineage

Map of Bharatavarsha
BHARATAVARSHA (SIXTH CENTURY BCE)

Introduction
The Hindu tradition has an amazingly large corpus of religious texts, spanning Vedas, Vedanta (brahmanas,1
aranyakas,2 Upanishads,), Vedangas,3 smritis, Puranas, dharmashastras and itihasa. For most of these texts, especially if one excludes classical Sanskrit literature, we don’t quite know when they were composed and by whom,
not that one is looking for single authors. Some of the minor Puranas (Upa Purana) are of later vintage. For instance, the Bhavishya Purana (which is often listed as a major Purana or Maha Purana) mentions Queen Victoria.
In the listing of the corpus above ﬁgures itihasa, translated into English as history. History doesn’t entirely capture the nuance of itihasa, which is better translated as ‘this is indeed what happened’. Itihasa isn’t myth or ﬁction.
It is a chronicle of what happened; it is fact. Or so runs the belief. And itihasa consists of India’s two major epics,
the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. The former is believed to have been composed as poetry and the latter as
prose. This isn’t quite correct. The Ramayana has segments in prose and the Mahabharata has segments in poetry.
Itihasa doesn’t quite belong to the category of religious texts in a way that the Vedas and Vedanta are religious.
However, the dividing line between what is religious and what is not is fuzzy. After all, itihasa is also about attaining the objectives of dharma,4 artha,5 kama6 and moksha7 and the Mahabharata includes Hinduism’s most important spiritual text—the Bhagavad Gita.
The epics are not part of the shruti tradition. That tradition is like revelation, without any composer. The epics
are part of the smriti tradition. At the time they were composed, there was no question of texts being written down.
They were recited, heard, memorized and passed down through the generations. But the smriti tradition had composers. The Ramayana was composed by Valmiki, regarded as the ﬁrst poet or kavi. The word kavi has a secondary
meaning as poet or rhymer. The primary meaning of kavi is someone who is wise. And in that sense, the composer
of the Mahabharata was no less wise. This was Vedavyasa or Vyasadeva. He was so named because he classiﬁed
(vyasa) the Vedas. Vedavyasa or Vyasadeva isn’t a proper name. It is a title. Once in a while, in accordance with
the needs of the era, the Vedas need to be classiﬁed. Each such person obtains the title and there have been twentyeight Vyasadevas so far.
At one level, the question about who composed the Mahabharata is pointless. According to popular belief and
according to what the Mahabharata itself states, it was composed by Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa (Vyasadeva).
But the text was not composed and cast in stone at a single point in time. Multiple authors kept adding layers and
embellishing it. Sections just kept getting added and it is no one’s suggestion that Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa
composed the text of the Mahabharata as it stands today.
Consequently, the Mahabharata is far more unstructured than the Ramayana. The major sections of the Ramayana are known as kandas and one meaning of the word kanda is the stem or trunk of a tree, suggesting solidity.
The major sections of the Mahabharata are known as parvas and while one meaning of the word parva is limb or
member or joint, in its nuance there is greater ﬂuidity in the word parva than in kanda.
The Vyasadeva we are concerned with had a proper name of Krishna Dvaipayana. He was born on an island
(dvipa). That explains the Dvaipayana part of the name. He was dark. That explains the Krishna part of the name.
(It wasn’t only the incarnation of Vishnu who had the name of Krishna.) Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa was also
related to the protagonists of the Mahabharata story. To go back to the origins, the Ramayana is about the solar dynasty, while the Mahabharata is about the lunar dynasty. As is to be expected, the lunar dynasty begins with Soma
(the moon) and goes down through Pururava (who married the famous apsara Urvashi), Nahusha and Yayati. Yayati became old, but wasn’t ready to give up the pleasures of life. He asked his sons to temporarily loan him their

youth. All but one refused. The ones who refused were cursed that they would never be kings, and this includes the
Yadavas (descended from Yadu). The one who agreed was Puru and the lunar dynasty continued through him.
Puru’s son Duhshanta was made famous by Kalidasa in the Duhshanta–Shakuntala story and their son was Bharata, contributing to the name of Bharatavarsha. Bharata’s grandson was Kuru. We often tend to think of the
Kouravas as the evil protagonists in the Mahabharata story and the Pandavas as the good protagonists. Since Kuru
was a common ancestor, the appellation Kourava applies equally to Yudhishthira and his brothers and Duryodhana
and his brothers. Kuru’s grandson was Shantanu. Through Satyavati, Shantanu fathered Chitrangada and Vichitravirya. However, the sage Parashara had already fathered Krishna Dvaipayana through Satyavati. And Shantanu
had already fathered Bhishma through Ganga. Dhritarasthra and Pandu were fathered on Vichitravirya’s wives by
Krishna Dvaipayana.
The story of the epic is also about these antecedents and consequents. The core Mahabharata story is known to
every Indian and is normally understood as a dispute between the Kouravas (descended from Dhritarashtra) and
the Pandavas (descended from Pandu). However, this is a distilled version, which really begins with Shantanu. The
non-distilled version takes us to the roots of the genealogical tree and at several points along this tree we confront
a problem with impotence/sterility/death, resulting in offspring through a surrogate father. Such sons were accepted in that day and age. Nor was this a lunar dynasty problem alone. In the Ramayana, Dasharatha of the solar dynasty also had an infertility problem, corrected through a sacriﬁce. To return to the genealogical tree, the Pandavas
won the Kurukshetra war. However, their ﬁve sons through Droupadi were killed. So was Bhima’s son Ghatotkacha, fathered on Hidimba. As was Arjuna’s son Abhimanyu, fathered on Subhadra. Abhimanyu’s son Parikshit inherited the throne in Hastinapura, but was killed by a serpent. Parikshit’s son was Janamejaya.
Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa’s powers of composition were remarkable. Having classiﬁed the Vedas, he composed the Mahabharata in 100,000 shlokas or couplets. Today’s Mahabharata text doesn’t have that many shlokas,
even if the Hari Vamsha (regarded as the epilogue to the Mahabharata) is included. One reaches around 90,000
shlokas. That too, is a gigantic number. (The Mahabharata is almost four times the size of the Ramayana and is
longer than any other epic anywhere in the world.) For a count of 90,000 Sanskrit shlokas, we are talking about
something in the neighbourhood of two million words. The text of the Mahabharata tells us that Krishna Dvaipayana ﬁnished this composition in three years. This doesn’t necessarily mean that he composed 90,000 shlokas.
The text also tells us that there are three versions to the Mahabharata. The original version was called Jaya and had
8,800 shlokas. This was expanded to 24,000 shlokas and called Bharata. Finally, it was expanded to 90,000 (or
100,000) shlokas and called Mahabharata.
Krishna Dvaipayana didn’t rest even after that. He composed the eighteen Maha Puranas, adding another
400,000 shlokas. Having composed the Mahabharata, he taught it to his disciple Vaishampayana. When Parikshit
was killed by a serpent, Janamejaya organized a snake-sacriﬁce to destroy the serpents. With all the sages assembled there, Vaishampayana turned up and the assembled sages wanted to know the story of the Mahabharata, as
composed by Krishna Dvaipayana. Janamejaya also wanted to know why Parikshit had been killed by the serpent.
That’s the background against which the epic is recited. However, there is another round of recounting too. Much
later, the sages assembled for a sacriﬁce in Naimisharanya and asked Lomaharshana (alternatively, Romaharshana)
to recite what he had heard at Janamejaya’s snake-sacriﬁce. Lomaharshana was a suta, the sutas being charioteers
and bards or raconteurs. As the son of a suta, Lomaharshana is also referred to as Souti. But Souti or Lomaharshana aren’t quite his proper names. His proper name is Ugrashrava. Souti refers to his birth. He owes the name
Lomaharshana to the fact that the body-hair (loma or roma) stood up (harshana) on hearing his tales. Within the
text therefore, two people are telling the tale. Sometimes it is Vaishampayana and sometimes it is Lomaharshana.
Incidentally, the stories of the Puranas are recounted by Lomaharshana, without Vaishampayana intruding. Having
composed the Puranas, Krishna Dvaipayana taught them to his disciple Lomaharshana. For what it is worth, there
are scholars who have used statistical tests to try and identify the multiple authors of the Mahabharata.
As we are certain there were multiple authors rather than a single one, the question of when the Mahabharata
was composed is somewhat pointless. It wasn’t composed on a single date. It was composed over a span of more
than 1000 years, perhaps between 800 BCE and 400 ACE. It is impossible to be more accurate than that. There is a
difference between dating the composition and dating the incidents, such as the date of the Kurukshetra war. Dat-

ing the incidents is both subjective and controversial and irrelevant for the purposes of this translation. A timeline
of 1000 years isn’t short. But even then, the size of the corpus is nothing short of amazing.

Familiarity with Sanskrit is dying out. The ﬁrst decades of the twenty-ﬁrst century are quite unlike the ﬁrst decades
of the twentieth. Lamentation over what is inevitable serves no purpose. English is increasingly becoming the
global language, courtesy colonies (North America, South Asia, East Asia, Australia, New Zealand, Africa) rather
than the former colonizer. If familiarity with the corpus is not to die out, it needs to be accessible in English.
There are many different versions or recensions of the Mahabharata. However, between 1919 and 1966, the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (BORI) in Pune produced what has come to be known as the critical
edition. This is an authenticated text produced by a board of scholars and seeks to eliminate later interpolations,
unifying the text across the various regional versions. This is the text followed in this translation. One should also
mention that the critical edition’s text is not invariably smooth. Sometimes, the transition from one shloka to another is abrupt, because the intervening shloka has been weeded out. With the intervening shloka included, a noncritical version of the text sometimes makes better sense. On a few occasions, I have had the temerity to point this
out in the notes which I have included in my translation.
It took a long time for this critical edition to be put together. The exercise began in 1919. Without the Hari
Vamsha, the complete critical edition became available in 1966. And with the Hari Vamsha, the complete critical
edition became available in 1970. Before this, there were regional variations in the text and the main versions were
available from Bengal, Bombay and the south. However, now, one should stick to the critical edition, though there
are occasional instances where there are reasons for dissatisfaction with what the scholars of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute have accomplished. But in all fairness, there are two published versions of the critical
edition. The ﬁrst one has the bare bones of the critical edition’s text. The second has all the regional versions collated, with copious notes. The former is for the ordinary reader, assuming he/she knows Sanskrit. And the latter is
for the scholar. Consequently, some popular beliefs no longer ﬁnd a place in the critical edition’s text. For example, it is believed that Vedavyasa dictated the text to Ganesha, who wrote it down. But Ganesha had a condition before accepting. Vedavyasa would have to dictate continuously, without stopping. Vedavyasa threw in a countercondition. Ganesha would have to understand each couplet before he wrote it down. To ﬂummox Ganesha and give
himself time to think, Vedavyasa threw in some cryptic verses. This attractive anecdote has been excised from the
critical edition’s text. Barring material that is completely religious (speciﬁc hymns or the Bhagavad Gita), the Sanskrit text is reasonably easy to understand. Oddly, I have had the most difﬁculty with things that Vidura has sometimes said. Arya has today come to connote ethnicity. Originally, it meant language. That is, those who spoke Sanskrit were Aryas. Those who did not speak Sanskrit were mlecchas. Vidura is supposed to have been skilled in the
mlechha language. Is that the reason why some of Vidura’s statements seem obscure? In similar vein, in popular
renderings, when Droupadi is being disrobed, she prays to Krishna. Krishna provides the never-ending stream of
garments that stump Duhshasana. The critical edition has excised the prayer to Krishna. The never-ending stream
of garments is given as an extraordinary event. However, there is no intervention from Krishna.
How is the Mahabharata classiﬁed? The core component is the couplet or shloka. Several such shlokas form a
chapter or adhyaya. Several adhyayas form a parva. Most people probably think that the Mahabharata has eighteen
parvas. This is true, but there is another 100-parva classiﬁcation that is indicated in the text itself. That is, the adhyayas can be classiﬁed either according to eighteen parvas or according to 100 parvas. The table (given on pp.
xxiii–xxvi), based on the critical edition, should make this clear. As the table shows, the present critical edition
only has ninety-eight parvas of the 100-parva classiﬁcation, though the 100 parvas are named in the text.

Thus, interpreted in terms of BORI’s critical edition, the Mahabharata no longer possesses the 100,000 shlokas it
is supposed to have. The ﬁgure is a little short of 75,000 (73,787 to be precise). Should the Hari Vamsha be included in a translation of the Mahabharata? It doesn’t quite belong. Yet, it is described as a khila or supplement to the
Mahabharata and BORI includes it as part of the critical edition, though in a separate volume. Hence, I have included the Hari Vamsha in this translation as well. With the Hari Vamsha, the number of shlokas increases to a
shade less than 80,000 (79,860 to be precise). However, in some of the regional versions the text of the Mahabharata proper is closer to 85,000 shlokas and with the Hari Vamsha included, one approaches 95,000, though one
doesn’t quite touch 100,000.
Why should there be another translation of the Mahabharata? Surely, it must have been translated innumerable
times. Contrary to popular impression, unabridged translations of the Mahabharata in English are extremely rare.
One should not confuse abridged translations with unabridged versions. There are only ﬁve unabridged translations
—by Kisori Mohan Ganguly (1883–96), by Manmatha Nath Dutt (1895–1905), by the University of Chicago and
J.A.B. van Buitenen (1973 onwards), by P. Lal and Writers Workshop (2005 onwards) and the Clay Sanskrit Library edition (2005 onwards). Of these, P. Lal is more a poetic trans-creation than a translation. The Clay Sanskrit
Library edition is not based on the critical edition, deliberately so. In the days of Ganguly and Dutt, the critical
edition didn’t exist. The language in these two versions is now archaic and there are some shlokas that these two
translators decided not to include, believing them to be untranslatable in that day and age. Almost three decades
later, the Chicago version is still not complete, and the Clay edition, not being translated in sequence, is still in
progress. However, the primary reason for venturing into yet another translation is not just the vacuum that exists,
but also reason for dissatisfaction with other attempts. Stated more explicitly, this translation, I believe, is better
and more authentic—but I leave it to the reader to be the ﬁnal judge. (While translating 80,000 shlokas is a hazardous venture, since Ganguly, Dutt and Lal are Bengalis, surely a fourth Bengali must also be preeminently qualiﬁed to embark on this venture!)

A few comments on the translation are now in order. First, there is the vexed question of diacritical marks—
should they be used or not? Diacritical marks make the translation and pronunciation more accurate, but often put
readers off. Sacriﬁcing academic purity, there is thus a conscious decision to avoid diacritical marks. Second, since
diacritical marks are not being used, Sanskrit words and proper names are written in what seems to be phonetically
natural and the closest—such as, Droupadi rather than Draupadi. There are rare instances where avoidance of diacritical marks can cause minor confusion, for example, between Krishna (Krishnaa) as in Droupadi9 and Krishna
as in Vaasudeva. However, such instances are extremely rare and the context should make these differences, which
are mostly of the gender kind, clear. Third, there are some words that simply cannot be translated. One such word
is dharma. More accurately, such words are translated the ﬁrst time they occur. But on subsequent occasions, they
are romanized in the text. Fourth, the translation sticks to the Sanskrit text as closely as possible. If the text uses
the word Kounteya, this translation will leave it as Kounteya or Kunti’s son and not attempt to replace it with Arjuna. Instead, there will be a note explaining that in that speciﬁc context Kounteya refers to Arjuna or, somewhat
more rarely, Yudhishthira or Bhima. This is also the case in the structure of the English sentences. To cite an instance, if a metaphor occurs towards the beginning of the Sanskrit shloka, the English sentence attempts to retain it
at the beginning too. Had this not been done, the English might have read smoother. But to the extent there is a
trade-off, one has stuck to what is most accurate, rather than attempting to make the English smooth and less
stilted.
As the table shows, the parvas (in the eighteen-parva classiﬁcation) vary widely in length. The gigantic Aranyaka or Shanti Parva can be contrasted with the slim Mousala Parva. Breaking up the translation into separate volumes based on this eighteen-parva classiﬁcation therefore doesn’t work. The volumes will not be remotely similar
in size. Most translators seem to keep a target of ten to twelve volumes when translating all the parvas. Assuming
ten volumes, 10 per cent means roughly 200 chapters and 7000 shlokas. This works rather well for Adi Parva, but
collapses thereafter. Most translators therefore have Adi Parva as the ﬁrst volume and then handle the heterogeneity across the eighteen parvas in subsequent volumes. This translation approaches the break-up of volumes somewhat differently, in the sense that roughly 10 per cent of the text is covered in each volume. The complete text, as
explained earlier, is roughly 200 chapters and 7,000 shlokas per volume. For example, then, this ﬁrst volume has
been cut off at 199 chapters and a little less than 6,500 shlokas. It includes 90 per cent of Adi Parva, but not all of
it and covers the ﬁrst ﬁfteen parvas of the 100-(or 98-) parva classiﬁcation.

The Mahabharata is one of the greatest stories ever told. It has plots and subplots and meanderings and digressions.
It is much more than the core story of a war between the Kouravas and the Pandavas, which everyone is familiar
with, the culmination of which was the battle in Kurukshetra. In the Adi Parva, there is a lot more which happens
before the Kouravas and the Pandavas actually arrive on the scene. In the 100-parva classiﬁcation, the Kouravas
and the Pandavas don’t arrive on the scene until Section 6.
From the Vedas and Vedanta literature, we know that Janamejaya and Parikshit were historical persons. From
Patanjali’s grammar and other contemporary texts, we know that the Mahabharata text existed by around 400 BCE.
This need not of course be the ﬁnal text of Mahabharata, but could have been the original text of Jaya. The Hindu
eras or yugas are four in number—Satya (or Krita) Yuga, Treta Yuga, Dvapara Yuga and Kali Yuga. This cycle
then repeats itself, with another Satya Yuga following Kali Yuga. The events of the Ramayana occurred in Treta
Yuga. The events of the Mahabharata occurred in Dvapara Yuga. This is in line with Rama being Vishnu’s seventh
incarnation and Krishna being the eighth. (The ninth is Buddha and the tenth is Kalki.) We are now in Kali Yuga.
Kali Yuga didn’t begin with the Kurukshetra war. It began with Krishna’s death, an event that occurred thirty-six
years after the Kurukshetra war. Astronomical data do exist in the epic. These can be used to date the Kurukshetra
war, or the advent of Kali Yuga. However, if the text was composed at different points in time, with additions and
interpolations, internal consistency in astronomical data is unlikely. In popular belief, following two alternative astronomers, the Kurukshetra war has been dated to 3102 BCE (following Aryabhatta) and 2449 BCE (following
Varahamihira). This doesn’t mesh with the timelines of Indian history. Mahapadma Nanda ascended the throne in
382 BCE, a historical fact on which there is no dispute. The Puranas have genealogical lists. Some of these state

that 1050 years elapsed between Parikshit’s birth and Mahapadma Nanda’s ascension. Others state that 1015 years
elapsed. (When numerals are written in words, it is easy to confuse 15 with 50.) This takes Parikshit’s birth and the
Kurukshetra war to around 1400 BCE. This is probably the best we can do, since we also know that the Kuru kingdom ﬂourished between 1200 BCE and 800 BCE. To keep the record straight, archaeological material has been
used to bring forward the date of the Kurukshetra war to around 900 BCE, the period of the Iron Age.
As was mentioned, in popular belief, the incidents of the Ramayana took place before the incidents of the Mahabharata. The Ramayana story also ﬁgures in the Mahabharata. However, there is no reference to any signiﬁcant
Mahabharata detail in the Ramayana. Nevertheless, from reading the text, one gets the sense that the Mahabharata
represents a more primitive society than the Ramayana. The ﬁghting in the Ramayana is more genteel and civilized. You don’t have people hurling rocks and stones at each other, or ﬁghting with trees and bare arms. Nor do
people rip apart the enemy’s chest and drink blood. The geographical knowledge in the Mahabharata is also more
limited than in the Ramayana, both towards the east and towards the south. In popular belief, the Kurukshetra war
occurred as a result of a dispute over land and the kingdom. That is true, in so far as the present text is concerned.
However, another ﬁght over cattle took place in the Virata Parva and the Pandavas were victorious in that too. This
is not the place to expand on the argument. But it is possible to construct a plausible hypothesis that this was the
core dispute. Everything else was added as later embellishments. The property dispute was over cattle and not
land. In human evolution, cattle represents a more primitive form of property than land. In that stage, humankind is
still partly nomadic and not completely settled. If this hypothesis is true, the Mahabharata again represents an earlier period compared to the Ramayana. This leads to the following kind of proposition. In its ﬁnal form, the Mahabharata was indeed composed after the Ramayana. But the earliest version of the Mahabharata was composed before the earliest version of the Ramayana. And the events of the Mahabharata occurred before the events of the Ramayana, despite popular belief. The proposition about the feud ending with Virata Parva illustrates the endless
speculation that is possible with the Mahabharata material. Did Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva ever exist? Nakula
and Sahadeva have limited roles to play in the story. Arjuna’s induction could have been an attempt to assert Indra’s supremacy. Arjuna represents such an integral strand in the story (and of the Bhagavad Gita), that such a suggestion is likely to be dismissed out of hand. But consider the following. Droupadi loved Arjuna a little bit more
than the others. That’s the reason she was denied admission to heaven. Throughout the text, there are innumerable
instances where Droupadi faces difﬁculties. Does she ever summon Arjuna for help on such occasions? No, she
does not. She summons Bhima. Therefore, did Arjuna exist at all? Or were there simply two original Pandava
brothers—one powerful and strong, and the other weak and useless in physical terms. Incidentally, the eighteenparva classiﬁcation is clearly something that was done much later. The 100-parva classiﬁcation seems to be older.
The Mahabharata is much more real than the Ramayana. And, therefore, much more fascinating. Every conceivable human emotion ﬁgures in it, which is the reason why it is possible to identify with it even today. The text itself states that what is not found in the Mahabharata, will not be found anywhere else. Unlike the Ramayana, India
is littered with real places that have identiﬁcations with the Mahabharata. (Ayodhya or Lanka or Chitrakuta are
identiﬁcations that are less certain.) Kurukshetra, Hastinapura, Indraprastha, Karnal, Mathura, Dvaraka, Gurgaon,
Girivraja are real places: the list is endless. In all kinds of unlikely places, one comes across temples erected by the
Pandavas when they were exiled to the forest. In some of these places, archaeological excavations have substantiated the stories. The war for regional supremacy in the Ganga–Yamuna belt is also a plausible one. The Vrishnis
and the Shurasenas (the Yadavas) are isolated, they have no clear alliance (before the Pandavas) with the powerful
Kurus. There is the powerful Magadha kingdom under Jarasandha and Jarasandha had made life difﬁcult for the
Yadavas. He chased them away from Mathura to Dvaraka. Shishupala of the Chedi kingdom doesn’t like Krishna
and the Yadavas either. Through Kunti, Krishna has a matrimonial alliance with the Pandavas. Through Subhadra,
the Yadavas have another matrimonial alliance with the Pandavas. Through another matrimonial alliance, the Pandavas obtain Drupada of Panchala as an ally. In the course of the royal sacriﬁce, Shishupala and Jarasandha are
eliminated. Finally, there is yet another matrimonial alliance with Virata of the Matsya kingdom, through Abhimanyu. When the two sides face each other on the ﬁeld of battle, they are more than evenly matched. Other than
the Yadavas, the Pandavas have Panchala, Kashi, Magadha, Matsya and Chedi on their side. The Kouravas have
Pragjyotisha, Anga, Kekaya, Sindhu, Avanti, Gandhara, Shalva, Bahlika and Kamboja as allies. At the end of the

war, all these kings are slain and the entire geographical expanse comes under the control of the Pandavas and the
Yadavas. Only Kripacharya, Ashvatthama and Kritavarma survive on the Kourava side.
Reading the Mahabharata, one forms the impression that it is based on some real incidents. That does not mean
that a war on the scale that is described took place. Or that miraculous weapons and chariots were the norm. But
there is such a lot of trivia, unconnected with the main story, that their inclusion seems to serve no purpose unless
they were true depictions. For instance, what does the physical description of Kripa’s sister and Drona’s wife,
Kripi, have to do with the main story? It is also more real than the Ramayana because nothing, especially the treatment of human emotions and behaviour, exists in black and white. Everything is in shades of grey. The Uttara
Kanda of the Ramayana is believed to have been a later interpolation. If one excludes the Uttara Kanda, we generally know what is good. We know who is good. We know what is bad. We know who is bad. The Ramayana is like
a clichéd Bollywood ﬁlm. This is never the case with the Mahabharata. However, a qualiﬁcation is necessary. Most
of us are aware of the Mahabharata story because we have read some version or the other, typically an abridged
one. Every abridged version simpliﬁes and condenses, distills out the core story. And in doing that, it tends to paint
things in black and white, ﬁtting everything into the mould of good and bad. The Kouravas are bad. The Pandavas
are good. And good eventually triumphs. The unabridged Mahabharata is anything but that. It is much more nuanced. Duryodhana isn’t invariably bad. He is referred to as Suyodhana as well, and not just by his father. History
is always written from the point of view of the victors. While the Mahabharata is generally laudatory towards the
Pandavas, there are several places where the text has a pro-Kourava stance. There are several places where the text
has an anti-Krishna stance. That’s yet another reason why one should read an unabridged version, so as not to miss
out on these nuances. Take the simple point about inheritance of the kingdom. Dhritarashtra was blind. Consequently, the king was Pandu. On Pandu’s death, who should inherit the kingdom? Yudhishthira was the eldest
among the brothers. (Actually, Karna was, though it didn’t become known until later.) We thus tend to assume that
the kingdom was Yudhishthira’s by right, because he was the eldest. (The division of the kingdom into two, Hastinapura and Indraprastha, is a separate matter.) But such primogeniture was not universally clear. A case can also be
established for Duryodhana, because he was Dhritarashtra’s son. If primogeniture was the rule, the eldest son of
the Pandavas was Ghatotkacha, not Abhimanyu. Before both were killed, Ghatotkacha should have had a claim to
the throne. However, there is no such suggestion anywhere. The argument that Ghatotkacha was the son of a rakshasa or demon will not wash. He never exhibited any demonic qualities and was a dutiful and loving son. Karna
saved up a weapon for Arjuna and this was eventually used to kill Ghatotkacha. At that time, we have the unseemly sight of Krishna dancing around in glee at Ghatotkacha being killed.
In the Mahabharata, because it is nuanced, we never quite know what is good and what is bad, who is good and
who is bad. Yes, there are degrees along a continuum. But there are no watertight and neat compartments. The four
objectives of human existence are dharma, artha, kama and moksha. Etymologically, dharma is that which upholds. If one goes by the Bhagavad Gita, pursuit of these four are also transient diversions. Because the fundamental objective is to transcend these four, even moksha. Within these four, the Mahabharata is about a conﬂict of
dharma. Dharma has been reduced to varnashrama dharma, according to the four classes (varnas) and four stages
of life (ashramas). However, these are collective interpretations of dharma, in the sense that a Kshatriya in the
garhasthya (householder) stage has certain duties. Dharma in the Mahabharata is individual too. Given an identical
situation, a Kshatriya in the garhasthya stage might adopt a course of action that is different from that adopted by
another Kshatriya in the garhasthya stage, and who is to judge what is wrong and what is right? Bhishma adopted a
life of celibacy. So did Arjuna, for a limited period. In that stage of celibacy, both were approached by women who
had fallen in love with them. And if those desires were not satisﬁed, the respective women would face difﬁculties,
even death. Bhishma spurned the advance, but Arjuna accepted it. The conﬂict over dharma is not only the law
versus morality conﬂict made famous by Krishna and Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gita. It pervades the Mahabharata,
in terms of a conﬂict over two different notions of dharma. Having collectively married Droupadi, the Pandavas
have agreed that when one of them is closeted with Droupadi, the other four will not intrude. And if there is such
an instance of intrusion, they will go into self-exile. Along comes a Brahmana whose cattle have been stolen by
thieves. Arjuna’s weapons are in the room where Droupadi and Yudhishthira are. Which is the higher dharma? Providing succour to the Brahmana or adhering to the oath? Throughout the Mahabharata, we have such conﬂicts,

with no clear normative indications of what is wrong and what is right, because there are indeed no absolute answers. Depending on one’s decisions, one faces the consequences and this brings in the unsolvable riddle of the
tension between free will and determinism, the so-called karma concept. The boundaries of philosophy and religion blur.
These conﬂicts over dharma are easy to identify with. It is easy to empathize with the protagonists, because we
face such conﬂicts every day. That is precisely the reason why the Mahabharata is read even today. And the reason
one says every conceivable human emotion ﬁgures in the story. Everyone familiar with the Mahabharata has
thought about the decisions taken and about the characters. Why was life so unfair to Karna? Why was Krishna
partial to the Pandavas? Why didn’t he prevent the war? Why was Abhimanyu killed so unfairly? Why did the
spirited and dark Droupadi, so unlike the Sita of the Ramayana, have to be humiliated publicly?

It is impossible to pinpoint when and how my interest in the Mahabharata started. As a mere toddler, my maternal
grandmother used to tell me stories from Chandi, part of the Markandeya Purana. I still vividly recollect pictures
from her copy of Chandi: Kali licking the demon Raktavija’s blood. Much later, in my early teens, at school in Ramakrishna Mission, Narendrapur, I ﬁrst read the Bhagavad Gita, without understanding much of what I read. The
alliteration and poetry in the ﬁrst chapter was attractive enough for me to learn it by heart. Perhaps the seeds were
sown there. In my late teens, I stumbled upon Bankimchandra Chattopadhyay’s Krishna Charitra, written in 1886.
Bankimchandra was not only a famous novelist, he was a brilliant essayist. For a long time, Krishna Charitra was
not available other than in Bengali. It has now been translated into English, but deserves better dissemination. A
little later, when in college, I encountered Buddhadeb Bose’s Mahabharater Katha. That was another brilliant collection of essays, ﬁrst serialized in a magazine and then published as a book in 1974. This too was originally in
Bengali, but is now available in English. Unlike my sons, my ﬁrst exposure to the Mahabharata story came not
through television serials but comic books. Upendrakishore Raychowdhury’s Mahabharata (and Ramayana) for
children was staple diet, later supplanted by Rajshekhar Basu’s abridged versions of both epics, written for adults.
Both were in Bengali. In English, there was Chakravarti Rajagopalachari’s abridged translation, still a perennial
favourite. Later, Chakravarthi Narasimhan’s selective unabridged translation gave a ﬂavour of what the Mahabharata actually contained. In Bengal, the Kashiram Das version of the Mahabharata, written in the seventeenth century, was quite popular. I never found this appealing. But in the late 1970s, I stumbled upon a treasure. Kolkata’s
famous College Street was a storehouse of old and second-hand books in those days. You never knew what you
would discover when browsing. In the nineteenth century, an unabridged translation of the Mahabharata had been
done in Bengali under the editorship of Kaliprasanna Singha (1840–70). I picked this up for the princely sum of Rs
5. The year may have been 1979, but Rs 5 was still amazing. This was my ﬁrst complete reading of the unabridged
version of the Mahabharata. This particular copy probably had antiquarian value. The pages would crumble in my
hands and I soon replaced my treasured possession with a republished reprint. Not longer after, I acquired the
Aryashastra version of the Mahabharata, with both the Sanskrit and the Bengali together. In the early 1980s, I was
also exposed to three Marathi writers writing on the Mahabharata. There was Iravati Karve’s Yuganta. This was
available in both English and in Marathi. I read the English one ﬁrst, followed by the Marathi. The English version
isn’t an exact translation of the Marathi and the Marathi version is far superior. Then there was Durga Bhagwat’s
Vyas Parva. This was in Marathi and I am not aware of an English translation. Finally, there was Shivaji Sawant’s
Mritunjaya, a kind of autobiography for Karna. This was available both in English and in Marathi.
In the early 1980s, quite by chance, I encountered two shlokas, one from Valmiki’s Ramayana, the other from
Kalidasa’s Meghadutam. These were two poets separated by anything between 500 to 1,000 years, the exact period
being an uncertain one. The shloka in Meghadutam is right towards the beginning, the second shloka to be precise.
It is the ﬁrst day in the month of Ashada. The yaksha has been cursed and has been separated from his beloved.
The mountains are covered with clouds. These clouds are like elephants, bent down as if in play. The shloka in the
Valmiki Ramayana occurs in Sundara Kanda. Rama now knows that Sita is in Lanka. But the monsoon stands in
the way of the invasion. The clouds are streaked with ﬂags of lightning and garlanded with geese. They are like
mountain peaks and are thundering, like elephants ﬁghting. At that time, I did not know that elephants were a stan-

dard metaphor for clouds in Sanskrit literature. I found it amazing that two different poets separated by time had
thought of elephants. And because the yaksha was pining for his beloved, the elephants were playing. But because
Rama was impatient to ﬁght, the elephants were ﬁghting. I resolved that I must read all this in the original. It was a
resolution I have never regretted. I think that anyone who has not read Meghadutam in Sanskrit has missed out on
a thing of beauty that will continue to be a joy for generations to come.
In the early 1980s, Professor Ashok Rudra was a professor of economics in Visva-Bharati, Santiniketan. I used
to teach in Presidency College, Kolkata, and we sometimes met. Professor Rudra was a left-wing economist and
didn’t think much of my economics. I dare say the feeling was reciprocated. By tacit agreement, we never discussed economics. Instead, we discussed Indological subjects. At that point, Professor Rudra used to write essays
on such subjects in Bengali. I casually remarked, ‘I want to do a statistical test on the frequency with which the
ﬁve Pandavas used various weapons in the Kurukshetra war.’ Most sensible men would have dismissed the thought
as crazy. But Professor Rudra wasn’t sensible by usual norms of behaviour and he was also a trained statistician.
He encouraged me to do the paper, written and published in Bengali, using the Aryashastra edition. Several similar
papers followed, written in Bengali. In 1983, I moved to Pune, to the Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics,
a stone’s throw away from BORI. Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute (ABORI) is one of the
most respected journals in Indology. Professor G.B. Palsule was then the editor of ABORI and later went on to become Director of BORI. I translated one of the Bengali essays into English and went and met Professor Palsule,
hoping to get it published in ABORI. To Professor Palsule’s eternal credit, he didn’t throw the dilettante out. Instead, he said he would get the paper refereed. The referee’s substantive criticism was that the paper should have
been based on the critical edition, which is how I came to know about it. Eventually, this paper (and a few more)
were published in ABORI. In 1989, these became a book titled Essays on the Ramayana and the Mahabharata,
published when the Mahabharata frenzy had reached a peak on television. The book got excellent reviews, but
hardly sold. It is now out of print. As an aside, the book was jointly dedicated to Professor Rudra and Professor
Palsule, a famous economist and a famous Indologist respectively. Both were ﬂattered. However, when I gave him
a copy, Professor Rudra said, ‘Thank you very much. But who is Professor Palsule?’ And Professor Palsule remarked, ‘Thank you very much. But who is Professor Rudra?’
While the research interest in the Mahabharata remained, I got sidetracked into translating. Through the 1990s,
there were abridged translations of the Maha Puranas, the Vedas and the eleven major Upanishads. I found that I
enjoyed translating from the Sanskrit to English and since these volumes were well received, perhaps I did do a
good job. With Penguin as publisher, I did a translation of the Bhagavad Gita, something I had always wanted to
do. Sarama and Her Children, a book on attitudes towards dogs in India, also with Penguin, followed. I kept thinking about doing an unabridged translation of the Mahabharata and waited to muster up the courage. That courage
now exists, though the task is daunting. With something like two million words and ten volumes expected, the exercise seems open-ended. But why translate the Mahabharata? In 1924, George Mallory, with his fellow climber
Andrew Irvine, may or may not have climbed Mount Everest. They were last seen a few hundred metres from the
summit, before they died. Mallory was once asked why he wanted to climb Everest and he answered, ‘Because it’s
there.’ Taken out of context, there is no better reason for wanting to translate the Mahabharata. There is a steep
mountain to climb. And I would not have dared had I not been able to stand of the shoulders of the three intellectual giants who have preceded me—Kisori Mohan Ganguli, Manmatha Nath Dutt and J.A.B. van Buitenen.
Bibek Debroy

The third volume completes the Vana Parva, the account of the Pandavas’
sojourn in the forest. It details the dharma obtained from, and descriptions
of, places of pilgrimage. It recounts the stories of Agastya, Rishyashringa,
Kartavirya, Sukanya and Chyavana, Mandhata, Jantu, Shibi, Ashtavakra,
Yavakrita, Jatasura, and Markandeya. The narrative covers Arjuna’s slaying
of the nivatakavacha demons; the Kouravas’ defeat at the hands of the
gandharvas and their subsequent release by the Pandavas; Droupadi’s abduction by Jayadratha and rescue by the Pandavas; and Indra’s visit to Karna to rob him of his earrings and armour.

Section Thirty-Three
Tirtha-yatra Parva
This parva has 2294 shlokas and seventy-four chapters.
Chapter 377(80): 133 shlokas
Chapter 378(81): 178 shlokas
Chapter 379(82): 143 shlokas
Chapter 380(83): 114 shlokas
Chapter 381(84): 19 shlokas
Chapter 382(85): 23 shlokas
Chapter 383(86): 24 shlokas
Chapter 384(87): 15 shlokas
Chapter 385(88): 30 shlokas
Chapter 386(89): 22 shlokas
Chapter 387(90): 24 shlokas
Chapter 388(91): 28 shlokas
Chapter 389(92): 22 shlokas
Chapter 390(93): 27 shlokas
Chapter 391(94): 27 shlokas
Chapter 392(95): 24 shlokas
Chapter 393(96): 20 shlokas
Chapter 394(97): 27 shlokas
Chapter 395(98): 24 shlokas
Chapter 396(99): 21 shlokas
Chapter 397(100): 24 shlokas
Chapter 398(101): 17 shlokas
Chapter 399(102): 23 shlokas
Chapter 400(103): 19 shlokas
Chapter 401(104): 22 shlokas
Chapter 402(105): 25 shlokas
Chapter 403(106): 40 shlokas
Chapter 404(107): 25 shlokas
Chapter 405(108): 19 shlokas
Chapter 406(109): 20 shlokas
Chapter 407(110): 36 shlokas
Chapter 408(111): 22 shlokas
Chapter 409(112): 18 shlokas
Chapter 410(113): 25 shlokas
Chapter 411(114): 26 shlokas
Chapter 412(115): 30 shlokas
Chapter 413(116): 29 shlokas
Chapter 414(117): 18 shlokas
Chapter 415(118): 23 shlokas
Chapter 416(119): 22 shlokas
Chapter 417(120): 30 shlokas
Chapter 418(121): 23 shlokas
Chapter 419(122): 27 shlokas
Chapter 420(123): 23 shlokas
Chapter 421(124): 24 shlokas
Chapter 422(125): 23 shlokas
Chapter 423(126): 43 shlokas
Chapter 424(127): 21 shlokas
Chapter 425(128): 19 shlokas

Chapter 426(129): 22 shlokas
Chapter 427(130): 20 shlokas
Chapter 428(131): 32 shlokas
Chapter 429(132): 20 shlokas
Chapter 430(133): 27 shlokas
Chapter 431(134): 39 shlokas
Chapter 432(135): 42 shlokas
Chapter 433(136): 18 shlokas
Chapter 434(137): 20 shlokas
Chapter 435(138): 19 shlokas
Chapter 436(139): 24 shlokas
Chapter 437(140): 17 shlokas
Chapter 438(141): 30 shlokas
Chapter 439(142): 28 shlokas
Chapter 440(143): 21 shlokas
Chapter 441(144): 27 shlokas
Chapter 442(145): 43 shlokas
Chapter 443(146): 81 shlokas
Chapter 444(147): 41 shlokas
Chapter 445(148): 39 shlokas
Chapter 446(149): 52 shlokas
Chapter 447(150): 28 shlokas
Chapter 448(151): 15 shlokas
Chapter 449(152): 25 shlokas
Chapter 450(153): 31 shlokas
The chapters have two numbers, the ﬁrst being the sequential numbering of the chapters right from the beginning. The second one, the number within brackets, is the sequential numbering of the chapters within Aranyaka Parva.
Tirtha means a sacred place of pilgrimage and yatra means a journey. This section is thus primarily about the journey to sacred places of
pilgrimage like Pushkara, Prabhasa, Dvaravati, Vinasana, Rudrakoti, Kurukshetra, Mrigadhuma, Naimisha, Saptasarasvata, Prithudaka,
Samnihiti, Shakambhari, Suvarnaksha, Varanasi, Gaya, Shalagrama, Rishabha, Gokarna, Prayaga, Gandhamadana and Kailasa. It also has
the stories of Agastya, Indra and Vritra, Sagara and Bhagiratha, Rishyashringa, Parashurama and Kartyavirya, Chyavana and Sukanya,
Mandhata, Jantu, Shibi Ushinara, Ashtavakra, Yavakrita and the account of the encounter between Hanuman and Bhima.
377(80)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Anxious on Dhananjaya’s account, the immensely fortunate and maharatha1 Pandavas lived
in the forest with Droupadi. Then they saw there the great-souled devarshi2 Narada. He was radiant with the resplendence of the brahman3 and his energy was like that of the blazing ﬁre. The supreme one among the Kurus4
was surrounded by his illustrious brothers and shone brilliantly, like Shatakratu5 surrounded by the gods. Just as
savitri6 does not forsake the Vedas and the sun’s rays do not forsake Meru,7 the faithful Yajnaseni8 followed dharma and did not abandon the Parthas.9 O unblemished one!10 The illustrious rishi11 Narada accepted their homage
and appropriately comforted Dharma’s son.12 He spoke these words to great-souled Dharmaraja13 Yudhishthira.
“O supreme among those who uphold dharma! Tell me what will accomplish your purpose. What will I give you?”
Then Dharma’s son, the king, bowed in obeisance with his brothers, and with hands joined in salutation, told the
divine Narada, “O immensely fortunate one! O one who is worshipped by all the worlds! O one whose vows are
great! If you are satisﬁed, I think everything has been accomplished through your grace. O unblemished one! O
supreme among sages! But if you wish to show a favour to me and my brothers, please dispel a doubt that has
arisen in my heart. Tell me what merits are obtained by someone who circles the earth14 and visits all the tirthas?
O brahmana! Please tell me this in detail.”
‘Narada replied, “O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen attentively to what Bhishma heard from
Pulastya.15 Hear it in detail. In earlier times, Bhishma, supreme among those who uphold dharma, was observing
a vow for his father16 on the banks of the Bhagirathi,17 like a hermit. O great king! This was a pure and sacred
region and was frequented by the devarshis. The immensely energetic one was at the mouth of the Ganga, in a
place frequented by gods and gandharvas.18 The immensely radiant one made offerings to the ancestors and the
gods and satisﬁed the rishis in accordance with the prescribed rituals. After some time, when the immensely fa-

mous one was meditating, he saw the supreme rishi Pulastya, whose appearance was extraordinary. On seeing that
terrible ascetic, blazing in fortune, he was extremely delighted and overcome by wonder. O great king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhishma, best among those who uphold dharma, worshipped him in accordance with
the prescribed rituals. He puriﬁed himself and concentrated his mind. He placed the arghya19 on his head and announced his name to the supreme among brahmarshis. ‘O fortunate one whose vows are great! I am your slave
Bhishma. At the mere sight of you, I have been cleansed of all my sins.’ O great king! O Yudhishthira! Having
said this, Bhishma, supreme among those who uphold dharma, became silent and controlled his speech. He joined
his hands in salutation. On seeing that Bhishma, best among those of the Kuru lineage, had become emaciated because of the rituals and the studying, the sage was pleased in his mind.
‘“Pulastya said, ‘O one who is knowledgeable about dharma! O immensely fortunate one! I am entirely satisﬁed
with your humility, self-control and devotion to the truth. O unblemished one! O son! It is because of your dharma
and because of your devotion to your father that you have been able to see me. I am extremely pleased with you. O
Bhishma! My vision is unrestricted. Tell me what I can do for you. O best of the Kurus! O unblemished one! I will
give you whatever you ask for.’
‘“Bhishma replied, ‘O immensely fortunate one! O one who is worshipped by all the worlds! O lord! If you are
pleased with me and I have been able to see you, I think that all my tasks have been accomplished. O supreme
among those who uphold dharma! If I have obtained your favour, I will tell you about a doubt in my heart. Please
dispel it. O illustrious one! A doubt exists about the dharma that comes from the tirthas. I wish to hear about this
from you, separately for each of them. Please tell me. O brahmana rishi! O inﬁnitely valorous one! O one blessed
with the riches of austerities! Tell me what merits are obtained by circling the earth.’
‘“Pulastya said, ‘O son! Listen to me with an attentive mind. I will recount to you the fruits from the tirthas, the
ultimate goal of all the rishis. He who has controlled his hands, feet and mind and he who has learning, asceticism
and deeds, obtains the fruits of the tirthas. He who is satisﬁed, controlled and pure, does not receive gifts20 and
has restrained his ego, obtains the fruits of the tirthas. He who is without deceit, without undertakings,21 eats lightly, controls his senses and is freed from all sins, obtains the fruits of the tirthas. O Indra among kings! He who is
without anger, truthful in conduct and ﬁrm in his vows and who regards all beings as his own self, obtains the
fruits of the tirthas. In due order, the rishis have recounted in the Vedas all the fruits from sacriﬁces, exactly as they
occur, in this life and the afterlife. O lord of the earth! The poor cannot perform these sacriﬁces. Sacriﬁces require
many objects and a lot of ingredients in large quantities. Kings can attain them and so can some rich men. They
cannot be attained by those without riches, without objects, without means and those who are alone. O lord of
men! But listen to what the poor can obtain, the supreme equal of the fruits of sacred sacriﬁces. O supreme among
those of the Bharata lineage! This is the supreme mystery of the rishis, the pure merit from visiting tirthas, superior
even to sacriﬁces. He who has not fasted for three nights, not visited tirthas and not donated gold and cattle, is
known as poor. The fruits obtained from agnishtoma22 and other sacriﬁces, with large quantities of donations, are
inferior to those obtained from visiting tirthas.’
‘“There is in the world of men a tirtha of the god of the gods. It is famous in the three worlds and is known by
the name of Pushkara.23 Those who are immensely fortunate go there. O lord of the earth! At the time of the three
sandhyas,24 ten thousand crores of tirthas can be found in Pushkara. O lord! Adityas,25 Vasus,26 Rudras,27 the
Sadhyas,28 with the Maruts29 and gandharvas and apsaras30 are always present there. O great king! It was there
that the gods, demons and brahmarshis performed austerities and attained great merits and celestial yoga.31 Even
if one only desires Pushkara in one’s mind, all the sins of that intelligent one are cleansed and he is revered in the
vault of heaven. The immensely fortunate grandfather32 always dwells there, happily worshipped by the gods and
the demons. O immensely fortunate one! It was in Pushkara that the gods, with the rishis at the forefront, attained
salvation and great merits. The learned ones say that he who bathes there and worships the gods and the ancestors,
obtains ten times the merits of an ashvamedha.33 O Bhishma! He who goes to Pushkara forest and feeds only a
single brahmana, obtains through that deed happiness in this life and the afterlife. If he himself survives on vegetables, roots and fruits and faithfully and respectfully offers that to a brahmana, that wise man obtains the fruits of a

horse sacriﬁce. O supreme among kings! Great-souled brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras who bathe in
this tirtha are not reborn as inferior species. O bull among the Bharata lineage! A man who specially goes to
Pushkara at the time of the full moon in the month of Kartika extends his merits and they become inexhaustible. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! He who joins his hands in salutation and remembers Pushkara in the morning
and the evening attains the fruits of bathing in all the tirthas. That man obtains Brahma’s eternal world, without decay. Whatever sins a woman or a man has committed since birth are all instantly destroyed from bathing in
Pushkara. O king! Just as Madhusudana34 is the origin of all the gods, Pushkara is known as the origin of all the
tirthas. He who lives constantly and purely in Pushkara for twelve years obtains all the sacriﬁces35 and attains
Brahma’s world. He who performs agnihotra36 for one hundred years and he who lives in Pushkara on the night
of the full moon in Kartika are like equals. It is difﬁcult to go to Pushkara. It is difﬁcult to perform austerities in
Pushkara. It is difﬁcult to donate in Pushkara. It is extremely difﬁcult to live there.
‘“Having lived in Pushkara for twelve nights, restrained and with a controlled diet, one should circumambulate
it and go to Jambumarga.37 Jambumarga is frequented by the gods, the rishis and the ancestors and once one has
entered, one obtains the fruits of a horse sacriﬁce and goes to Vishnu’s world. A man who lives there for ﬁve
nights and eats once in three days never confronts calamity and achieves supreme success. Having left Jambumarga, one goes to Tandulikashrama and never confronts calamity, being worshipped in heaven. O king! He who goes
to Agastya’s38 lake and engages himself in worshipping the ancestors and the gods, residing there for three nights,
obtains the merits of an agnishtoma.39 He lives there on vegetables and fruits and obtains the supreme abode of
Kumara.40 He then reaches Kanva’s41 hermitage, full of prosperity and worshipped in the world. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! From the beginning, that has been a sacred forest, full of dharma. As soon as one enters there,
one is freed from all sins. He who restrains himself and controls his diet there, worshipping the ancestors and the
gods, obtains all the objects of desire and the fruits of all sacriﬁces. Having circumambulated it, one should go to
the place where Yayati fell.42 This gives one the merits from a horse sacriﬁce. Restrained and controlled in diet,
one should then go to Mahakala.43 Having bathed in Kotitirtha,44 one obtains the fruits of a horse sacriﬁce. One
who is learned in dharma should then go to the sacred place of Uma’s consort.45 This is famous in the three
worlds by the name of Bhadravata.46 Having gone there and seen Ishana,47 he obtains the fruits of donating one
thousand cows. Through Mahadeva’s48 grace, he obtains the status of a ganapatya.49
‘“One then goes on to the river named Narmada, famous in the three worlds. Having offered oblations to the ancestors and the gods, one obtains the fruits of agnishtoma. The brahmachari50 who is in control of his senses goes
on to the southern waters, attains agnishtoma51 and ascends a celestial chariot. Controlling himself and controlling
his diet, he then goes to Charmanvati,52 and obtaining Rantideva’s permission, attains the fruits of agnishtoma. O
Yudhishthira!53 O one learned in dharma! He then goes on to Arbuda, the son of the Himalayas. In earlier times,
there used to be a hole in the earth here.54 Vasishtha’s hermitage, famous in the three worlds, is there. He who
spends a single night there, obtains the fruits of one thousand cows.55 O tiger among men! As a brahmachari in
control of one’s senses, one should bathe in Pingatirtha and obtain the fruits from one hundred tawny cows.56 O
one learned in dharma! One then goes to Prabhasa, famous in the worlds.57 The ﬁre-god is himself always present
there. The brave Anala58 is the mouth of the gods and has the wind for his chariot. A man who bathes in that
supreme tirtha, pure and restrained in mind, obtains the fruits of both agnishtoma and atiratra.59 One then goes to
the place where Sarasvati unites with the ocean. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He obtains the fruits of one
thousand cows60 and attains the world of heaven, blazing in resplendence like the ﬁre. One should stay there for
three nights and offer oblations to the ancestors and the gods. One then shines like the moon and attains ashvamedha.61 O supreme among the Bharata lineage! One then goes to the tirtha where a boon was granted. O Yudhishthira!62 Durvasa granted a boon to Vishnu there. A man who bathes where the boon was granted obtains the fruits of

one thousand cows.63 Then, restrained and controlled in one’s diet, one goes to Dvaravati. A man who bathes in
Pindaraka64 obtains a lot of gold. O immensely fortunate one! O destroyer of enemies! O descendant of the Kuru
lineage! It is extraordinary that in that tirtha,65 even today, coins can be seen, marked with the signs of the lotus
and signs of the trident. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Mahadeva is always present there.
‘“O descendant of the Bharata lineage! One goes on to where the Sindhu66 unites with the ocean. With a restrained mind, one bathes in the waters of that king among tirthas. O bull among the Bharata lineage! One offers
oblations to the ancestors, the gods and the sages. One obtains the world of Varuna and becomes resplendent in
one’s own energy. O Yudhishthira!67 The wise ones say that by worshipping the god who is the lord of Shankukarna, one obtains ten times an ashamedha.68 O bull among the Bharata lineage! O supreme among the best of the
Kuru lineage! After circumambulating it, one goes to the tirtha that is famous in the three worlds. This is renowned
by the name of Drimi and is the cleanser of all sins. It is there that Brahma and the other gods worshipped Maheshvara.69 A man who bathes there and worships Rudra, surrounded by the masses of the gods, removes all the sins
he has committed since birth. It was there that Drimi, supreme among men, was honoured by all the gods. O best
of men! Bathing there, one obtains a horse sacriﬁce.70 O immensely intelligent one! O king! In earlier times, it
was there that the lord Vishnu puriﬁed himself after slaying the thorns of the gods.71 O one learned in dharma!
One should then go to Vasudhara, universally worshipped. From merely going there, one obtains a horse
sacriﬁce.72 O best among the supreme of the Kurus! By bathing there, controlling his soul and worshipping the
gods and the ancestors, one is gloriﬁed in Vishnu’s world. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In that tirtha, there is
a sacred lake of the Vasus. Bathing there and drinking its water, one is favoured by the Vasus. O best of men!
There is the famous Sindhuttama, the cleanser of all sins. Bathing there, one obtains a lot of gold. Having gone to
Brahmatunga, pure and controlled in mind, a man who performs good deeds without any passion, attains the world
of Brahma. There is Shakra’s73 tirtha named Kumarika, frequented by the siddhas.74 Having bathed there, a man
swiftly attains Shakra’s world. There is another tirtha named Renuka there, frequented by the gods. On bathing
there, a brahmana becomes as unblemished as the moon.
‘“Controlled and restrained in diet, one should then go to Panchanada.75 As has been extolled, in due order, one
obtains the ﬁve sacriﬁces.76 O one learned in dharma! One then goes to the supreme place known as
Bhimasthana.77 O supreme among the Bharata lineage! O king! Bathing in Yoni,78 a man becomes the son of a
goddess and has a body adorned with golden earrings. He obtains the fruits of one hundred thousand cows.79 Going to Girimunja and worshipping the grandfather,80 one obtains the fruits of a thousand cows.81 O one learned in
dharma! Then one goes to the supreme tirtha known as Vimala.82 Even today, golden and silver ﬁsh can be seen
there. O best of men! Having bathed there, one obtains a horse sacriﬁce.83 Cleansed of all sins and pure in soul,
one attains the supreme goal. Then one should go to Malada, famous in the three worlds. At the time of the western84 sandhya, one should perform ablutions in the ritual fashion. One should then offer charu85 to the sevenﬂamed ﬁre in accordance with one’s powers. The learned say that such offerings to the ancestors become inexhaustible. Charu offered to the seven-ﬂamed ﬁre is superior to a hundred thousand cows,86 a hundred royal sacriﬁces and one thousand horse sacriﬁces. O Indra among men! From there, one should speciﬁcally go to Vastrapada.
Having gone to Mahadeva there, one obtains the fruits of a horse sacriﬁce. O king! One then goes to Manimat.
Practising brahmacharya, controlling one’s mind and living there for one night, one obtains the fruits of
agnishtoma.
‘“O Indra among kings! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Then one should go to Devika,87 famous in the
world. It has been heard that brahmanas were created there. This is the place of the wielder of the trident, famous
in the three worlds.88 O bull among the Bharata lineage! Bathing in Devika and worshipping Maheshvara, and offering charu in accordance with one’s capacity, a man obtains the fruits of a sacriﬁce that yields all desires. Rudra’s
tirtha Kamakhya,89 frequented by the divine sages, is also there. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having

bathed there, a man swiftly obtains success. Moving on to Yajana, Yajana90 and Brahmavaluka and touching the
waters of Pushpam, one overcomes sorrow and death. It is said that the sacred Devika, frequented by devarshis, is
ﬁve yojanas91 long and half a yojana wide. O one learned in dharma! Then in due order, one should go to
Dirghasatra.92 With Brahma at the forefront, the gods, the siddhas and the supreme rishis performed a long sacriﬁce there, rigid in their vows and donating dakshina.93 O Indra among kings! O destroyer of enemies! By going to
Dirghasatra, a man obtains the fruits of a royal sacriﬁce and a horse sacriﬁce. Then, controlled and restrained in
one’s diet, one should go to Vinasana.94 The Sarasvati disappeared there in the midst of the desert and could again
be seen in Chamasa, Shivodbheda and Nagodbheda. Bathing in Chamasodbheda,95 one obtains the fruits of agnishtoma. Bathing in Shivodbheda, a man obtains the fruits of one thousand cows.96 Bathing in Nagodbheda, a
man obtains the world of the nagas.97
‘“O Indra among kings! One moves on to Shashayana,98 a difﬁcult tirtha to attain. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Lotuses assume the form of rabbits there for an entire year. O Indra among kings! O best of the Bharata
lineage! O tiger among men! Bathing in the waters there, at the time of the full moon in the month of Kartika, one
is always radiant like the moon. O bull among the Bharata lineage! One obtains the fruits of one thousand cows.99
O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Restrained, one should go on to Kumarakoti. Having bathed there, one should
worship the ancestors and the gods. Thus one obtains the fruits of inﬁnite cows100 and uplifts one’s lineage. O one
learned in dharma! Restrained in soul, one then goes to Rudrakoti. O great king! In ancient times, one crore selfcontrolled sages assemble there, ﬁlled with great joy and desiring to see Rudra. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! ‘I will be the ﬁrst one to see Vrishadhvaja.’101 ‘I am the ﬁrst to see him.’ O king! It is said that thus did the
sages speak. O lord of the earth! In an attempt to prevent those self-controlled sages from becoming angry, the lord
of yoga102 resorted to yoga and created one crore Rudras, one before every sage. Each one separately thought, ‘I
have seen him ﬁrst.’ O king! Having been satisﬁed with the terrible energy of the sages and their supreme devotion, Mahadeva granted them a boon. ‘Your dharma will increase from today.’ O tiger among men! A pure man
who bathes in Rudrakoti obtains the fruits of a horse sacriﬁce and rescues his lineage. O Indra among kings! From
there, one should go to the conﬂuence of Sarasvati, famous in the world and extremely sacred.103 O Indra among
kings! There the gods, the rishis, the siddhas and the charanas,104 with Brahma at the forefront, go on the fourteenth day of shuklapaksha105 in the month of Chaitra and worship Janardana.106 Having bathed there, one obtains a lot of gold, is freed from all one’s sins and one’s soul is puriﬁed. One goes to the world of Brahma. O lord
of men! On going to Satravasana, one obtains the fruits of one thousand cows.107 It is there that the sages completed their sacriﬁces.”’
378(81)

‘“Pulastya said, ‘O Indra among kings! One should then go to the applauded Kurukshetra. All those who go there
are freed from all their sins. He who always says, “I will go to Kurukshetra, I will live in Kurukshetra,” is freed
from sins. O Yudhishthira!108 One should live for a month on the banks of the Sarasvati. O lord of the earth! With
Brahma at the forefront, the gods, the sages, the siddhas, the charanas, the gandharvas, the apsaras and the pannagas109 always go to the immensely sacred Brahmakshetra.110 O Yudhishthira!111 Even if one only wishes to go
to Kurukshetra in one’s mind, all one’s sins are destroyed and one goes to Brahma’s world. O extender of the Kuru
lineage! He who goes to Kurukshetra with devotion, obtains the fruits of a royal sacriﬁce and a horse sacriﬁce. O
king! Saluting the immensely strong gatekeeper, the yaksha Machakruka,112 one obtains the fruits of one thousand
cows.113 O one learned in dharma! O Indra among kings! One then goes to Vishnu’s supreme region. This is
known as Satata and Hari is there.114 Bathing there and worshipping Hari, the lord of the three worlds, one obtains a horse sacriﬁce115 and attains Vishnu’s world. One should then go to the tirtha of Pariplava, famous in the

three worlds. A man116 obtains the fruits of agnishtoma and atiratra.117 On going to the tirtha known as Prithivi,
one obtains the fruits of a thousand cows.118 O lord of men! Going on to Shalukini and bathing in Dashashvamedhika,119 the visitor of tirthas obtains those fruits.120 On going to the supreme tirtha of nagas known as
Sarpadevi,121 one obtains agnishtoma122 and attains the world of nagas. O one learned in dharma! One should
then go to the gatekeeper Tarantuka.123 Spending one night there, one obtains the fruits of one thousand cows.124
One should then go to Panchanada,125 controlled and restrained in diet. Having bathed in Kotitirtha, one obtains
the fruits of a horse sacriﬁce.126 Going on to the tirtha known as Ashvins, one is reborn in beautiful form.
‘“‘O one learned in dharma! One should then go to the supreme tirtha known as Varaha.127 In earlier times,
Vishnu was established there in the form of a boar. O tiger among men! On bathing there, one obtains the fruits of
agnishtoma. O Indra among kings! One should then go to Somatirtha in Jayanti.128 Bathing there, a man obtains
the fruits of a royal sacriﬁce. Bathing in Ekahamsa, a man obtains the fruits of a thousand cows.129 O extender of
the Kuru lineage! A visitor of tirthas then goes to Kritashoucha. Such a man becomes pure and attains
Pundarika.130 Then one goes to the wise Mahadeva at Munjavata.131 Having stayed there for one night, one attains the status of Ganapati.132 O great king! Yakshi, famous in the world, is there. O Indra among kings! Going
there, one attains the sacred worlds. O bull among the Bharata lineage! This is famous as the gate to Kurukshetra.
The visitor of tirthas should control his soul and circumambulate it. Bathing in the lake there, which was created
by the great-souled Jamadagnya Rama,133 one should worship the ancestors and the gods. O king! One then becomes successful in one’s endeavours and obtains a horse sacriﬁce.134
‘“‘O lord of men! O Indra among kings! The visitor of tirthas should then go to Rama’s lakes.135 The radiant
and energetic Rama destroyed the kshatriyas through his valour and created ﬁve lakes there. O tiger among men! It
has been heard that he ﬁlled them with blood. Thus did he worship all his fathers and grandfathers. O lord of men!
Then the ancestors were pleased and told Rama, “O Rama! O immensely fortunate Rama! O Bhargava!136 O lord!
We are pleased with your devotion to your ancestors and your valour. O fortunate one! O immensely radiant one!
Ask for a boon. What do you wish for?” O Indra among kings! At these words, Rama, supreme among those who
can smite, joined his hands in salutation and told his ancestors who were established in the sky, “If you are pleased
with me and if I have earned your favour, I wish to obtain a boon from my ancestors that I may again be satisﬁed
through austerities. Overcome with anger, I destroyed the kshatriyas. Through your energy, may I be freed from
that sin. Let these lakes become tirthas, famous on earth.” Having heard Rama’s pure words, the ancestors were
extremely delighted and happily told Rama, “Especially because of your devotion to your ancestors, let your austerities become greater. The kshatriyas have been destroyed by you out of wrath. But you have been freed from
that sin, because it was their deeds that brought them down. There is no doubt that these lakes of yours will become tirthas. One who bathes in these lakes and worships his ancestors, will please his ancestors and they will
grant him everything that his mind desires, even if it is the most difﬁcult of objects to obtain on earth, and even the
eternal world of heaven.” O king! Having granted this boon, Rama’s pleased ancestors showed their respects to
Bhargava and disappeared instantly. It was thus that Rama’s lakes, those of the great-souled Bhargava, become sacred. O Indra among kings! If one leads the life of a brahmachari, pure in vows, and bathes in Rama’s lakes and
worships Rama, one obtains a lot of gold.137
‘“‘O extender of the Kuru lineage! O king! A visitor of tirthas should go to Vamshamulaka and save his own lineage by bathing in Vamshamulaka. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! One should then go to the tirtha known
as Kayashodhana.138 Bathing in that tirtha, there is no doubt that one can purify one’s body. Having puriﬁed one’s
body, one goes to the supreme and sacred worlds. O Indra among kings! Then one should go to the tirtha that is
famous in the three worlds. In ancient times, the powerful Vishnu rescued the worlds there. O king! Having gone
to Lokoddhara139 tirtha, famous in the three worlds, and bathing in that supreme of tirthas, one recovers140 many
worlds for one’s own self. One should then go to the tirtha known as Shri141 and obtain supreme prosperity. Composed, the brahmachari should then go to Kapila tirtha.142 A man who bathes there and worships the gods and the

ancestors, obtains the fruits of one thousand tawny cows.143 With a controlled mind, one should then go and bathe
in Surya tirtha.144 Having worshipped the gods and the ancestors and having fasted, one attains agnishtoma145
and goes to the world of Surya. Then, in proper order, the visitor of tirthas goes to Govambhavana.146 Having performed one’s ablutions there, one obtains the fruits of one thousand cows.147 O extender of the Kuru lineage! The
visitor of tirthas then goes to Shankhini.148 Bathing in that tirtha of the goddess, a man obtains supreme beauty. O
Indra among kings! One should then go to the gatekeeper Arantuka.149 That tirtha of the great-souled Indra
among the yakshas is on the banks of the Sarasvati. O king! Having bathed there, a man obtains the fruits of agnishtoma. O one who is learned in dharma! O lord of men! Then one should go to Brahmavarta. Bathing in Brahmavarta, a man attains Brahma’s world. O one who is learned in dharma! Then one should go to the supreme Sutirtha. The ancestors are always there, together with the gods. Having performed ablutions there, devoted to the
worship of the ancestors and the gods, one obtains a horse sacriﬁce and attains the world of the ancestors. O one
learned in dharma! In due order, one then goes to Ambuvashya. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Bathing in
the tirtha of the lord of treasures,150 one is cleansed of all disease and attains greatness in the world of Brahma.
‘“‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is also Matri tirtha.151 O king! On bathing there, one’s offspring
increase and one attains everlasting prosperity. Controlled and restrained in diet, one should then go to Shitavana
tirtha.152 O great king! There is a great thing there, rare elsewhere. O lord of men! One is sanctiﬁed in one stroke
only by looking at it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! One is puriﬁed by shaving one’s hair there. O great
king! There is a tirtha there, known by the name of Shvanalomapaha.153 O tiger among men! O supreme among
the Bharata lineage! Learned brahmanas who are devoted to tirthas, supreme among brahmanas, perform pranayama154 in Shvanalomapaha.155 O Indra among kings! Puriﬁed in this way, they become sanctiﬁed and attain the
supreme objective. O lord of the earth! Then there is the tirtha known as Dashashvamedhika.156 O tiger among
men! Bathing there, one attains the supreme goal. O Indra among kings! One should then go to Manusha,
renowned in the worlds. O king! There, a black antelope was oppressed by a hunter. Plunging into a lake, it assumed the form of a human.157 Bathing there, as a brahmachari, and conquering one’s senses, one is cleansed of
all sins and having become pure in soul, attains greatness in the world of heaven. O lord of the earth! The river
renowned as Apaga158 is only a krosha159 to the east of Manusha. This is frequented by the siddhas. A man offering a meal of grain160 to the gods and the ancestors there attains all the great fruits of dharma. One brahmana
fed there is equal to one crore brahmanas being fed. Bathing there and worshipping the ancestors and the gods, and
staying there for only a single night, one obtains the fruits of agnishtoma.
‘“‘O Indra among kings! One should then go to Brahma’s supreme region. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
This is famous on earth as Brahma’s udumbara.161 O bull among the Kuru lineage! O Indra among kings! Whoever bathes there, in the lake of the saptarshis,162 in Kedara of the great-souled Kapishthala,163 pure and controlled in mind, attains Brahma and cleansed of all sin and pure in soul, attains Brahma’s world. On going to
Kapishthala and Kedara, difﬁcult of access, all one’s sins are burnt through the powers of asceticism and one obtains the powers of disappearance. O Indra among kings! One should then go to Saraka,164 famous in the worlds.
On seeing Vrishadhvaja there on the fourteenth day of krishnapaksha,165 one obtains everything that one desires
and goes to the world of heaven. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! There are three crore tirthas in Saraka. O lord
of the earth! There are wells and ponds in Rudrakoti. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The tirtha known as
Ilaspada is there. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bathing there and worshipping the ancestors and the gods,
one overcomes all misfortunes and attains a horse sacriﬁce.166 O lord of the earth! O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Bathing in Kimdana and Kimjapya, a man obtains immeasurable donations and prayers.167 A man who
performs ablutions in Kalashi, devoted and while controlling his senses, obtains the fruits of an agnishtoma sacriﬁce. O best among the supreme of the Kuru lineage! The tirtha of the great-souled Narada is to the east of Saraka
and is famous by the name of Anajanma. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On bathing in that tirtha,168 after

giving up his life, on the instructions of Narada, a man obtains worlds that are difﬁcult to get. On the tenth day of
shuklapaksha, one should go to Pundarika. On bathing there, a man obtains the fruits of a pundarika sacriﬁce. One
should then go to Trivishtapa, famous in the three worlds. The sacred river Vaitarani, the cleanser of all sins, ﬂows
there.169 Bathing there, and worshipping Vrishadhvaja, the wielder of the trident, one’s soul becomes pure and
cleansed of all sins, one goes to the supreme goal. O Indra among kings! One should then go to the supreme Phalakivana. O king! The gods always sought refuge in Phalakivana. They performed great austerities for many thousands of years. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bathing in Drishadvati170 and worshipping the gods, a man
obtains the fruits of agnishtoma and atiratra. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! O Indra among kings! When
one bathes in the tirtha of all the gods, a man obtains the fruits of one thousand cows.171 On bathing in Panikhata
and worshipping the gods, a man attains a royal sacriﬁce and obtains the world of the rishis.
‘“‘O Indra among kings! One should then go to the supreme tirtha of Mishraka. O Indra among kings! We have
heard that there, the great-souled Vyasa, tiger among men, mixed all the tirthas for the welfare of brahmanas. A
man who bathes in Mishraka bathes in all the tirthas. Controlled and restrained in diet, one should then go to
Vyasa’s grove. A man who bathes in Manojava obtains the fruits of one thousand cows.172 Going on to the tirtha
of the goddess in Madhuvati,173 a pure man, who bathes and worships the ancestors and the gods with devotion
and purity, obtains the fruits of one thousand cows on the instructions of the goddess. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! He who is restrained in diet and bathes at the conﬂuence of the Koushiki and the Dhrishadvati, is freed
from all sins. Then there is Vyasasthali.174 The wise Vyasa was afﬂicted by sorrow over his son and determined to
give up his body there.175 O Indra among kings! The gods resurrected him there. One who goes to Sthali obtains
the fruits of one thousand cows.176 O extender of the Kuru lineage! If one goes to the well named Kimdatta and
offers a measure177 of sesamum seeds there, one attains the supreme objective and is freed from all one’s debts.
The tirthas known as Ahas and Sudina are difﬁcult to access. O tiger among men! By bathing there, one attains the
world of the sun. One should then go to Mrigadhuma, renowned in the three worlds. A man who bathes in the
pond known as Ganga there, and worships Mahadeva, the wielder of the trident, obtains the fruits of a horse sacriﬁce. Bathing in Devatirtha, a man obtains the fruits of one thousand cows.178 One should then go to Vamanaka,
famous in the three worlds.179 Bathing in the mark of Vishnu’s foot there and worshipping Vamana, one becomes
pure in soul and cleansed of all sins, attains Vishnu’s world. Bathing in Kulampuna, a man puriﬁes his own lineage. O tiger among men! A man who goes to Pavana’s lake,180 the supreme tirtha of the Maruts, and bathes
there, attains greatness in Vayu’s world. O lord of men! Bathing in the lake of the immortals, through the powers of
the immortals, one attains greatness in the world of heaven, among the immortals. O Indra among kings! O best
among supreme of men! By bathing in Shalishurpa in Shalihotra,181 in accordance with the rites, a man obtains
the fruits of one thousand cows.182 O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Shrikunja tirtha is on the banks of the
Sarasvati. O king! On bathing there, a man obtains the fruits of agnishtoma.
‘“‘O extender of the Kuru lineage! One should then go to the grove known as Naimisha. O Indra among kings!
It is said that in ancient times, the sages who lived in Naimisha,183 rich in their austerities, went on a pilgrimage
to Kurukshetra. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! They established a grove on the banks of the Sarasvati.
This became a great and satisfying place for the sages to rest. A man who goes and bathes in that grove obtains the
fruits of one thousand cows.184 A man who bathes in Kanyatirtha185 obtains the fruits of agnishtoma. O tiger
among men! From there, one should go to Brahma’s supreme region. Bathing there, a man who is from the other
varnas becomes a brahmana. A brahmana who is pure in soul attains the supreme objective. O best of men! One
should then go to the supreme Somatirtha.186 O king! On bathing there, a man attains the world of the moon.
Then one should go to the tirtha known as Saptasarasvata.187 Mankanaka, famous in the world of the maharshis,
found success there. O king! We have heard that, in ancient times, Mankanaka cut his hand with the tip of kusha
grass. O king! From that wound ﬂowed out the juices of vegetables. On seeing the vegetable juice, the great ascetic
was ﬁlled with delight. The brahmana sage widened his eyes in wonder and began to dance. On seeing him dance,

all mobile and immobile objects were benumbed by his valour and energy, and also began to dance. O king! O lord
of men! Then the gods, with Brahma at the forefront, and the great ascetics, went to Mahadeva and told him about
the rishi. “O God! You should act so that he stops dancing.” In a desire to ensure the welfare of the gods, the
god188 went to the one who was dancing, having lost his senses in delight, and told him, “O maharshi! O one who
is learned in dharma! Why are you dancing? O bull among the sages! Why are you so delighted today?” The sage
replied, “O God! Can you not see vegetable juices ﬂowing from my hand? On seeing this, I am greatly delighted
and am dancing.”’
‘“Pulastya said, ‘The god smiled and told the sage, who was deluded in his delight, “O brahmana! I am not surprised. Look at me.” O best of men! O king! Having uttered these words, the wise Mahadeva pricked his thumb
with his ﬁngernail and from that wound emerged ashes, as white as snow. O king! On seeing this, the sage was
struck with shame and fell down at his feet. “I think that there is no other god more supreme than the great Rudra.
O wielder of the spear! You are the refuge of the worlds of the gods and the demons. You have created the universe, the three worlds and everything that is mobile and immobile. O illustrious one! It is into you that everything
enters at the destruction of a yuga. The gods themselves are incapable of comprehending you. How can I? O unblemished one! Brahma and all the other gods can be seen in you. You are everything. You are the maker of the
worlds, the one who makes them act. It is through your grace that the gods are free from fear and can rejoice.”
Having thus prayed to Mahadeva, the sage remained prostrate. The rishi said, “O Mahadeva! Through your grace,
may my austerities never diminish.” Then the god was delighted and spoke to the brahmarshi. “O brahmana!
Through my grace, your austerities will increase thousandfold. O great sage! I will dwell with you in your hermitage. Those who bathe in Saptasarasvata and worship me will get everything that is difﬁcult to obtain, in this
world and the next. There is no doubt that they will go to Sarasvati’s world.”
‘“‘One should then go to Oushanasa,189 renowned in the three worlds.190 Brahma, the gods, the sages and the
ascetics are there. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In a desire to ensure Bhargava’s191 welfare, the illustrious
Kartikeya is always present there at the time of the three sandhyas. O tiger among men! Bathing in the tirtha
known as Kapalamochana, one is cleansed of all sins and is freed from all sins. O bull among men! One should
then go and bathe in Agnitirtha, saving one’s lineage and attaining the world of Agni. O supreme among the
Bharata lineage! Vishvamitra’s tirtha is also there.192 O great king! On bathing there, one is born as a brahmana.
O tiger among men! If one goes to Brahmayoni,193 pure and controlled in mind, and bathes there, one obtains
Brahma’s world. There is no doubt that seven generations of one’s lineage are sanctiﬁed. O Indra among kings!
One should then go to the tirtha that is renowned in the three worlds. O king! This is famous by the name of
Prithudaka and belongs to Kartikeya. Having performed one’s ablutions there, one should worship the ancestors
and the gods. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Whatever improper act one has committed because of human
intelligence, knowingly or unknowingly, whether one is a man or a woman, is destroyed as soon as one bathes
there. One obtains the fruits of a horse sacriﬁce and goes to the world of heaven. The learned say that Kurukshetra
is sacred. But the Sarasvati is more sacred than Kurukshetra. The tirthas are more sacred than Sarasvati and Prithudaka is more sacred than the tirthas. It is supreme among all the tirthas. He who meditates and then gives up his
body in Prithudaka, will never be tormented by the fear of death.194 This has been sung by Sanatkumara195 and
the great-souled Vyasa. O king! It is also the injunction of the Vedas that one should go to Prithudaka. O supreme
among men! There is no other tirtha as sacred as Prithudaka. There is no doubt that it is purifying, pure and the destroyer of sins. O best of men! The learned say that even people who commit evil acts go to heaven if they bathe in
Prithudaka.
‘“‘O supreme among the Bharata lineage! O king! There is another tirtha named Madhusrava there.196 On
bathing there, a man obtains the fruits of one thousand cows.197 O best of men! In due order, one should then go
to the tirtha of the goddess, famous in the world and at the conﬂuence of the Sarasvati and the Aruna.198 Having
bathed there after fasting for three nights, one is freed from the sin of killing a brahmana. O bull among the Bharata lineage! A man obtains the fruits of agnishtoma and atiratra and sanctiﬁes his lineage for seven generations. O
extender of the Kuru lineage! There is another tirtha named Avatirna there. Out of compassion for the brahmanas,

Darbhin created it in ancient times. There is no doubt that a twice-born who observes vows, takes up the sacred
thread, fasts and follows rituals is a brahmana. O bull among men! But it has been seen from ancient times that one
who bathes there, without rituals and without mantras, becomes a brahmana, with all the results of vows. O tiger
among men! Darbhin199 united the four oceans there. Bathing there, one never confronts any calamity. One obtains the fruits of four thousand cows.200 O Indra among kings! From there, one should go to the tirtha named
Shatasahasraka. The tirtha Sahasraka is also there, famous in the world. Bathing in those two, a man obtains the
fruits of one thousand cows.201 His donations and his fasting increase a thousandfold. O Indra among kings! One
should then go to the supreme Renuka tirtha.202 Having performed ablutions there and engaged in the worship of
the ancestors and the gods, one is cleansed of all sins and one’s soul becomes pure. One obtains the fruits of agnishtoma. On touching the water in Vimochana, controlling one’s anger and controlling one’s senses, one is freed
from all sins connected with acquisition.203 On going to Panchavata,204 celibate and in control of one’s senses,
one obtains great merit and greatness in the world of those who are virtuous. There Yogeshvara Sthanu Vrishadhvaja205 is always present himself. One who goes there and worships the lord of the gods becomes successful.
Varuna’s tirtha Oujasa206 is resplendent in its own energy. There Brahma, the gods and the rishis, rich in austerities, instated Guha207 as the general of the army of the gods.
‘“‘O extender of the Kuru lineage! To the east of Oujasa is Kuru tirtha. Bathing in Kuru tirtha, celibate and in
control of his senses, a man is cleansed of all sins, becomes pure in soul and attains the world of the Kurus. Controlled and restrained in diet, one should then go to Svargadvara.208 One attains the world of heaven and goes to
the world of Brahma. O lord of men! Then the visitor of tirthas should go to Anaraka. O king! On bathing there, a
man never confronts any difﬁculties. O lord of the earth! O best of men! Brahma himself is always present there,
with the gods in attendance, with Narayana at their head. O Indra among kings! O extender of the Kuru lineage!
Rudra’s wife is always present there. One who approaches the goddess never faces any difﬁculty. O great king!
Vishveshvara,209 Uma’s husband, is also there. One who approaches Mahadeva is freed from all blemishes. O
great king! On going to Narayana Padmanabha,210 the destroyer of enemies, one becomes radiant and goes to
Vishnu’s world. O bull among men! On bathing at the tirtha of all the gods, a man discards all his misery and
blazes like the moon. O lord of men! Then the visitor of tirthas should go to Svastipura. On going to that sacred
tirtha and satisfying the ancestors and the gods, a man obtains the fruits of an agnishtoma sacriﬁce. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! There is a lake named Ganga there and a well. O lord of the earth! Three crores of tirthas are
in that well.211 O king! On bathing there, a man attains the world of heaven. Bathing in the river there and worshipping Maheshvara, a man attains the status of a Ganapati and rescues his lineage. One should then go to Sthanuvata, renowned in the three worlds. On bathing and staying there for a night, a man attains Rudra’s world. Then
one should go to Badaripachana and Vasishtha’s hermitage there.212 After fasting there for three nights, a man
should eat jujubes.213 O lord of men! One who lives only on jujubes for twelve complete years, and one who fasts
there for three nights, are equal. O lord of men! The visitor of tirthas then reaches Indra’s path. On fasting there for
one day and one night, one attains greatness in Shakra’s world. Going to Ekaratra and fasting there for one night,
controlled and truthful, one attains greatness in Brahma’s world. O one learned in dharma! Then one should go to
the tirtha that is renowned in the three worlds. This is the hermitage of the great-souled Aditya, full of energy. On
bathing there and worshipping Vibhavasu,214 a man goes to the world of Aditya and rescues his lineage.
‘“‘O extender of the Kuru lineage! A man who is a visitor of tirthas should go and bathe in Soma tirtha. There is
no doubt that such a man will go to the world of the moon. O one learned in dharma! One should then go to the
tirtha of the great-souled Dadhicha. O king! This is pure and purifying and is famous in the world. Angiras of the
Sarasvata lineage, treasure of austerities, is there. A man who bathes in that tirtha obtains the fruits of a horse sacriﬁce and there is no doubt that he attains Sarasvati’s world.215 Controlled and celibate, one should then go to
Kanyashrama. O king! If one fasts and lives there for three nights, one obtains one hundred celestial maidens and
goes to Brahma’s world. Brahma, the gods, the sages and the ascetics go there every month and obtain great mer-

its. If one touches the water at Samnihiti when the sun has been devoured by Rahu,216 one has obtained one hundred eternal horse sacriﬁces.217 Whatever tirthas exist on earth and in the sky, female rivers, male rivers, lakes, all
streams, wells, ponds and everything else that is sacred, there is no doubt that they are gathered every month at
Samnihiti. Whatever evil act a man or a woman may have committed, there is no doubt that they are all destroyed
on bathing there. One goes to Brahma’s world in a lotus-coloured vehicle. Having worshipped the yaksha gatekeeper Arantuka, if one touches the water in Kotirupa, one obtains a lot of gold. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! There is a tirtha, a pond named Ganga, there. O one learned in dharma! On bathing there, controlled and
celibate, one obtains the eternal fruits of royal and horse sacriﬁces. There is a sacred tirtha Naimisha on earth and
Pushkara in the sky. But in all the three worlds, Kurukshetra is special. Even the dust carried away by the wind in
Kurukshetra takes the performer of evil acts to the supreme objective. To the south is Sarasvati and to the north Drishadvati.218 Those who live in Kurukshetra live in heaven. “I will go to Kurukshetra, I will live in Kurukshetra.”
He who utters this single sentence is cleansed of all sins. O king! Those who live in sacred Kurukshetra, Brahma’s
altar and frequented by the brahmarshis, there is no doubt that one should not sorrow for them. The region between
Tarantuka and Arantuka and between Machakruka and Rama’s lakes is Kurukshetra Samantapanchaka219 and is
known as the grandfather’s northern altar.’”’220
379(82)

‘“Pulastya said, ‘O one learned in dharma! One should then go to the ancient Dharmatirtha. O king! There is no
doubt that a man who bathes there, controlled and devoted to dharma, sanctiﬁes his lineage for seven generations.
O one learned in dharma! One should then go to the supreme Karapatana. One obtains agnishtoma and goes to the
world of the sages. O king! A man should then go to the forest Sougandhika.221 Brahma, the gods, the sages and
the ascetics are there and the siddhas, the charanas, the gandharvas, the kinnaras222 and the great nagas. As soon
as one enters the forest, one is freed from all sins. O king! The best of streams, the supreme of rivers, the immensely sacred goddess and river, Sarasvati, ﬂows in Plaksha.223 On performing one’s ablutions there, from the water
that issues from an anthill, and worshipping the ancestors and the gods, one obtains the fruits of a horse sacriﬁce.
There is a tirtha named Ishanadhyushita224 there, difﬁcult of access and determined to be six throws of a shamya
away from the anthill.225 O tiger among men! It has been seen in the ancient accounts, that on bathing there, one
obtains a thousand tawny cows and a horse sacriﬁce.226 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O best of men! If
one goes to Sugandha, Shatakumbha and Panchayajna, one obtains greatness in the world of heaven. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! The tirtha known as Trishulakhata is also there. On performing ablutions there, engaged in
the worship of the ancestors and the gods, there is no doubt that after discarding one’s body, one attains the status
of a Ganapati.
‘“‘O Indra among kings! One should then go the place of the goddess that is difﬁcult of access. This is famous
in the three worlds by the name of Shakambhari.227 O lord of men! Strict in her vows, for a thousand divine years,
she subsisted on vegetables, month after month. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Rishis, ascetics and devotees
of the goddess came there and the guests were entertained with offerings of vegetables. Her name of Shakambhari
was thus established. On going to Shakambhari, celibate and controlled, one should live there for three nights, eating vegetables and restrained and pure. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Through the grace of the goddess, a
visit there is equal in fruits to living on vegetables for twelve years.
‘“‘Then one should go to Suvarnaksha, renowned in the three worlds. In ancient times, to win his favours, Vishnu propitiated Rudra there. He obtained many rare boons, difﬁcult even among the gods. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The destroyer of Tripura228 was satisﬁed and told him, “O Krishna! You will be more loved in
the world. There is no doubt that your mouth will be the entire universe.” O Indra among kings! Going there and
worshipping Vrishadhvaja, one attains a horse sacriﬁce and the status of a Ganapati. Then a man should go to Dhumavati229 and fast there for three nights, obtaining certainly everything that one desires in one’s mind. O lord of

men! Rathavarta is towards the south230 of the goddess. O one learned in dharma! One should ascend it with faith,
and in control of one’s senses. Through Mahadeva’s grace, one then obtains the supreme objective. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! O immensely wise one! After circumambulating it, one should go to Dhara, the cleanser of all
sins. O tiger among men! O lord of men! On bathing there, one never sorrows. O one learned in dharma! After
showing obeisance to the great mountain, one should then go to the gate of the Ganga.231 There is no doubt that
this is like the gate of heaven. On bathing there in Kotitirtha, controlled in mind, one obtains pundarika sacriﬁce
and saves one’s lineage. On satisfying the gods and the ancestors in Saptaganga,232 Triganga and Shakravarta, in
accordance with the prescriptions, one obtains greatness in the world of the virtuous. Then bathing in
Kanakhala233 and fasting there for three nights, a man obtains a horse sacriﬁce and goes to the world of heaven. O
lord of men! The visitor of tirthas should then go to Kapilavata.234 Staying there for one night, one obtains the
fruits of one thousand cows. O Indra among kings! O best among the supreme of the Kuru lineage! This is the
tirtha of the great-souled Kapila, king of the nagas. It is renowned in all the worlds. O lord of men! On performing
ablutions in that tirtha of the nagas, a man obtains the fruits of one thousand tawny cows. Then one should go to
Lalitika, Shantanu’s supreme tirtha. O king! On bathing there, a man never confronts difﬁculties. A man who
bathes at the conﬂuence of the Ganga and the Sangama,235 obtains ten horse sacriﬁces and rescues his lineage. O
Indra among kings! From there, one should go to Sugandha, famous in the worlds. Cleansed of all sin and pure of
soul, one attains greatness in Brahma’s world. O lord of men! The visitor of tirthas should then go to Rudravarta. O
king! On bathing there, a man obtains greatness in the world of heaven. O best of men! On bathing at the conﬂuence of the Ganga and the Sarasvati, one obtains a horse sacriﬁce and goes to the world of heaven.236
‘“‘On going to Bhadrakarneshvara and worshipping the gods in accordance with the rites, one never confronts
difﬁculties and goes to the world of heaven. O lord of men! The visitor of tirthas should then go to Kubjamraka.
One obtains the fruits of one thousand cows and goes to heaven. O lord of men! The visitor of tirthas should then
go to Arundhativata. On touching the water at Samudraka, and fasting there for three nights, a man obtains the
fruits of one thousand cows and rescues his lineage. Celibate and controlled in mind, one should then go to Brahmavarta. One obtains a horse sacriﬁce and goes to the world of heaven. On going to the source of the Yamuna237
and touching the water of the Yamuna there, one obtains the fruits of a horse sacriﬁce and attains greatness in the
world of heaven. Then one should go to the tirtha named Darvisamkramana, famous in the three worlds. One obtains a horse sacriﬁce and goes to the world of heaven. On going to the source of the Sindhu,238 frequented by siddhas and gandharvas, and staying there for ﬁve nights, one obtains a lot of gold. On going thereafter to Vedi, extremely difﬁcult of access, a man obtains a horse sacriﬁce and the goal of Ushanas.239 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! One should then go to Rishikulya240 and Vasishtha. On going to Vasishtha, all the other varnas become
brahmanas. O lord of men, having bathed in Rishikulya, a man attains the world of the rishis, if one lives there for
one month and subsists on vegetables.’
‘“On going to Bhrigutunga, one obtains the fruits of a horse sacriﬁce. On going to Virapramoksha, one is freed
from all sins. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On going to the tirthas of Krittika and Magha, a virtuous man
obtains the fruits of agnishtoma and atiratra. On going to the supreme Vidyatirtha in the evening, and touching the
water there, one becomes skilled in all forms of knowledge. If one spends a night in Mahashrama, eating once a
day, one is cleansed of all sins and attains the worlds of the pure. Living there for one month at the time of Mahalaya241 and eating once in three days, one is cleansed of all sins, the soul becomes pure, and one obtains a lot of
gold. One should then go to Vetasika, frequented by the grandfather.242 One obtains a horse sacriﬁce and goes to
the objective of Ushanas. Then, on reaching the tirtha of Sundarika, frequented by the siddhas, as has been witnessed in the ancient texts, one becomes handsome. Then, going on to Brahmani, celibate and in control of one’s
senses, one goes to Brahma’s world in a lotus-coloured vehicle. Then one should go to the sacred Naimisha, frequented by the siddhas. Brahma always resides there, together with the masses of the gods. Even if one desires to
go to Naimisha, half of one’s sins are destroyed. As soon as a man enters it, all his sins are cleansed. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! The wise visitor of tirthas should live in Naimisha for a month. All the tirthas of the earth

are in Naimisha. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bathing there, controlled and restrained in diet, one obtains
the fruits of a sacriﬁce in which cows are donated. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! One also rescues one’s
lineage for seven generations. It is said by the wise ones that he who gives up his life in Naimisha through fasting,
ﬁnds delight in the world of heaven. O supreme among kings! Naimisha is always sacred and holy.
‘“On going to Gangobheda and fasting there for three nights, a man obtains a horse sacriﬁce and is born like
Brahma. Going to the Sarasvati, one should satisfy the ancestors and the gods. There is no doubt that one ﬁnds delight in Sarasvati’s world. Celibate and controlled, one should then go to Bahuda. A man then obtains the fruits of
a devasatra243 sacriﬁce. Then one should go to the sacred Chiravati, surrounded by holy ones. Worshipping the
ancestors and the gods there, one obtains a horse sacriﬁce. On going to Vimalashoka, one shines like the moon.
Spending a night there, one attains greatness in the world of heaven. One should then go to Gopratara, the supreme
of tirthas on the Sarayu. Rama went to heaven there, with his servants, forces and vehicles.244 O lord of men! On
bathing at the tirtha of Gopratara, a man is cleansed of all sins, becomes pure in soul and attains greatness in the
world of heaven. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! If a man bathes in Rama’s tirtha on the Gomati,245 he obtains
a horse sacriﬁce, and the man’s lineage is saved. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The tirtha Shatasahasrika
is there. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On bathing there, controlled and restrained in diet, one obtains the sacred fruits of one thousand cows. O Indra among kings! One should then go to the supreme region of Bhartri. O
king! On bathing in Kotitirtha and worshipping Guha,246 a man obtains the fruits of one thousand cows. Such a
man becomes energetic. On going to Varanasi and worshipping Vrishadhvaja, and bathing in the pond known as
Kapila, one attains a royal sacriﬁce. O Indra among kings! On going to Markandeya’s tirtha, difﬁcult of access and
famous in the worlds, located at the conﬂuence of the Gomati and the Ganga, one obtains agnishtoma and rescues
one’s lineage. Celibate and in control of one’s senses, one should then go to Gaya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On going there, one obtains a horse sacriﬁce. Akshayavata, famous in the three worlds, is there. O lord!
Whatever is offered to the ancestors there becomes inexhaustible. On bathing in Mahanadi and satisfying the ancestors and the gods, one attains the inexhaustible worlds and saves one’s lineage. On going to Brahma’s lake,
adorned with Dharma’s forests, one attains a pundarika sacriﬁce, as soon as night becomes dawn. O Indra among
kings! Brahma’s sacriﬁcial pole rises high in that lake. On circumambulating the pole, one obtains the fruits of a
horse sacriﬁce.
‘“O Indra among kings! One should then go to Dhenuka, famous in the world. O king! On staying there for one
night and donating sesamum and a cow, all sins are cleansed, one becomes pure in soul and there is no doubt that
one goes to the world of the moon. O great king! There is no doubt that, even today, there is a sign there. A cow,
with her calf, used to roam over that mountain. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Her hoof-marks, and those of
her calf, can be seen there, even today. O Indra among kings! O supreme among kings! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On touching water at these hoof-marks, whatever evil acts one has committed are destroyed. Then one
should go to Gridhravata, the place where the wise god is established. On going to Vrishadhvaja, one should bathe
in ashes. If one is a brahmana, one will obtain a vow of twelve years.247 If one is from an inferior varna, all one’s
sins will be destroyed. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Then one should go to Mount Udyanta, ﬁlled with the
sound of singing. The footprint of Savita248 can be seen there. Rigid in vows, a brahmana who observes the sandhya prayers there is like one who has observed sandhya prayers for twelve years. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The famous Yonidvara249 is there. On going there, a man is freed from any mixing up of varnas.250 O king!
If a man lives in Gaya during both shuklapaksha and krishnapaksha, there is no doubt that his lineage is sanctiﬁed
for seven generations. If one wishes for many sons, one should only go to Gaya, or perform a horse sacriﬁce, or set
free a blue bull.251 O king! O lord of men! The visitor of tirthas should then go to Phalgu.252 He obtains a horse
sacriﬁce and goes to great success. O Indra among kings! Controlled, one should then go to Dharmaprastha. O
great king! O Yudhishthira! Dharma is always present there. Going there, one obtains the fruits of a horse sacriﬁce.
O Indra among kings! One should then go to the supreme Brahmatirtha. O Indra among kings! There, worshipping
Brahma, whose energy is unlimited, a man obtains the fruits of a royal sacriﬁce and a horse sacriﬁce.

‘“O lord of men! The visitor of tirthas should then go to Rajagriha.253 On touching the warm water there, one
becomes the equal of Kakshivat254 and ﬁnds delight. On partaking from the daily offerings made to the yakshini
there, a man becomes pure. Through the grace of the yakshini, one is freed from the sin of killing an embryo. Going to Maninaga, one obtains the fruits of one thousand cows. If one partakes from the daily offerings made to
Maninaga, and stays there for one night, one is freed from all sins and terrible serpent’s venom does not cause
harm. O king! Then one should go to brahmarshi Goutama’s forest. Bathing in Ahalya’s255 lake, one goes to the
supreme objective. O king! On going to Shri,256 one obtains supreme prosperity. O one learned in dharma! There
is a spring there, renowned in the three worlds. Performing one’s ablutions there, one obtains a horse sacriﬁce.
There is also rajarshi257 Janaka’s well, worshipped by the thirty gods.258 On performing one’s ablutions there,
one attains Vishnu’s world. One should then go to Vinashana,259 which frees from all sins. One obtains the fruits
of a horse sacriﬁce and goes to the world of the moon. On going to Gandaki,260 created from the water of all the
tirthas, one obtains a horse sacriﬁce and goes to the world of the sun. O one learned in dharma! One should then go
to the hermitage Adhivamshya. O great king! There is no doubt that one ﬁnds delight among the guhyakas.261 Going on to the river Kampana, frequented by the siddhas, one obtains a pundarika sacriﬁce and goes to the world of
the sun. Then going to the river Vishala, renowned in the three worlds, one obtains agnishtoma and goes to the
world of heaven. O lord of men! On going to the rivulet Maheshvari, one attains a horse sacriﬁce and rescues one’s
lineage. On going to the celestial pond, a pure man never confronts difﬁculties and attains a horse sacriﬁce. Celibate and controlled, one should then go to Maheshvarapada. On bathing in Maheshvarapada, one obtains the fruits
of a horse sacriﬁce. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O Indra among kings! There are one crore famous tirthas
there and these were carried away by an evil-souled demon in the form a tortoise. O king! While they were being
carried away, Vishnu recovered them through Vishnu’s powers. O Yudhishthira! On performing ablutions at the
one crore tirthas, one obtains a pundarika sacriﬁce and goes to Vishnu’s world. O Indra among kings! One should
then go to Narayana’s region. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Hari always dwells near that place. Vishnu, the
performer of extraordinary deeds, is famous by the name of Shalagrama there.262 On going to Vishnu, without decay, the granter of boons and the lord of the three worlds, one obtains a horse sacriﬁce and goes to Vishnu’s world.
‘“O one learned in dharma! There is a well there that frees from all sins. The four oceans are always present in
this well. O Indra among kings! By touching the water there, one never confronts any difﬁculties. On going to Mahadeva,263 Vishnu without decay and the granter of boons, one shines like the moon and is freed from all one’s
debts. If one touches the water in Jatismara, pure and controlled in mind, there is no doubt that one can recall one’s
past lives by bathing there. Going to Vateshvarapura and fasting and worshipping Keshava, there is no doubt that
one satisﬁes all one’s wishes and desires. Thereafter, on going to Vamana, one is freed from all sins. On worshipping the god Hari, one never confronts any difﬁculties. Then one should go to Bharata’s hermitage, which frees
from all sins. There, a man should go to the Koushiki,264 the destroyer of great sins, and obtain the fruits of a royal sacriﬁce. O, one learned in dharma! Then one should go to the supreme forest of Champaka. Spending a night
there, one obtains the fruits of one thousand cows. Then one should go the supremely revered tirtha of Jyeshthila.
Fasting and spending a night there, one obtains the fruits of agnishtoma. O bull among men! On seeing the immensely radiant lord of the universe there,265 together with the goddess, one attains the world of Mitra and
Varuna. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On going to Kanyasamveda, controlled and restrained in diet, one goes
to the world of Prajapati Manu. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Whatever drink or food is offered at Kanya
becomes inexhaustible. This is what sages, rigid in their vows, have said. On going to Nishchira,266 renowned in
the three worlds, one attains a horse sacriﬁce and goes to Vishnu’s world. O tiger among men! There is no doubt
that men who donate at the conﬂuence of Nishchira, go to Brahma’s world. Vasishtha’s hermitage, renowned in the
three worlds, is there. On performing ablutions there, one attains a horse sacriﬁce.
‘“On going to Devakuta, frequented by masses of brahmarshis, one attains a horse sacriﬁce and rescues one’s
lineage. O Indra among kings! Then one should go the lake of the sage Koushika. In ancient times, Koushika’s son
Vishvamitra obtained success there. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On staying for a month at brave Koushika’s

place, one obtains within a month the merits of a horse sacriﬁce. He who dwells in that great lake, supreme among
all the tirthas, never confronts any difﬁculty and obtains a lot of gold. On going to Kumara,267 who dwells in Virashrama, there is no doubt that a man obtains a horse sacriﬁce. On going to Agnidhara, renowned in the three
worlds, and bathing there, one obtains agnishtoma and does not return from heaven. On going to the
grandfather’s268 lake, established in the king of the mountains,269 and performing one’s ablutions there, one obtains the fruits of agnishtoma. From the grandfather’s lake issues the stream of Kumaradhara, renowned in the
three worlds and the puriﬁer of the world. On bathing there, one knows in one’s own mind that one has become
successful. If one eats once in three days there, one is freed from the sin of killing a brahmana. The peak of the
great goddess Gouri is famous in the three worlds. A devoted man should climb, and touching the waters of
Stanakunda270 and worshipping the ancestors and the gods, obtain a horse sacriﬁce and go to Shakra’s world.
Celibate and controlled, one goes to Tamraruna and obtaining a horse sacriﬁce, goes to Shakra’s world. One goes
to the well named Nandini, frequented by the thirty gods. O extender of the Kuru lineage! One then obtains the
fruits of a human sacriﬁce. On bathing in Kalika, the conﬂuence of the Koushiki and the Aruna, and fasting for
three nights, a learned one is freed from all sins. Going to Urvashi tirtha and the hermitage of the moon, and
bathing in the hermitage of Kumbhakarna, a wise man is worshipped by the earth. Bathing in the sacred Kokamukha, celibate and careful in vows, it has been seen in the ancient accounts that one can recall one’s earlier births.
A brahmana who has gone to Nanda becomes successful and accomplished in his soul. He is cleansed of all sins,
becomes pure of soul and goes to Shakra’s world. On going to the island Rishabha, worthy of a visit and inhabited
by curlews, and touching the waters of the Sarasvati, one becomes resplendent in a celestial vehicle. O great king!
Ouddalaka tirtha is frequented by the sages. On performing one’s ablutions there, one is freed from all sins. On going to the sacred Dharmatirtha, frequented by brahmarshis, there is no doubt that a man obtains a horse sacriﬁce.
On going to Champa and touching the waters of the Bhagirathi and on going to Dandarka, one obtains the fruits of
one thousand cows. On going to the sacred Lavedika, frequented by holy ones, one obtains a horse sacriﬁce and is
worshipped in a celestial vehicle.’”
380(83)

‘“Pulastya said, ‘On going to the supreme tirtha of Samvedya in the evening, and touching the water there, there is
no doubt that a man obtains knowledge. O king! Then going to Louhitya, the tirtha created through Rama’s favour
in ancient times, one obtains a lot of gold.271 On going to Karatoya272 and fasting there for three nights, following the rites laid down by the grandfather,273 a man obtains a horse sacriﬁce. O Indra among kings! On going to
the conﬂuence of the Ganga with the ocean, the learned have said that one obtains ten times a horse sacriﬁce. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! If one goes to the island that is on the other bank of the Ganga,274
bathing and fasting there for three nights, all one’s desires are satisﬁed. Then one should go to the river
Vaitarani,275 the cleanser of all sins. Going to the tirtha known as Viraja, one shines like the moon. Sanctifying
one’s own lineage, one is cleansed of all sins. A man makes his own lineage pure and obtains the fruits of ten thousand cows.276 On dwelling at the conﬂuence of the Shona and the Jyotirathi, pure and restrained, and worshipping
the ancestors and the gods, one obtains the fruits of agnishtoma. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! On touching
the water at Vamshagulma, the source of the Shona and the Narmada,277 one obtains the fruits of a horse sacriﬁce.
O lord of men! On going to Rishabha tirtha in Kosala and fasting there for three nights, a man obtains a horse sacriﬁce. On going to Kosala and touching the waters at Kala tirtha, there is no doubt that one obtains the fruits of
eleven bulls.278 Performing ablutions in Pushpavati, and fasting for three nights, a man obtains the fruits of one
thousand cows and also rescues his lineage. Then bathing in Badarika tirtha, 279 controlled in mind, one obtains a
long life and goes to the world of heaven.
‘“‘Then, going to Mahendra, frequented by Jamadagni’s son, and bathing at Rama tirtha,280 a man obtains the
fruits of a horse sacriﬁce. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! O King! On going to Matanga’s Kedara281 and

bathing there, a man obtains the fruits of one thousand cows. On going to Mount Shri282 and touching the water
on the banks of the river, one obtains a horse sacriﬁce and goes to the world of heaven. The immensely radiant
Mahadeva dwells in great delight on Mount Shri with the goddess, together with Brahma and the thirty gods. On
bathing at the lake of the gods there, pure and restrained in mind, one obtains a horse sacriﬁce and goes to supreme
success. On going to Mount Rishabha in Pandya,283 worshipped by the gods, one obtains a horse sacriﬁce and
ﬁnds delight in the vault of the sky.284 One should then go to Kaveri,285 frequented by masses of apsaras. O king!
On bathing there, a man obtains the fruits of one thousand cows. Then one should bathe in Kanyatirtha,286 on the
shores of the ocean. O Indra among kings! On bathing there, one is freed from all sins. Then one should go to
Gokarna,287 renowned in the three worlds. O Indra among kings! It is in the middle of the ocean and is worshipped by all the worlds. Brahma, the gods, the rishis, the ascetics, the bhutas,288 the yakshas, the pishachas,289
the kinnaras, the great nagas, the siddhas, the charanas, the gandharvas, humans, the pannagas, rivers, oceans and
mountains worship Uma’s consort there. On worshipping Ishana there and fasting for three nights, a man obtains a
horse sacriﬁce and attains the status of a Ganapati. A man who lives there for twelve nights becomes pure of soul.
Then one should go to the region of Gayatri, famous in the three worlds.290 After staying there for three nights,
one obtains the fruits of one thousand cows. O lord of men! For brahmanas, something special can be witnessed
there. O king! When one born of mixed varna recites the gayatri there, it becomes metrical and musical.291
‘“‘On going to the pond of the brahmana rishi Samvarta, difﬁcult of access, one obtains personal beauty and
great fortune. On going to Venna292 and worshipping the ancestors and the gods, a man obtains a celestial chariot
drawn by peacocks and swans. Then one goes to Godavari, always frequented by the siddhas, obtaining a cow sacriﬁce and attaining Vasuki’s world. On bathing at the conﬂuence of Venna, one obtains the fruits of a horse sacriﬁce. On bathing at the conﬂuence of Varada,293 one obtains the fruits of one thousand cows. On going to Brahma’s region and dwelling there for three nights, a man obtains the fruits of one thousand cows and goes to the
world of heaven. On going to Kushaplavana, celibate and controlled in mind, and bathing and living there for three
nights, one obtains the fruits of a horse sacriﬁce. Then one should go to the beautiful lake of the gods, the source of
the waters of the Krishna and the Venna.294 O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bathing in the lake
known as Jatimatra and in the hermitage of the maiden, where the king of the gods performed one hundred sacriﬁces and went to heaven, one obtains one hundred agnishtomas from the act of merely going there. On bathing at
the lake of all the gods, one obtains the fruits of one thousand cows. On bathing in the lake known as Jatimatra, a
man can recollect his earlier lives. Then one should go the immensely pure Payoshni, supreme among rivers.295
Worshipping the ancestors and the gods, one will obtain the fruits of one thousand cows. O great king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On going to the Dandaka forest and touching the waters there, one obtains the fruits of
one thousand cows as soon as one has bathed there. On going to the hermitage of Sharabhanga and the greatsouled Shukra, a man never confronts any difﬁculty and rescues his lineage. On going to Shurparaka, frequented
by Jamadagni’s son and bathing in Rama’s tirtha, a man obtains a lot of gold.296 On bathing in Saptagodavari,297
restrained and controlled in diet, one obtains great merits and goes to the world of the gods. Restrained and controlled in diet, one treads the path of the gods, and a man thus obtains the merits of a divine sacriﬁce.
‘“‘One goes to the Tungaka forest, celibate and in control of one’s senses. In ancient times, the rishi Sarasvata
had taught the Vedas there. The Vedas were lost. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Seated on the upper garments of the maharshis, the son of the sage Angiras taught them and pronounced the syllables of ‘OM’, accurately
and as they should be uttered.298 Immediately, everything that had been learnt before returned to memory. The
rishis, the gods, Varuna, Agni, Prajapati, the god Hari Narayana, Mahadeva and the illustrious grandfather299 together with the immensely radiant other gods, appointed the immensely radiant Bhrigu as a priest for their sacriﬁce
there. In accordance with the prescribed rites and in accordance with the prescribed rituals, and for the sake of the
sages, the lord300 once again invoked and worshipped the ﬁre. Satisﬁed with their shares, the gods left for the
three worlds and the sages went where they wished. O best of kings! When one enters Tungaka, whether one is a
man or a woman, all one’s sins are destroyed. O king! If a wise one dwells there for a month, controlled and re-

strained in diet, one goes to Brahma’s world and saves one’s lineage. On going to Medhavika and satisfying the
ancestors and the gods, one obtains agnishtoma and memory and intellect. There is the peak named Kalanjara,
renowned in the world.301 On bathing in the lake of the gods there, one obtains the fruits of one thousand cows. O
king! There is no doubt that a man who puriﬁes his soul in Mount Kalanjara obtains greatness in the world of
heaven. O lord of the earth! Then one goes to Mandakini, the cleanser of all sins, in Chitrakuta, best among the
supreme of mountains.302 On performing one’s ablutions there and worshipping the ancestors and the gods, one
obtains a horse sacriﬁce and goes to the supreme objective.
‘“‘O Indra among kings! Then one should go to the supreme region of Bhartri. O king! The god Mahasena303 is
always established there. A man who bathes in Kotitirtha, obtains the fruits of one thousand cows. After circumambulating it, one should go to Jyeshthasthana. On going to Mahadeva, one becomes as resplendent as the moon.
O great king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! O Yudhishthira!304 There is a famous well there and the four
oceans reside in it. O Indra among kings! On touching the waters there and circumambulating it, pure and controlled in soul, a man goes to the supreme objective. O best among the Kuru lineage. Then one should go to the
great Shringaverapura. O great king! In ancient times, Rama, Dasharatha’s son, crossed there.305 A man who
bathes in the Ganga there, celibate and controlled, is washed of all sin and attains a horse sacriﬁce. O lord of men!
On going to Mahadeva and worshipping and circumambulating him, one attains the status of a Ganapati.
‘“‘O Indra among kings! One should then go to Prayaga, praised by the rishis. There dwell Brahma and the other gods, the directions and the lords of the directions, the lords of the worlds, the sadhyas, the nairritas,306 the ancestors, the supreme rishis with Sanatkumara at their head, the other brahmarshis led by Angiras, the nagas, the
suparnas,307 the siddhas, the chakracharas,308 the rivers, the oceans, the gandharvas, the apsaras and the illustrious Hari, worshipped by Prajapati. There are three pits of ﬁre and through their middle, Jahnavi,309 worshipped
among all the tirthas, ﬂows out of Prayaga. The goddess who is Tapana’s daughter is famous in the three
worlds.310 The Yamuna ﬂows with the Ganga, the puriﬁer of the world. The region between the Ganga and the
Yamuna is known as the loins of the earth. The learned sages know that Prayaga is the supreme spot in these loins.
Prayaga, Pratishthana, Kambala, Ashvatara and the tirtha of Bhogavati are known as Prajapati’s altars. O Yudhishthira!311 The Vedas and sacriﬁces become personiﬁed there. Rishis, rich in austerities, worship Prajapati there.
O king! The gods and chakracharas worship him with sacriﬁces. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is no
other place as sacred as this. O lord! Prayaga’s power is greater than that of all the tirthas. Even if a man hears of
this tirtha, or chants its name, or obtains a bit of its clay, he is freed from sins. He who performs his ablutions at the
conﬂuence, strict in his vows, obtains the sacred fruits of royal and horse sacriﬁces. This sacriﬁcial ground is worshipped even by the gods. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Even if a little bit is given there, it becomes great.
O son! Let not the words of the Vedas or the sayings of the world dissuade you from your intention of dying in
Prayaga. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! It is said that there are sixty crore and ten thousand tirthas there. From
merely bathing at the conﬂuence of the Ganga and the Yamuna, one obtains all the merits of a truthful person
learned in the four Vedas. Vasuki’s supreme tirtha named Bhogavati is there.312 On performing ablutions there,
one obtains a horse sacriﬁce. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! On the Ganga there is the tirtha known as Hamsaprapatana,313 famous in the three worlds, and Dashashvamedhika.314 O great king! The region where the Ganga is, is ﬁt for hermitages. The region along the banks of the Ganga is the place where success can be obtained.
This truth should only be recited into the ears of brahmanas, righteous ones, one’s son, well-wishers, disciples and
dependents. This brings dharma. This brings sanctity. This brings purity. This brings happiness. This brings heaven. This brings beauty. This brings supreme puriﬁcation. This is the secret of the maharshis, this is the cleanser of
all sins. By learning this among brahmanas, one is freed from all blemishes.
‘“‘He who hears about the eternal sanctity of the tirthas, will always be pure. He will be able to remember his
earlier births and will ﬁnd delight in the vault of the sky.315 Some of the tirthas recounted are easy of access, others difﬁcult of access. But if one wishes to visit all the tirthas, one should go to the latter in one’s mind. In a desire
to perform good deeds, the Vasus, the Sadhyas, the Adityas, the Maruts, the Ashvins and the rishis, who are equal

to the gods, have gone there. O Kouravya! Good in vows and controlled, and according to the precepts, you must
also go to the sacred tirthas and increase your merits. Those who are learned, those who are honest and those who
have insight are able to reach these tirthas because of their virtue, their purity, their belief and their learning of the
sacred texts. One who does not observe vows, one who has not cleansed his soul, one who is not pure, or one who
is a thief, cannot bathe in these tirthas. O Kouravya! Nor can a man whose mind is crooked. You have always been
good in conduct. You have always had insight on dharma and artha. O son! You have saved your fathers and all
your ancestors. O king! The gods, with Brahma leading them, together with the masses of rishis, have always been
satisﬁed by your dharma and your knowledge of dharma. You are equal to Vasava.316 You will attain the world of
the Vasus. O Bhishma! Your deeds will be great and you will obtain eternal fame on earth.’”
‘Narada said, “Having spoken these words and taking his317 leave, the illustrious rishi Pulastya, pleased and in
a delighted frame of mind, immediately disappeared. Bhishma, tiger among the Kuru lineage and with insight
about the import of the sacred texts, travelled throughout the earth on Pulastya’s words. He who travels throughout
the earth according to these instructions, after his death, obtains the fruits of one hundred horse sacriﬁces. O
Partha!318 According to supreme dharma, you will obtain eight times those merits. Because you will lead the
rishis there, your fruits will be eight times. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those tirthas are infested by
masses of rakshasas. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! No one except you can go there. He who awakes in the
morning and recites this account of all the tirthas, as told by the devarshi,319 is freed from all sins. The foremost
among the rishis—Valmiki, Kashyapa, Atreya, Koundinya, Vishvamitra, Goutama, Asita-Devala, Markandeya,
Galava, Bharadvaja, Vasishtha, the sage Uddalaka, Shounaka and his son, Vyasa who is supreme among those who
meditate, Durvasa who is the best of sages and the great ascetic Galava320—all these supreme rishis, rich in austerities, are waiting for you. O great king! Go and visit the tirthas and meet them. The immensely radiant devarshi
named Lomasha will come to you and you must travel with him. O one learned in dharma! You can go to the
tirthas with me too. You will obtain great fame, as did King Mahabhisha.321 O tiger among the Kuru lineage! Like
Yayati who had dharma in his soul and like King Pururava, you will also blaze with your dharma. Like King Bhagiratha and like the famous Rama, you will also shine among all the kings, like the one with the rays.322 Like
Manu, like Ikshvaku, like the immensely famous Puru and like the immensely energetic Vainya, you will also be
famous. Just as in earlier times, the slayer of Vritra323 burnt down all his enemies, you will destroy your enemies
and protect your subjects. O lotus-eyed one! Having obtained the earth, conquered with your dharma, you will obtain fame with your dharma, like Kartaviryarjuna.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having thus reassured the king, the illustrious rishi Narada took his leave of the greatsouled one324 and instantly disappeared. Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul, reﬂected on this and recounted to
the rishis the eternal merits that derive from going to the tirthas.’
381(84)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having ascertained the thoughts of his brothers and those of the wise Narada, King Yudhishthira then spoke to Dhoumya, who was like the grandfather325 himself. “I have sent into exile Jishnu, tiger
among men and for whom truth is his valour, the mighty-armed one whose soul is unlimited, for the sake of
weapons. O one rich in austerities! That brave one is devoted and capable. He is skilled in the use of weapons and
is like the lord Vasudeva himself. O brahmana! I know those two brave Krishnas,326 the slayers of enemies, just
as the powerful Vyasa knows Pundarikaksha327 Vasudeva and Dhananjaya of the three yugas.328 Narada also
knows this and has spoken to me about this. I know them to be the sages Nara and Narayana. Therefore, knowing
that he was capable, I sent Arjuna to set his eyes on the king of the gods and obtain weapons from him. He is capable, he is the son of a god and he is not inferior to Indra. That is the reason he was exiled. Bhishma and Drona are
atirathas329 and Kripa and Drona’s son330 are invincible. These immensely strong ones have been engaged by
Dhritarashtra’s son for the war. They are all knowledgeable in the Vedas, they are valiant and they are all skilled in

the use of weapons. Then there is also Karna, the maharatha who is the son of a suta331 and has the knowledge of
divine weapons. That immensely strong one has always wanted to ﬁght with Partha. He has the speed of a horse
and the strength of the wind. His arrows roar from a ﬂaming base. The dust332 is like the smoke. Unleashed by the
wind of Dhritarashtra’s son, his weapons scorch. He has been unleashed, like the ﬂames of destruction at the end
of a yuga, released by time. There is no doubt that he will scorch my soldiers like dried grass. There is the wind
raised by Krishna, with a great cloud of divine weapons and with his white steeds like cranes. The blazing Gandiva
is like Indra’s weapon.333 Only a shower of those arrows, unfurled from Arjuna’s cloud can pacify in battle Karna’s blazing ﬂames. Bibhatsu, the destroyer of enemy cities, will certainly obtain from Shakra himself all the divine weapons and their knowledge. I keep thinking that he is equal to all of them. No one can act against him in
battle, nor will the enemies be able to react. All of us Pandavas will see Dhananjaya with the weapons that he has
obtained. Bibhatsu has never been seen to be dragged down under the weight of something he has undertaken. O
supreme among those who have two feet! But in this Kamyaka forest, in that warrior’s absence and with Krishna
with us, we will never ﬁnd peace of mind. Therefore, tell us of another forest that is sacred and lovely and has a lot
of food and fruit, frequented by the performers of virtuous deeds. We should be able to spend some time there and
wait for the brave Arjuna, for whom truth is his valour, to return, just as those desirous of rain wait for the clouds.
Tell us about the different hermitages that have been listed by brahmanas, about lakes and rivers and beautiful
mountains. O brahmana! Bereft of Arjuna, residence in this Kamyaka forest no longer seems attractive to us. Let
us go in some other direction.”’
382(85)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On seeing all the Pandavas anxious and miserable in their minds, Dhoumya, who was like
Brihaspati himself, reassured them and said, “O bull among the Bharata lineage! O king! Let me mention sacred
hermitages, directions, tirthas and mountains approved of by brahmanas. Listen as I speak. O king! O Yudhishthira! As I remember it, I will ﬁrst describe to you the beautiful eastern direction, frequented by masses of rajarshis.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that region there is a place named Naimisha, desired by the devarshis.
There are sacred tirthas, holy to separate gods. The beautiful and holy Gomati ﬂows here, frequented by devarshis.
There is the sacriﬁcial ground of the gods and Vivasvat’s sacriﬁcial site is here. Sacred Gaya, supreme among
mountains and worshipped by rajarshis, is there. There is Brahma’s sacred lake, frequented by rishis and the thirty
gods. O tiger among men! It is for this reason that the ancient ones have declared that if one desires many sons,
one should go to Gaya alone. O unblemished one! Mahanadi is there and also Gayashira. There is also a banyan
tree, celebrated by the brahmanas as Akshayakarana.334 O lord! The food that is given to the ancestors there, becomes inexhaustible. A great river named Phalgu ﬂows there and its waters are sacred. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! There is also Koushiki, with many roots and fruit. Vishvamitra, rich in austerities, became a brahmana
there. The sacred river Ganga is there. O son! Bhagiratha performed many sacriﬁces on its banks and gave away a
lot of gifts.
‘“O Kouravya! It is said that there is Utpala in Panchala. Koushika Vishvamitra335 performed a sacriﬁce there
with Shakra. On witnessing Vishvamitra’s superhuman powers, Jamadagni’s illustrious son recounted his lineage
there.336 In Kanyakubja,337 Koushika drank soma with Indra and withdrawing himself from the kshatriya class,
announced that he was a brahmana. O brave one! There is the conﬂuence of the Ganga and the Yamuna, renowned
in the world. It is pure and sacred, supreme among purifying places, and is visited by the sages. In earlier times,
the grandfather,338 the soul of all beings, performed a sacriﬁce there. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! That
is the reason it has become famous as Prayaga.339 O Indra among kings! O king! There is Agastya’s supreme and
great hermitage. There is the peak named Hiranyabindu on Kalanjara. O king! There is another mountain that is
more pure and sacred than all other mountains. O Kouravya! This is the great-souled Bhargava’s340 Mahendra. O
Kounteya! O Yudhishthira! In earlier times, the grandfather performed a sacriﬁce there and the sacred Bhagirathi
was where the ofﬁciating priests were seated. O lord of the earth! The sacred and famous Brahmashala341 is there.

Its mere sight is pure and its banks are crowded by those whose sins have been cleansed. There is also the pure,
auspicious, eternal, supreme and great hermitage of the great-souled Matanga, famous in the world by the name of
Kedara. The beautiful Kundoda mountain has roots, fruits and water. The thirsty nishada342 found water and shelter there. There is the beautiful grove of the gods there, adorned with ascetics. There are the rivers Bahuda and
Nanda, on the peak of the mountain. O great king! I have recounted for you tirthas, rivers, mountains and sacred
spots that are in the eastern direction. Now hear from me about sacred tirthas, rivers and mountains in the other
three directions.”’
383(86)

‘Dhoumya said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Now listen to the sacred tirthas in the southern direction. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will recount them in detail, to the best of my intelligence. In this direction is
the sacred and auspicious river Godavari. It is pure, has many places to rest and a lot of water, and is frequented by
ascetics. There are the rivers Venna and Bhimarathi, both capable of destroying the fear of sin. They are full of animals and birds and are adorned with the habitations of ascetics. O bull among the Bharata lineage! There is the river of rajarshi Nriga, lord of the earth. This is the Payoshni, with beautiful tirthas and a lot of water, and frequented
by brahmanas. The immensely ascetic and great yogi Markandeya sang the praises of Nriga’s lineage here. We
have heard that this really happened when Nriga performed a sacriﬁce. Indra became drunk with soma and brahmanas with their gifts. O best of the Bharata lineage! On Mount Varunasrotasa, there is the sacred and pure forest
of Mathara, with many roots and fruit. This has a sacriﬁcial stake. It is said that to the north of Praveni, there is
Kanva’s sacred hermitage and there are many forests inhabited by ascetics. O son! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Two sacriﬁcial altars of the great-souled Jamadagni are in Shurparka—Pashana tirtha and Purashchandra. O
Kounteya! In Martya, there is Ashoka tirtha, with many hermitages. O Yudhishthira! In Pandya, there are the
tirthas known as Agasyta and Varuna. O bull among men! In Pandya, there is the sacred one known as Kumari.343
‘“O Kounteya! Listen as I now recount Tamraparni.344 The gods underwent austerities there, in a desire to attain greatness. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Gokarna is famous in the three worlds. O son! There is a lot of
water there and the water is cool. It is sacred and auspicious. The lake is extremely difﬁcult to access for men who
have not puriﬁed their souls. Near that is the sacred hermitage of Agastya’s disciple, on Mount Devasabha. It is
full of fruits and roots and is known as Trinasomagni. There is Mount Vaidurya, auspicious and beautiful, and full
of many gems. Agastya’s hermitage is there, with a lot of roots, fruit and water. O lord of men! I will now describe
the sacred spots, hermitages, rivers, mountains and lakes in Surashtra. O Yudhishthira! The brahmanas speak of
Chamasonmajjana there and of Prabhasa tirtha on the sea, belonging to the thirty gods. There is the auspicious Pindaraka, visited by the ascetics and the great Mount Ujjayanta, which brings swift success. O Yudhishthira! Narada,
foremost among devarshis, has recited an ancient shloka about this. Listen. ‘He who torments his body with austerities in Ujjayanta, on auspicious Mount Surashtra, frequented by animals and birds, attains greatness in the vault of
the sky.’345 The sacred Dvaravati is there. The ancient god Madhusudana, who is the eternal dharma, dwells there
in person. The brahmanas who are knowledgeable in the Vedas and those who are learned about the nature of the
soul say that the great-souled Krishna is the eternal dharma. It is said that Govinda is supremely pure among all
puriﬁers, most sacred among all things sacred and most auspicious among all things auspicious. Pundarikaksha,
the eternal god of the gods in the three worlds, Hari whose soul cannot be contemplated and Madhusudana dwells
there.”’346
384(87)

‘Dhoumya said, “I will now recount for you the sacred and purifying places that lie to the west, in Avanti. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is the sacred river Narmada that ﬂows in a western direction. It has priyangus347 and groves of mangoes and groves of cane. The sage Vishrava’s holy and famous habitation is there. The
lord of riches, Kubera, who has a man as a mount, was born there.348 There is a sacred and auspicious peak there,

by the name of Vaiduryashikhara.349 It abounds in green trees and there are divine ﬂowers and fruit. O king! On
the top of the peak there is the lake of a sage, with blooming lotuses and frequented by gods and gandharvas. O
great king! Many wonders are to be seen on that mountain. That sacred and celestial place is always like heaven
itself and is frequented by the devarshis. O destroyer of enemy cities! The rajarshi Vishvamitra’s river is there and
that sacred river known as Para has many lakes and holy tirthas. Nahusha’s son Yayati fell on its banks, in the
midst of righteous ones.350 Though he fell, he again obtained the eternal words characterized by dharma. O son!
There is also a sacred lake and Mount Mainaka. There is also Mount Asita, with many roots and fruit. O Yudhishthira! O Pandava! Kakshasena’s sacred hermitage is there and also Chyavana’s hermitage, famous everywhere.
O lord! With a few austerities, men can obtain success there. O great king! There is also Jambumarga, the hermitage of rishis who have controlled their souls. O foremost among those who have paciﬁed themselves! It is frequented by animals and birds. O king! O lord of the earth! There is Ketumala, which is most sacred and is always
crowded by ascetics and Medhya and Gangaranya. There is the famous and sacred forest of Saindhava, frequented
by brahmanas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is the grandfather’s351 holy lake, by the name of
Pushkara. This is the beloved hermitage of vaikhanasas,352 siddhas and rishis. O best of the Kuru lineage! O
supreme among those who have performed good deeds! Prajapati himself chanted this verse in praise of Pushkara.
‘If a wise person desires to go to Pushkara even in his mind, all his sins are destroyed and he ﬁnds delight in the
vault of the sky.’”’353
385(88)

‘Dhoumya said, “O tiger among kings! I will now describe to you the sacred spots and purifying places in the
northern direction. O Pandava! The sacred Sarasvati ﬂows towards the ocean, with many pools354 and adorned
with groves. There is the immensely swift Yamuna. There is also the sacred and auspicious tirtha Plakshavatarana.
After undertaking a sacriﬁce to Sarasvati, brahmanas performed their ablutions there. O unblemished one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is the sacred, famous, divine and auspicious Agnishira. Sahadeva sacriﬁced
there, after throwing the sacriﬁcial peg.355 O Yudhishthira! It is because of this reason that Indra chanted a verse,
which is still prevalent in the world and is sung by brahmanas. ‘The ﬁres that Sahadeva lit along the Yamuna were
one crore356 and the gifts were hundreds of thousands.’ It was there that King Bharata, the immensely famous emperor, performed thirty-ﬁve horse sacriﬁces. O son! We have heard that Sarakasta, who satisﬁed the wishes of
brahmanas in ancient times, has an extremely holy and famous hermitage there. O Partha! O great king! The river
Sarasvati is always worshipped by those who are virtuous. In ancient times, the Valakhilya rishis performed sacriﬁces there. O Yudhishthira! The most sacred and famous Drishadvati is there. O lord of men! O supreme among
the Bharata lineage! The immensely sacred Vaivarnya and Varna, learned in the Vedas, learned in the rites of the
Vedas and wise in the knowledge that is in the Vedas, always performed many sacred sacriﬁces there.
‘“In ancient times, many gods gathered in Vishakhayupa, with Indra and Varuna, and performed austerities, so
that the spot became extremely sacred. There is also holy and lovely Palashaka, where the great rishi Lord Jamadagni, immensely fortunate and immensely famous, performed a sacriﬁce. All the best of rivers came in person
to meet the supreme rishi, each bringing its own waters, and stood around in servitude. O great king! Vishvavasu
himself went there and on witnessing the valour of that great-souled and brave one, chanted this shloka. ‘When the
great-souled Jamadagni sacriﬁced to the gods, all the rivers arrived and worshipped him with honey.’ O Yudhishthira! The place where the supreme peak of the mountain was swiftly splintered by the Ganga in Gangadvara
is made beautiful by gandharvas, yakshas, rakshasas and apsaras. It is the habitation of kiratas357 and kinnaras. O
king! This famous and sacred place is frequented by masses of brahmarshis. O Kouravya! Sanatkumara and sacred
Kanakhala are there and the mountain named Puru, where Pururava was born. Bhrigu performed his austerities
there, visited by masses of maharshis. O great king! That hermitage on the great mountain has become famous by
the name of Bhrigutunga.
‘“O bull among the Bharata lineage! The lord Vishnu Narayana is eternal and supreme among beings and is all
that is, all that was and all that will be. His glorious, holy and extensive hermitage Badari is there, famous and

renowned in the three worlds as a sacred place. Ganga, which carries warm waters, is different along Badari. O
king! It carries cool waters laced with gold. The rishis and the gods always come and show their obeisance to the
lord god Narayana, immensely fortunate and immensely energetic. O Partha! Where the supreme-souled eternal
god Narayana dwells, the entire universe and all its tirthas are also there. He is sanctity. He is the supreme brahman. He is the tirtha. He is the hermitage of austerities. The devarshis, the siddhas and all the other ascetics also
dwell there. Madhusudana is the original god, he is the great yogi. You should have no doubt that the place where
he dwells is the most holy among all that is holy. O king! O lord of the earth! These are the sacred spots on the
earth. O best of men! I have recounted the tirthas and purifying places. The Vasus, the Sadhyas, the Adityas, the
Maruts, the Ashvins, and the great-souled rishis who know about the nature of the brahman, frequent these places.
O Kounteya! If you go to these places with the bulls among the brahmanas and your immensely fortunate brothers,
you will discard all anxiety.”’
386(89)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Kourava lineage! While Dhoumya was speaking thus, the great and immensely energetic rishi Lomasha arrived. The king, who was the eldest of the Pandavas, his retinue and the brahmanas arose for the immensely fortunate one, just as the immortals arise in heaven for Shakra. Having worshipped
him in accordance with what is prescribed, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira asked him the reason for his arrival and the
reason for his travels.
‘Thus asked by Pandu’s son, the great-souled one was pleased and replied in soft words, delighting the Pandava.
“O Kounteya! While I was travelling all the worlds according to my wishes, I went to Shakra’s residence and saw
the lord of the gods there. I also saw your brave brother Savyasachi and was extremely astonished to see him share
half of Shakra’s throne. O tiger among men! On my seeing Partha seated in that fashion, the king of the gods told
me there, ‘Go to Pandu’s sons.’ Thus addressed, I have swiftly come to see you, with your younger brothers. I have
come because of the words of Puruhuta358 and the great-souled Partha. O son! O descendant of the Pandava lineage! I will tell you that which will bring you great delight. O king! Listen to my words, with your brothers and
with Krishna. O bull among the Pandava lineage! On your words, the mighty-armed one went out for weapons.
Partha has obtained from Rudra a great and unrivalled weapon. It is known as Brahmashira and Rudra obtained it
after great austerities. That terrible weapon arose with the ambrosia359 and Savyasachi has now obtained it, together with the mantras for withdrawing, repulsing and releasing it. O Yudhishthira! O descendant of the Kuru lineage! The inﬁnitely powerful Partha has obtained other divine weapons too—like vajra and danda—from Yama,
Kubera, Varuna and Indra. He has learnt from Vishvavasu’s son360 singing, dancing, the chanting of samas and
the playing of musical instruments, as is prescribed, according to the rules and according to the norms for learning.
Thus Kounteya has become skilled in weapons and has learnt gandharva veda.361 Bibhatsu, younger to your
younger brother,362 lives happily there. O Yudhishthira! I will now tell you the import of what the best of the gods
told me for your sake. Listen to me. ‘There is no doubt that you will go the world of men. O supreme among brahmanas. Repeat these words of mine to Yudhishthira.363 “Your younger brother Arjuna will swiftly return, after obtaining weapons, but after accomplishing a great task for the gods, which the gods themselves are incapable of.
Together with your brothers, devote yourself to austerities. Austerities are supreme and there is nothing greater
than austerities. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I know Karna exactly. In battle, he is not worth a sixteenth part
of Partha. O destroyer of enemies! I will dispel the fear that exists in your mind about him364 when Savyasachi
has returned. O brave one! You have a desire in your mind towards visiting the tirthas. There is no doubt that Lomasha will tell you everything about this. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Whatever the maharshi tells you
about the fruits of austerities and tirthas should be accepted by you as the bringer of welfare. It should not be otherwise.”’”’365
387(90)

‘Lomasha said, “O Yudhishthira! Now listen to what Dhananjaya has said. ‘O one rich in austerities!366 Make my
brother Yudhishthira devote himself to the prosperity dharma brings. You know about the supreme dharma and
about austerities. You also know about the eternal dharma that brings prosperity to kings. You also know about
other supreme things through which men are puriﬁed. Therefore, bestow on the Pandava the merits that come
through tirthas. Act with your entire mind in a way such that the king visits tirthas and gives away cattle there.’
This is what Vijaya367 told me. ‘Protected by you, let him go to all the tirthas. You should protect him from rakshasas in difﬁcult and uneven terrain. O supreme among brahmanas! Just as Dadhicha protected Indra of the gods
and Angiras the sun,368 protect the Kounteyas from rakshasas. There are many evil rakshasas who are the equal of
mountains. If you protect the Kounteyas, they will not be able to attack them.’ On Indra’s word and appointed by
Arjuna, I will travel with you and protect you from fear. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! I have visited the
tirthas twice earlier. With you, I will visit them for the third time. O Yudhishthira! O great king! Manu and other
rajarshis, the performers of good deeds, have visited the tirthas, the dispellers of all fear. O Kouravya! Liars, those
whose souls are not controlled, ignorant ones and the performers of evil acts do not bathe in tirthas, nor do men
whose minds are crooked. But your mind has always been devoted to dharma. You are always learned in dharma,
you are devoted to the truth. There is no doubt that you will be freed from all that is evil. O Kounteya! O Pandava!
You will become like King Bhagiratha, like King Gaya and like Yayati.”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “I am so overcome with delight that I cannot ﬁnd words to answer. There is no one greater
than one whom the king of gods remembers. Who can be greater than one who has your company, whose brother
is Dhananjaya and who is remembered by Vasava? O lord! You have spoken to me about visiting the tirthas. I had
already made up my mind, after Dhoumya’s words. O brahmana! Whenever you make up your mind about visiting
the tirthas, it is my certain resolution that I will also go to the tirthas.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Lomasha then spoke to the Pandava, who had already made up his mind. “O great king!
Travel light. If you travel light, it will be easier to go.”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “Let the brahmanas and ascetics who live on alms return, and the citizens who have followed me out of loyalty for their king. Let them go to the great king Dhritarashtra. In due time, he will give them
their due allowances, those that they have been used to. If that lord of men does not give it, out of affection for us
and to ensure our welfare, Panchala369 will give it.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Burdened with great grief, the citizens left for the city of the elephant,370 as did the brahmanas and the ascetics. Out of love for Dharmaraja, the king who was Ambika’s son371 received them and gave
them riches in the prescribed way. The king who was Kunti’s son lived happily in Kamyaka for three nights, with
Lomasha and a few brahmanas.’
388(91)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! On seeing that Kounteya was about to leave, the brahmanas who still resided in the
forest went to him and spoke to him. “O king! You are going to the sacred tirthas with your brothers and with the
great-souled devarshi Lomasha. O great king! O Pandava! O Kourava! Please take us with you. Without you, we
will never be able to visit them. O lord of men! They are uneven and difﬁcult of access and are frequented by
predatory beasts. Men in small groups cannot go to those tirthas. Your brothers are brave and are always skilled in
the use of bows. Under the protection of you valiant ones, we will be able to go there. O protector of the earth! O
lord of the earth! Through your favours, we will also obtain the auspicious fruits of tirthas and vows. O king! Protected by your prowess, we will become pure by bathing in those tirthas and cleansed of sin by visiting those
tirthas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! By bathing in those tirthas, you will also obtain the rare worlds obtained by King Kartavirya, rajarshi Ashtaka, Lomapada and the brave king and emperor, Bharata. O lord of the
earth! We wish to go with you and see Prabhasa and the other tirthas, mountains like Mahendra, rivers like Ganga
and giant trees like Plaksha. O lord of men! If you have any love for brahmanas, then swiftly do what we are asking you to. This will bring about your welfare. O mighty-armed one! The tirthas are infested by rakshasas, who always bring impediments in the way of austerities. Protect us from them. O lord of men! Visit the tirthas that have

been described by Dhoumya, the wise Narada and the great ascetic devarshi Lomasha. Visit them all in the prescribed way. Protected by Lomasha and accompanied by us, be cleansed of all sin.” Having been thus worshipped
by them, his eyes ﬁlled with tears of joy.
‘The bull among the Pandavas was surrounded by Bhimasena and his other brothers. He told all the rishis, “So
shall it be.” With Lomasha’s permission and that of the priest Dhoumya’s, the best of the Pandavas, self-controlled,
made up his mind to leave, with his brothers and with Droupadi, unblemished of form. At that time, the immensely
fortunate Vyasa, Narada and Parvata, all of them extremely intelligent, appeared before the Pandava in Kamyaka,
desirious of seeing him. King Yudhishthira worshipped them in accordance with the proper rites. When they had
been worshipped, the immensely fortunate ones spoke to Yudhishthira. “O Yudhishthira! O twins! O Bhima! Banish all that is evil from your minds. Be clean and pure and go to the tirthas. The brahmanas have said that control
of the body is the vow for humans. The brahmanas say that puriﬁcation of the mind and the intelligence is the vow
for gods. O lord of men! A mind that is clean is enough for brave ones. Therefore, bear friendship in your minds
and puriﬁed, go to the tirthas. Use your mental powers to purify and control your bodies through vows. Resort to
the vows of the gods and you will obtain the fruits that have been recounted.” The Pandavas and Krishna promised
that it would be this way. Their journey was blessed by all the sages, divine and human. O Indra among kings!
They then touched Lomasha’s feet and those of Dvaipayana, Narada and devarshi Parvata. Accompanied by
Dhoumya and other denizens of the forest, the brave ones departed when the full moon night of Margashirsha372
was over and Pushya373 was in the ascendant. They were attired in tough bark and deerskin. Their hair was matted. Clad in impenetrable armour, they set out to visit the tirthas. They were accompanied by Indrasena and the
other servants and had fourteen chariots. There were other attendants in charge of the food. O Janamejaya! With
weapons, with swords tied and with quivers and arrows, the brave Pandavas set out, their faces towards the east.’
389(92)

‘Yudhishthira said, “O supreme among devarshis! I do not think myself to be without qualities. But yet I am tormented by miseries, like no other king. O Lomasha! I think that my enemies do not possess any qualities. Nor do
they follow dharma. Why do they then prosper in this world?”
‘Lomasha replied, “O king! O Partha! You should never grieve that those who do not follow dharma achieve
prosperity because they do not follow dharma. A man may be seen to prosper, attain fortune and triumph over his
enemies, though he does not follow dharma, but will be destroyed, down to his roots. O lord of the earth! I have
seen many daityas and danavas prosper, though they do not follow dharma. But decay ﬁnally overcomes them. O
lord! I have witnessed all this earlier, in the era of the gods. The gods found delight in dharma, but the asuras gave
up dharma. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The gods visited the tirthas, but the asuras did not. As a result of
not following dharma, they were ﬁrst ﬁlled with insolence. Insolence gave birth to vanity and vanity gave birth to
anger. Anger resulted in a lack of shame and shamelessness destroyed their conduct. Because of their shamelessness, because of their lack of modesty, because of their evil conduct and because of their worthless vows, forgiveness, prosperity and dharma soon abandoned them. O king! Prosperity went to the gods and ill fortune went to the
asuras. When ill fortune overwhelmed them, they lost their senses because of insolence. Dissension possessed the
daityas and the danavas. O Kounteya! Overwhelmed by ill fortune and dissension and overtaken by insolence, the
danavas lost all their rites and intelligence. Overwhelmed by insolence, they soon confronted destruction. Overcome by infamy, the daityas were soon completely destroyed. But the gods went to oceans, rivers and lakes. They
followed dharma and visited other purifying places. O Pandava! They observed austerities and sacriﬁces and gave
gifts and benedictions. They discarded all sin and ensured their welfare. Thus, they were generous and always observed rites. They went to the tirthas. Therefore, they obtained supreme prosperity. O Indra among kings! Like
that, you will also bathe in the tirthas with your younger brothers. You will also regain prosperity. That is the eternal path. O lord of the earth! Just as King Nriga, Shibi and Oushinara, Bhagiratha, Vasumana, Gaya, Puru and Pururava were puriﬁed, through always observing austerities, touching water and visiting tirthas and seeing greatsouled ones, you will also obtain fame and pure riches. O Indra among kings! Like that, you will also obtain great
prosperity. Like Ikshvaku with his sons, subjects and relatives, like Muchukunda, Mandhata and King Marutta ob-

tained pure fame, like the gods with their power of austerities, like the devarshis, you will also obtain it. But the
sons of Dhritarashtra are enslaved by insolence and delusion. There is no doubt that they will soon be destroyed
like the daityas.”’
390(93)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O protector of the earth! Then those heroes, with the others,374 lived here and there, and
eventually arrived at the Naimisha forest. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Pandavas performed
their ablutions at the sacred tirtha of Gomati and donated cattle and riches. The Kouravas repeatedly satisﬁed the
gods, the ancestors and the brahmanas at Kanya tirtha, Ashva tirtha375 and Gava tirtha.376 O lord of the earth!
After staying in Valakoti on Mount Vrishaprastha, all the Pandavas bathed in Bahuda. O lord of the earth! They offered sacriﬁces to the gods in Prayaga, the sacriﬁcial ground of the gods. Devoted to the truth, they cleaned their
bodies and performed supreme austerities at the conﬂuence of the Ganga and the Yamuna. Having been cleansed
of sin, those great-souled ones gave a lot of riches to brahmanas. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Together with the brahmanas, those sons of Pandu then went to Prajapati’s377 altar, frequented by ascetics. The brave
ones lived there, performing supreme austerities. They always satisﬁed the brahmanas with offerings obtained
from the forest. They then went to Mahidhara, worshipped by rajarshi Gaya, unrivalled in radiance, learned in
dharma and the performer of pure deeds. The lake Gayashira is there and the sacred Mahanadi. The extremely sacred and supreme Brahmasara378 is there, frequented by rishis. There the illustrious Agastya went to
Vaivasvata.379 O king! That is where eternal Dharma himself lived. O lord of the earth! All the rivers originate
from there. That is where Mahadeva, the wielder of the pinaka, is always present.380 The great Akshayavata is
there and the Pandavas performed chaturmasya381 and the great sacriﬁce of the rishis there. Hundreds of brahmanas, rich in austerities, came there and performed the chaturmasya sacriﬁce in accordance with the rites laid
down by the rishis. The learned brahmanas, learned in the Vedas and always devoted to austerities, talked about
sacred accounts, while they were seated in the sacriﬁcial ground of those great-souled ones.
‘O king! There was a brahmana named Shamatha. He was learned and immersed in vows and celibate. He spoke
about Gaya, the son of Amurtarayas. “O descendant of the Bharata lineage!382 Gaya, the son of Amurtarayas, is
supreme among rajarshis. Listen to me as I recount his virtuous deeds. O king! His sacriﬁce had a lot of food and a
lot of stipends. There were mountains of food, in hundreds and thousands. There were several hundred rivers of
ghee and curd. There were thousands of ﬂows of rich condiments. O king! Day after day, they were given to those
who asked for them. The brahmanas ate special food that was cooked well. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
When the time came for distributing gifts, the sound of the brahman rose up to heaven. Nothing could be heard but
for the sound of the brahman. O king! The sacred sound travelled through the earth, the sky and the ﬁrmament and
ﬁlled them and it was extraordinary. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Satisﬁed with the pure food and drink, men
sung a verse that radiated in every region. ‘Who is there among beings who still wishes to eat at Gaya’s sacriﬁce?
There are still twenty-ﬁve mountains of food left. No men earlier, nor men hereafter, will do what the immensely
radiant rajarshi Gaya did at this sacriﬁce. The gods have been extremely satisﬁed by the offerings tendered by
Gaya. They will never be able to accept anything offered by others.’ O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Many such
verses were sung at the sacriﬁce of the great-souled one, near the banks of the lake.”’
391(94)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Then King Kounteya, the giver of many gifts, departed. He went to Agastya’s hermitage and
lived in Durjaya. The king asked Lomasha, supreme among eloquent ones, “Why was Vatapi immolated by
Agastya here? What was the power of that daitya, killer of humans? What excited the anger of that great-souled
one?”
‘Lomasha replied, “O descendant of the Kourava lineage! There was once a daitya named Ilvala. In earlier
times, he lived in the city of Manimati and Vatapi was his younger brother. That son of Diti once spoke to a brah-

mana who had the power of austerities. ‘O illustrious one! Grant me a son who is Indra’s equal.’ Since the brahmana did not give him a son who was Vasava’s equal, the asura became extremely angry with the brahmana. If
he383 summoned with his words anyone who had gone to Vaivasvata’s384 world, that person would regain his
body and be seen to be alive. He changed the asura Vatapi and cooked him well. He fed this to the brahmana and
summoned him385 back. O lord of the earth! O king! The great asura Vatapi smilingly ripped the brahmana’s side
apart and emerged. O king! He thus fed brahmanas again and again. The evil-minded daitya Ilvala caused violence
to them.
‘“At that time, the illustrious Agastya saw his ancestors hanging in a cave, with their faces downwards. He
asked them, ‘Why are you hanging upside down like this?’ The ones learned in the nature of the brahman replied,
‘For the sake of offspring.’ They told him, ‘We are your ancestors. We have reached this cave and are hanging upside down for the sake of offspring. O Agastya! If you give birth to excellent offspring for our sake, we will be
freed from this hell. O son! You will also attain the supreme objective.’ The energetic one, always devoted to the
dharma of truth, told them, ‘O forefathers! I will do what you desire. Remove the fever from your minds.’ Then
the illustrious rishi began to think about offspring. He could not see a ﬁt enough lady in whom he could procreate
himself.386 He then chose those limbs from different beings that are regarded as unsurpassed. Collecting those
limbs, he created a supreme woman. Having created her for himself, the immensely ascetic sage gave her to the
king of Vidarbha, who was desirous of offspring.387 The immensely fortunate one was born there, as radiant as
lightning. She grew and her face was beautiful, her body was handsome. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As
soon as she was born, on seeing her, the king of Vidarbha was delighted and announced this to the brahmanas. O
lord of the earth! All those brahmanas blessed her. The brahmanas gave her the name of Lopamudra. O great king!
She grew up and her beauty was supreme. She swiftly grew, like a lotus in the water, or the auspicious crest of a
ﬁre. O Indra among kings! When she attained her youth, one hundred maidens adorned with ornaments and one
hundred female servants served the beautiful one, attending to her instructions. O lord! Surrounded by the one hundred female servants and in the midst of the one hundred maidens, that energetic maiden blazed like Rohini388 in
the sky. When she attained her youth, though she was good in conduct and manners, no man asked for her hand,
out of fear for the great-souled one.389 The truthful maiden surpassed the apsaras in her beauty. She satisﬁed her
father and her relatives with her good conduct. On seeing that Vidarbha’s daughter was accomplished and had attained her youth, the father began to think in his mind, ‘To whom shall I give my daughter?’”’
392(95)

‘Lomasha said, “When Agastya thought that she had become capable of leading a householder’s life, he went to
Vidarbha, lord of the earth and said, ‘O king! I have decided to be a householder for the sake of a son. O lord of
the earth! I am asking for Lopamudra. Bestow her on me.’ Having been thus addressed by the sage, the lord of the
earth lost his senses. He was incapable of refusing and he was unwilling to give. The lord of the earth went to his
wife and told her, ‘The maharshi is full of valour. If angered, the ﬂames of his curse will consume us.’ At that time,
on seeing the lord of the earth and his wife thus miserable, Lopamudra went to them and spoke these words. ‘O
lord of the earth! You should not be miserable on my account. O father! Bestow me on Agastya and save yourself.’
O lord of the earth! On hearing his daughter’s words, the king bestowed Lopamudra, in accordance with the appropriate rites, on the great-souled Agastya.
‘“Having obtained Lopamudra as his wife, Agastya told her, ‘Throw away those expensive garments and ornaments.’ The long-eyed one’s thighs were like those of Rambha.390 The garments were beautiful to see, expensive
and ﬁne. But at that, she discarded them. She donned bark and skins and rags. The long-eyed one became an equal
in her vows. On going to Gangadvara, together with the wife who was devoted to him, the illustrious one, supreme
among rishis, undertook severe austerities. She then served her husband with love and respect. The illustrious
Agastya also exhibited great affection towards his wife. O lord of the earth! Thus, a lot of time passed. One day,
the illustrious rishi saw Lopamudra after a bath. She was radiant in her austerities. He was pleased with her servi-

tude, her purity and her self-control. He was pleased with her loveliness and her beauty and summoned her for
intercourse.
‘“Then the beautiful one joined her hands in salutation, and as if in shame, spoke these words of love to the illustrious one. ‘There is no doubt that a husband marries a wife for the sake of offspring. O rishi! But you should
act towards me in accordance with the love I bear towards you. O brahmana! You should come to me on a bed like
the bed in my father’s house, in his palace. I desire that you should be garlanded and adorned in ornaments. I wish
to be adorned in divine ornaments that please me.’ Agastya replied, ‘O Lopamudra! O one with the beautiful
waist! O fortunate one! I do not possess riches that are equal to those of your father.’ Lopamudra said, ‘O great
lord! In an instant, through your austerities, you can bring all the riches that can be found in the world of the living.’ Agastya replied, ‘What you say is true. But that will fritter away my austerities. Ask me to do that which will
not waste my austerities.’ Lopamudra said, ‘O one rich in austerities! Only a little bit of my season is left. I do not
wish to come to you in any other way. O one rich in austerities! I do not wish your dharma to be destroyed in any
way. You should therefore do what I desire, while taking care of that.’ Agastya replied, ‘O fortunate one! O beautiful one! Your mind has decided in accordance with your desire. I will go. Stay here according to your wishes.’”’
393(96)

‘Lomasha said, “O Kouravya! Knowing that King Shrutarvana had riches greater than those of any other king,
Agastya went to him to beg for riches. Having heard of the arrival of the one who had been born in a pot,391 the
king went out with his advisers to the borders of his kingdom, to receive him with great respect. After having offered gifts to the guest in the prescribed manner, the king joined his hands in salutation and respectfully asked him
about the reason for his arrival. Agastya said, ‘O lord of the earth! Know that I have come to you for riches. According to your capacity, give me a share, without taking away from others.’ Giving him a complete account of his
income and expenditure, the king replied, ‘Now that you know, take from me whatever riches you desire.’ The
brahmana looked on both sides impartially. On seeing that the income was equal to the expenditure, he thought
that if he took anything away, he would cause oppression to beings.
‘“Therefore, taking Shrutarvana with him, he went to Vadhryashva. He received them at the borders of his kingdom, in accordance with the prescribed rites. Vadhryashva offered them the gifts due to guests and water for washing the feet, and with their permission, asked them the reason for their arrival. Agastya said, ‘O lord of the earth!
Know that we have come to you with a desire for riches. According to your capacity, give us a share, without taking away from others.’ Then the king gave them a complete account of his income and expenditure and said, ‘Now
that you know, take whatever is left.’ The brahmana looked on both sides impartially. On seeing that the income
was equal to the expenditure, he thought that if he took anything away, he would cause oppression to beings. Then
the three of them—Agastya, Shrutarvana and King Vadhryashva—went to Purukutsa’s son Trasadasyu, the possessor of great riches. O great king! On hearing of their arrival, Trasadasyu received them, together with his mounts,
at the borders of his kingdom, in the prescribed manner. The supreme of kings from the Ikshvaku lineage showed
them his respects in the appropriate fashion. When they were comfortable, he asked them the reason for their arrival. Agastya said, ‘O lord of the earth! Know that we have come to you with a desire for riches. According to
your capacity, give us a share, without taking away from others.’ The king gave them a complete account of his
income and expenditure and said, ‘Now that you know, take whatever is left.’ The brahmana looked on both sides
impartially. On seeing that the income was equal to the expenditure, he thought that if he took anything away, he
would cause oppression to beings. O great king! Then all those kings looked at one another. Together, they spoke
to the great sage, ‘O brahmana! There is a rich danava named Ilvala on earth. Let us all go to him now and ask for
riches.’ O king! The thought of asking riches from Ilvala seemed to them to be a proper one. So they went to Ilvala
together.”’
394(97)

‘Lomasha said, “Having heard that the maharshi had arrived with the kings at the borders of his kingdom, Ilvala
went out with his advisers, to show them his respects. O Kouravya! The best of asuras offered them his hospitality.

He then cooked his brother Vatapi well. On seeing that the great asura Vatapi had been cooked as meat, all the rajarshis were miserable and lost their senses. But Agastya, supreme among rishis, told the rajarshis, ‘You should not
act out of despondence. I will eat up the great asura.’ Then the great rishi seated himself on the best seat. Ilvala,
king of the daityas, smilingly served him. Agastya then ate up all of Vatapi. When the eating was over, the asura
Ilvala summoned him.392 O son! But the great-souled Agastya only belched.393 On seeing that the great asura
had been digested, Ilvala was distressed. He joined his hands in salutation, and together with his advisers, asked,
‘Why have you come? Tell me what I can do for you.’ At that, Agastya smiled and replied, ‘O asura! We know
your powers and that you are the lord of all riches. These ones are not that rich and my need for riches is great.
Give us a share according to your capacity, but without taking away from others.’ At that, Ilvala bowed in obeisance before the rishi and told him, ‘If you know what I intend to give you, I will give you those riches.’ Agastya
replied, ‘O asura! You intend to give the kings ten thousand cows each. O great asura! You wish to give them that
much of gold. You wish to give me twice that much and a golden chariot. O great asura! You wish to give me two
steeds with the speed of thought. Go and ask and you will ﬁnd that the chariot is made of gold.’ O Kounteya! On
asking, it was found that the chariot was indeed made of gold. Miserably, the daitya gave them a lot of riches. The
horses Vivaja and Suvaja were yoked to the chariot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the twinkling of an
eye, all those riches were carried to Agastya’s hermitage.
‘“Agastya gave the rajarshis permission to leave. Then the sage did all that Lopamudra had desired. Lopamudra
said, ‘O illustrious one! You have done everything that I had desired. Now beget on me a son who is supreme in
valour.’ Agastya replied, ‘O fortunate one! O beautiful one! I am pleased with your conduct. Listen as I tell you
what I am thinking about the offspring. You can have a thousand sons, or a hundred equal to ten each, or ten equal
to a hundred each, or one equal to a thousand.’ Lopamudra said, ‘O one rich in austerities! Let me have one son
who is equal to one thousand. One learned and virtuous son is superior to many who are not righteous.’ The sage
promised that it would be that way. At the right time, he faithfully united with his wife, who was his equal in conduct and devotion. When the embryo had been conceived, he went away to the forest. When he had left for the forest, the embryo developed for seven autumns. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the seventh year had
passed, an immensely wise son was born. He blazed in his powers and his name was Dridhasyu. That great and energetic rishi became that rishi’s394 son. The immensely famous one issued forth, as if reciting the Vedas and the
Upanishads and their branches. Even as a child, that energetic one used to carry loads of kindling in his father’s
house and thus came to have the name of Idhmavaha.395 On seeing him thus endowed, the sage was delighted. O
king! Thus did the ancestors obtain the worlds they desired. This is Agastya’s famous hermitage, adorned everywhere with ﬂowers. This is where Vatapi of Prahrada’s lineage was destroyed by Agastya. O king! His hermitage
is beautiful and possesses all the qualities. You should bathe as you wish in this sacred Bhagirathi.”’
395(98)

‘Yudhishthira said, “O supreme among brahmanas! I wish to hear about that wise maharshi. Tell me in detail about
Agastya’s deeds.”
‘Lomasha replied, “O king! O great king! Then listen to his divine, extraordinary and superhuman account,
Agastya’s powers and his inﬁnite soul. In Krita yuga,396 there were some terrible danavas, invincible in battle.
There were masses of them, famous as the Kaleyas, and they were extremely terrible. Arming themselves with
many upraised weapons, they placed themselves under Vritra. They pursued the gods, led by the great Indra,
everywhere. In ancient times, the thirty gods decided to act so that Vritra might be killed. Placing Purandara397 at
the forefront, they approached Brahma. On seeing all of them, their hands joined in salutation, Parameshthi398
said, ‘O gods! I know the task that all of you wish to undertake. I will tell you the means whereby you can ensure
Vritra’s killing. There is a famous, great and wise rishi by the name of Dadhicha. Together, go to him and ask him
for a boon. The one with dharma in his soul and virtue in his mind will happily grant it to you. If you wish for victory, all of you must tell him these words. “For the welfare of the three worlds, give us your bones.” He will give
up his body and give his bones to you. With those bones, fashion the ﬁrm and greatly terrible vajra. It will be large,

capable of killing enemies. It will be sharp and will have six sides. It will make a terrible sound. With that vajra,
Shatakratu will kill Vritra. I have told you everything. Do this without delay.’ Having been thus addressed, the
gods took their leave of the grandfather.
‘“With Narayana at the forefront, they went to Dadhicha’s hermitage. It was on the other bank of the Sarasvati
and covered with many trees and creepers. It resounded with the sound of bees, as if they were chanting sama
hymns. This mixed with the sound of male cuckoos and was alive with the noise of chakora399 birds. Buffaloes,
boars, swamp deer and yaks roamed everywhere, without the fear of tigers. Male elephants, with juices ﬂowing
down their burst temples, sported with female ones in the ponds and thundered in every direction. The place
echoed with the giant roars of lions and tigers. There were others that were hidden in caves and caverns. The place
was extremely beautifully adorned with these and was like heaven. It was to this hermitage of Dadhicha’s that the
thirty gods went.
‘“They saw Dadhicha there, as radiant as the sun. His beauty was resplendent, like the grandfather with Lakshmi. O king! The gods bowed in obeisance at his feet and saluted him. Then all of them asked for the boon, as Parameshthi had asked them to. At this, Dadhicha was extremely delighted. He addressed the supreme gods and said,
‘O gods! I will act today for your welfare. For your sake, I will myself give up my body.’ Having spoken thus, that
best of men, in control of his breath of life, gave up his life. As they had been instructed, the gods collected the
bones of the dead one. Delighted at the prospect of victory, the gods went to Tvashtar400 and spoke to him. On
hearing their words, Tvashtar was happy and began to work, carefully and diligently. He created the vajra, extremely terrible in appearance. Having constructed it, he happily told Shakra, ‘O god! This vajra, the best of
weapons, will today reduce to ashes the terrible enemies of the gods. Therefore, kill the enemy and having done
that, happily live in heaven with your companions.’ Having been thus addressed by Tvashtar, Purandara cheerfully
and respectfully accepted the vajra.”’
396(99)

‘Lomasha said, “Then the wielder of the vajra, protected by the strength of the gods, attacked Vritra, who had then
covered heaven and earth.401 He was protected on all sides by the gigantic Kalakeyas. With their upraised
weapons, they looked like mountains with peaks. O best of the Bharata lineage! In an instant, a great battle, terrorising the worlds, began between the gods and the danavas. Upraised swords clashed, wielded by the arms of warriors and directed at each other’s bodies, creating a great sound. O lord of the earth! Heads descended from the sky
onto the ground and looked like palm fruit loosened from their stalks. Clad in golden armour and armed with
maces, the Kaleyas402 rushed at the thirty gods, like mountains on ﬁre. Unable to withstand the force of this onslaught, the thirty gods broke their ranks and ﬂed in fear. On seeing them ﬂy in fear and Vritra increasing in power,
the thousand-eyed Purandara was greatly overcome by fear. On seeing Shakra afﬂicted with fear, the eternal Vishnu increased his strength by giving him a share of his own energy. Having seen Shakra thus protected by Vishnu,
all the masses of gods and the unblemished brahmarshis gave him their own energy. Thus empowered by Vishnu,
the gods and the immensely fortunate rishis, Shakra increased in strength. On knowing that the lord of the thirty
gods had been strengthened, Vritra let out giant roars. The earth, the directions, the sky, heaven and all the mountains began to tremble at this roar.
‘“On hearing that terrible and great roar, the great Indra was struck with extreme grief. O king! Immersed in
fear, he swiftly unleashed the great vajra, so as to kill him. Struck by Shakra’s vajra, the giant asura, wearing a
golden garland, fell down, like the giant mountain Mandara in ancient times, when released from Vishnu’s
hand.403 The supreme daitya was killed. But out of fear, Shakra ﬂed and sought refuge in a lake.404 In his fear, he
refused to believe that his hand had released the vajra. In his fear, he refused to believe that Vritra was dead. All
the gods were happy and delighted. The maharshis chanted Indra’s praises. The gods assembled together and swiftly began to kill all the daityas, who were tormented at Vritra’s death. They were killed by the thirty gods. In their
fear, they entered the waves of the ocean and the inﬁnite depths of the ocean, frequented by large ﬁshes and full of
gems. There they plotted and conspired about the destruction of the three worlds. Some smiled. Others were wise
in suggesting courses of action, each according to his inclination. In due course of time, they arrived at the terrible

decision that the ﬁrst act should be to destroy all virtuous and learned ones and those who were ascetics. ‘All the
worlds are supported by austerities. Therefore, austerities must swiftly be destroyed. Whatever virtuous ones exist
on earth, ascetics, knowledgeable in dharma and wise, their slaughter must swiftly be ensured. When they are destroyed, the world will be destroyed.’ Having thus arrived at this decision of destroying the world, all of them were
extremely happy. Varuna’s abode was full of jewels. They made it their citadel, among the giant waves.”’
397(100)

‘Lomasha said, “When they had sought refuge in the ocean that was Varuna’s abode, the Kaleyas began to act for
the destruction of the three worlds. In their wrath, in the night, they always devoured sages and virtuous ones in
hermitages and sacred places. In Vasishtha’s hermitage, the evil-souled ones devoured one hundred and eightyeight brahmanas and nine other ascetics. On going to Chyavana’s sacred hermitage, frequented by brahmanas, they
devoured one hundred sages who lived on fruit and roots. They thus acted during the night. During the day, they
entered the ocean. In Bharadvaja’s hermitage, they destroyed twenty brahmacharis who lived on air and water. In
this way, one after another, the danavas destroyed all the hermitages. Intoxicated by the strength of their arms and
overcome by destiny, the Kaleyas chased and killed many masses of brahmanas in the night. O supreme among
men! Nevertheless, though the daityas acted in this way towards hermits and ascetics, men did not know this. In
the morning, the bodies of sages, emaciated from restrained diets, would be seen, lifeless on the ground. The earth
was full of bodies without ﬂesh, without blood, without marrow and without entrails, with masses of bones strewn
like conch shells. The earth was covered with broken sacriﬁcial pots and ladles and the remains of agnihotra sacriﬁces. Oppressed by the fear of the Kaleyas, the world lost all enterprise. Studying of the Vedas and the uttering of
exclamations at the time of making oblations ceased. Sacriﬁces and rituals were destroyed.
‘“O lord of men! When men began to decay in this fashion, they were scared and in an attempt to save themselves, ﬂed in all the directions. Some entered caves and others hid behind waterfalls. Still others were so anxious
about death that they lost their lives out of fear. There were those who were brave and great archers. In great pride
and with great care, they tried to hunt down the danavas. But they could not ﬁnd them, because they had sought
shelter in the ocean. Failing to ﬁnd them, they were destroyed because of the exhaustion. O lord of men! The world
neared destruction and all sacriﬁces and rituals were destroyed. The thirty gods were extremely distressed. With
the great Indra, they assembled and consulted each other out of fear. They worshipped the unvanquished
Vaikuntha405 Narayana and sought refuge with him. Then the assembled gods spoke to Madhusudana, ‘O lord!
You are the creator, the sustainer and the protector. You are the world. You are the creator of everything, with
limbs and without limbs.406 O lotus-eyed one! In earlier times, when the earth was destroyed, for the welfare of
the world, you raised it up, in the form of a boar.407 O supreme among beings! In ancient times, you destroyed the
extremely valorous and ancient daitya Hiranyakashipu in the form of narasimha.408 The great asura Bali was incapable of being killed by all beings. In the form of a dwarf, you expelled him from the three worlds.409 The asura
who was a great archer was famous by the name of Jambha.410 He was cruel and the obstructor of sacriﬁces and
you ensured his destruction. Such are your deeds and they are too many to count. O Madhusudana! We are scared
and frightened and you are our refuge. O god! O lord of the gods! It is for this reason and for the welfare of the
world that we are bringing this to your notice. Protect the worlds, the gods and Shakra from this great fear.’”’
398(101)

‘“The gods said, ‘All the four types of beings411 prosper because of these favours. Having prospered, they prosper
the denizens of heaven through oblations.412 Thus the different worlds prosper, each depending on the other.
Through your favours, they are free from anxiety and are protected. Now this supreme fear has overtaken the
worlds. We do not know who kills the brahmanas in the night. If the brahmanas decay, the earth will also decay. If
the earth decays, heaven will also decay. O mighty-armed one! O lord of the universe! Through your favours, protect all the worlds, so that they do not advance towards their destruction.’

‘“Vishnu replied, ‘O gods! I know everything about the reasons behind the decay of beings. I shall tell you
everything. Listen and be free of your fever. There is a famous class of extremely terrible Kaleyas. Having sought
refuge with Vritra, they oppressed the entire universe. On seeing Vritra killed by the wise one with the thousand
eyes,413 they have entered Varuna’s abode, so as to save their lives. Having entered the terrible ocean, infested
with crocodiles and sharks, they kill the sages by night, with the intention of destroying the worlds. But they cannot be destroyed, since they have sought refuge in the ocean. You should therefore set your minds on destroying
the ocean. But except Agastya, who is capable of drying up the ocean?’”
‘Lomasha said, “On hearing Vishnu’s words about drying up the ocean, the gods took Parameshthi’s414 leave
and went to Agastya’s hermitage. There they saw Varuna’s great-souled son blazing in his energy. He was being
worshipped by the rishis, just as the grandfather is by the gods. Going to the great-souled and undecaying son of
Mitra and Varuna, seated in his hermitage among the mass of his austere deeds, the gods recited his praises. The
gods said, ‘In ancient times, you were the refuge of the worlds when they were oppressed by Nahusha. For the
welfare of the worlds, this thorn of the worlds was removed as the lord of the gods.415 Vindhya, supreme among
mountains, was angry with the sun and suddenly began to increase its height. But because it could not ignore your
instructions, the mountain ceased to grow. When world was covered with darkness, all the subjects were oppressed
because of their fear of death. But having obtained you as a protector, they attained the supreme objective. O illustrious one! Whenever we have been scared and frightened, you have always been our refuge. Therefore, we distressed ones are asking you for a boon. You are the granter of boons.’”’
399(102)

‘Yudhishthira asked, “O great sage! Why was Vindhya angered and why did he suddenly begin to grow? I wish to
hear about this in great detail.”
‘Lomasha replied, “At the time of rising and at the time of setting, the sun used to circumambulate the great
mountain Meru, the golden king of mountains. On seeing this, Mount Vindhya told Surya, ‘O Bhaskara!416 You
always go around Meru. Circumambulate me in the same way.’ Having been thus addressed, Surya replied to the
king of the mountains, ‘O mountain! I do not circumambulate him out of my own desires. He who created the universe has assigned this path for me.’ Having been thus addressed, the mountain was angered and suddenly began
to increase. O scorcher of enemies! He sought to obstruct the paths of the sun and the moon. Then all the gods assembled and, with Indra, went to Vindhya, the great king of the mountains. They tried to restrain him from what he
was doing, but he paid no attention to their words. Then the gods went to the sage Agastya, the ascetic who was
supreme among those who followed dharma and radiant in his valour, in his hermitage. The gods told him everything. The gods said, ‘Consumed and overcome by anger, Vindhya, king of the mountains, is obstructing the paths
of the sun, the moon and the nakshatras. O supreme among brahmanas! No one except you is capable of restraining him. O immensely fortunate one! Therefore, restrain him.’ On hearing the words of the gods, the brahmana
went to the mountain.
‘“He went to Vindhya with his wife and told him, ‘O supreme among mountains! I wish that you should create a
path for me. I have to go in a southern direction for some work. O Indra among mountains! Restrain yourself until
I return from there and you can then grow as much as you wish.’ O destroyer of enemies! Having made this agreement with Vindhya, Varuna’s son went towards the southern direction and has not returned till this day. Just as you
asked me to, I have told you everything about why Vindhya does not increase, because of Agastya’s powers.
‘“O king! Now listen and I will tell you how the Kaleyas were destroyed by all the gods, once they had obtained
a boon from Agastya. Having heard the words of the thirty gods, Mitra and Varuna’s son asked, ‘Why have you
come? What boon do you wish from me?’ Having been thus addressed, the gods spoke these words to the sage. ‘O
great-souled one! O maharshi! We desire that you should act so as to drink up the great ocean. We will then be able
to kill those enemies of the gods, the Kaleyas, with all their relatives.’ Having heard the words of the thirty gods,
the sage said, ‘For the sake of the great happiness of the worlds, I will do what you desire.’ Having said this, the
one who was rigid in his vows, went to the ocean, the lord of the rivers, with the gods and the rishis who were successful in their austerities. Men, nagas, gandharvas, yakshas and kimpurushas417 followed the great-souled one, in

a desire to witness the extraordinary feat. All of them went to the ocean, which was thunderous in its roar. It
seemed to be dancing with the waves that leapt up at the wind. It seemed to laugh with its foam, as it dashed
against the caverns. It was infested with many crocodiles and frequented by masses of diverse birds. With Agastya,
the gods, the gandharvas, the great nagas and the immensely fortunate rishis approached the great ocean.”’
400(103)

‘Lomasha said, “On approaching the ocean, the illustrious rishi who was Varuna’s son told the gods and the rishis
who had gathered with him, ‘For the welfare of the world, I will drink up Varuna’s abode. Swiftly make the
arrangements that are appropriate.’ Having spoken these words, the undecaying son of Mitra and Varuna began to
drink up the ocean in his anger, while all the worlds looked on. On seeing how the ocean was being drunk up, the
immortals, together with Indra, were extremely astounded and began to worship him by chanting his praises. ‘You
are the protector. You are the creator of the worlds. You ensure the welfare of the worlds. Through your grace, the
universe, with all the immortals, will be saved from destruction.’ While he was worshipped by the thirty gods, the
musical instruments of the gandharvas sounded in every direction. Divine blossoms were showered down on him.
The great-souled one made the great ocean bereft of water.
‘“On seeing that the great ocean had been rendered waterless, the gods were extremely delighted. Grasping divine and supreme weapons, and with uplifted hearts, they began to kill those danavas. They were killed by the
great-souled thirty gods, who were extremely strong and swift and roared out aloud. They were unable to withstand the force of the great-souled gods or bear that force. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Attacked by the
thirty gods, the danavas let out terrible roars. Being attacked, they could put up a tumultuous ﬁght only for an instant. They had already been burnt through the austerities of the sages who were pure in their souls. Therefore,
though they tried their best, they could not prevent being destroyed by the thirty. They were adorned with golden
armour, earrings and arm-guards. When they were killed, they looked extremely beautiful, like kimshuka
ﬂowers.418 O supreme among men! Those among the Kaleyas who were not killed, cleft the goddess earth and
sought refuge in the nether regions.
‘“On seeing the danavas killed, the thirty gratiﬁed the bull among sages with diverse praises and words. ‘O immensely fortunate one! Through your favours, the worlds have obtained great happiness. The Kaleyas, cruel in valour, have been killed through your energy. O mighty-armed one! You ensure the welfare of the worlds. Fill up the
ocean again, by giving up the water that you had drunk.’ Having been thus addressed, the illustrious bull among
sages replied, ‘The water has already been digested by me. Think of some other means and make your best efforts
to ﬁll up the ocean.’ Having heard the words of the maharshi, whose soul had been perfected, the assembled gods
were surprised and distressed. They took each other’s leave and bowed in salutation to the bull among sages. O
great king! All the subjects and brahmanas returned whence they had come. The thirty gods, together with Vishnu,
went to the grandfather. They consulted again and again about ﬁlling up the ocean. All of them joined their hands
in salutation and spoke about ﬁlling up the ocean.”’
401(104)

‘Lomasha said, “Then Brahma, the grandfather of the world, spoke to the assembled gods. ‘O gods! All of you depart, as you desire and as you wish. A great deal of time must pass before the ocean returns to its natural state. The
great king Bhagiratha will do this because of his relatives.’”
‘Yudhishthira said, “O brahmana! O sage! How did the relatives become the cause? How was the ocean ﬁlled
through Bhagiratha’s efforts? O one rich in austerities! O brahmana! I wish to hear this in detail. Tell me the
supreme account of that king.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having been thus addressed by the great-souled Dharmaraja, the Indra among brahmanas
recounted the greatness of the great-souled Sagara.’
‘Lomasha said, “A king named Sagara was born in Ikshvaku’s lineage. He possessed beauty, character and
strength and was powerful. But he did not have a son. O descendant of the Bharata linage! Having exterminated
the Haihayas and the Talajanghas and having conquered other kings, he ruled over his own kingdom. O bull

among the Bharata lineage! He had two wives who were proud of their beauty and their youth. O best of the
Bharata lineage! One was from Vidarbha and the other from Shibi. O Indra among kings! Desirious of obtaining a
son, the king performed great austerities, together with his wives, seeking refuge on Mount Kailasa. While he was
engaged in great austerities and immersed in yoga, he saw the great-souled Tryaksha, the destroyer of Tripura,
Shankara, Bhava, Ishana, Shulapani, Pinaki, Tryambaka, Shiva, Ugresha and Uma’s consort, the one with many
forms.419 As soon as he saw that granter of boons, the mighty-armed king, together with his wives, prostrated
themselves and asked for a son. Hara was pleased and told the supreme among kings and his two wives, ‘O king!
Considering the moment when you have asked me for a boon, sixty thousand brave sons who will be proud in war
will be born to one of your wives. O supreme among men! One son will be born to the other wife. O king! But
they will all be destroyed together. But you will have one brave descendant from the one who bears the single
one.’ Having spoken these words, Rudra instantly vanished. King Sagara also returned to his residence with his
wives, happy in his heart.
‘“O best of men! Then his lotus-eyed wives, Vaidarbhi and Shaibya, conceived. In due time, Vaidarbhi gave
birth to a gourd. Shaibya gave birth to a son who was as beautiful as the gods. The king then thought about throwing away the gourd. But he heard a voice from the sky, deep in sound. ‘O king! Do not act in haste. Do not abandon your sons. Take the seeds out from the gourd. Let them be carefully preserved in a warm vessel partly ﬁlled
with ghee. O king! You will then obtain sixty thousand sons. O lord of men! Mahadeva has decided that your sons
will be born in this fashion. Do not make your mind act contrary to this.’”’
402(105)

‘Lomasha said, “O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having heard these words from the sky, the king, supreme
among kings, respectfully acted as he had been asked to. O king! Sixty thousand sons were born to the rajarshi
through Rudra’s grace. They were terrible, the performers of cruel deeds and could travel around in the sky. Since
they were many in number, they oppressed all the worlds, even the immortals. Addicted to ﬁghting, they oppressed
the thirty gods, the gandharvas, the rakshasas and all other beings. Slaughtered by the evil-minded sons of Sagara,
together with all the gods, the worlds sought refuge with Brahma. The immensely fortunate grandfather of all the
worlds told them, ‘O thirty gods! With all the worlds, go back to where you came from. Within a short space of
time, a great destruction of the sons of Sagara will occur. O gods! Their own great and terrible deeds will bring this
on them.’ O lord of men! Having been thus addressed, the gods and the worlds took the grandfather’s leave and
returned to where they had come from.
‘“O bull among the Bharata lineage! Many days passed. The valorous King Sagara instated himself for a horse
sacriﬁce. Protected by his sons, his horse roamed the earth and reached the terrible-looking and waterless ocean.
Though they sought to protect it with care, it disappeared there. O son! Then Sagara’s sons thought that the
supreme horse had been abducted. Returing to their father, they told him that the horse had disappeared and had
been abducted. He told them, ‘All of you go and search for the horse in all the directions.’ O great king! On their
father’s instructions, they looked for the horse in all the directions, in places where there were no paths and everywhere, even in the bottom of the earth. Then all of Sagara’s sons assembled together, but could not ﬁnd the horse
or the person who had abducted the horse. They returned to their father, and joining their hands in salutation, said,
‘O king! On the king’s command, we have searched the entire earth, with its oceans, forests, islands, female rivers,
male rivers, caves, mountains and wooded regions. O king! But we have not been able to ﬁnd the horse, nor the
person who has abducted the horse.’ Having heard their words, the king was angered and lost his senses. O king!
Driven by destiny, he spoke these words to all of them. ‘O sons! Go away and do not return. Look for the horse in
each direction. Do not return without the sacriﬁcial horse.’ Accepting the command, Sagara’s sons began to search
the earth once again.
‘“Then the brave ones saw a yawning hole in the earth. Sagara’s sons entered the hole and began to dig there.
With spades and axes, they dug up the bed of the ocean. Being thus dug by the combined efforts of Sagara’s sons,
Varuna’s abode was ripped apart on all sides and suffered extreme pain. Asuras, nagas, rakshasas and diverse other
beings were killed by Sagara’s sons and screamed in pain. Hundreds and thousands of living beings were seen with

severed heads, without torsos and with their thighs, bones and heads shattered. Thus, they continued to dig in the
ocean, the abode of crocodiles.420 A great deal of time passed, but the horse could still not be seen. O lord of the
earth! In their anger, Sagara’s sons then dug the ocean in the north-eastern direction, until they reached the nether
regions.421 They saw the horse roaming around on the surface of the ground there and the great-souled Kapila,
unsurpassed in a mass of energy and radiant in austerities, like a ﬂaming ﬁre.”’
403(106)

‘Lomasha said, “O king! On seeing the horse, they shivered with delight. Driven by destiny, they showed no respect for the great-souled Kapila. O great king! Desirous of grabbing the horse, they dashed towards it in anger.
Kapila, supreme among sages, was angered at this. Kapila, supreme among sages, was known as Vasudeva. He
opened his eyes wide and created energy from them. That immensely energetic one burnt down the sons of Sagara.
‘“Having seen them burnt to ashes, the great ascetic Narada went to Sagara and told him. On hearing these terrible words from the mouth of the sage, the king was distracted for a moment. But then he thought of the words of
Sthanu.422 He thought about the horse. Then he reassured himself and summoned his son’s son, Anshuman, the
son of Asamanja.423 O tiger among the Bharata lineage! He spoke these words to his grandson. ‘My sixty thousand sons are boundlessly energetic. But on my account, they have been killed through Kapila’s energy. O son!424
O unblemished one! Your father has also been abandoned by me, for the sake of protecting dharma and for the
welfare of the citizens.’”’
‘Yudhishthira asked, “O one rich in austerities! Why did Sagara, tiger among kings abandon his own valorous
son, one who is difﬁcult to abandon? Tell me.”
‘Lomasha replied, “Sagara had a son famous by the name of Asamanja. He was born through Shaibya. He used
to grasp the weak and crying infants of the citizens by the hooves425 and throw them into the river. Overcome by
fear and grief, the citizens assembled together and with hands joined in salutation, all of them went and prayed to
Sagara. ‘O great king! You are our protector from fears like the wheels of the enemy. You should therefore protect
us from the terrible fear due to Asamanja.’ Having heard those terrible words of the citizens, the supreme of kings
was distracted for an instant. Then he told his advisers, ‘Let my son Asamanja be expelled immediately from the
city. If you wish to do that which brings me pleasure, perform this act swiftly.’ O lord of men! Having been thus
addressed by that Indra of men, the advisers swiftly did what the king had asked them to. This is the entire account
of how the great-souled Sagara banished his son for the welfare of the citizens. I will now recount to you everything about what Sagara told the great archer Anshuman. Listen to me.
‘“Sagara said, ‘O son! I am aggrieved that I abandoned your father, at the death of my sons and I am also tormented because I have not been able to obtain the horse. O grandson! Therefore, I am tormented by misery and am
deluded because of impediment to the sacriﬁce. You must bring back the horse from hell.’”426
‘Lomasha said, “Having been thus addressed by the great-souled Sagara, Anshuman sadly went to the place
where the earth had been torn apart. Through that path, he entered the ocean and saw the great-souled Kapila and
the horse. On seeing that ancient and supreme of rishis, he bowed down his head on the ground and informed him
about the task for which he had come. O great king! Kapila was pleased with Anshuman. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The one with dharma in his soul told him to ask for a boon. First, he427 asked for the horse needed for the sacriﬁce. Second, he asked for water to purify his fathers.428 The immensely energetic Kapila, bull
among sages, told him, ‘O fortunate one! O unblemished one! I will give you the boons you have asked for. Forgiveness, dharma and truth are established in you. Sagara will become successful through you. Your father has truly got a son. Through your powers, the sons of Sagara will go to heaven. Your grandson will bring down the threecoursed one from heaven.429 He will satisfy Maheshvara430 and purify the sons of Sagara. O bull among men!
Be fortunate and take back the sacriﬁcial horse. O son! Complete the sacriﬁce of the great-souled Sagara. Having
been thus addressed by the great-souled Kapila, Anshuman took the horse and returned to the sacriﬁcial ground of
the great-souled one.431 There he bowed at the feet of the great-souled Sagara and told him everything and he in-

haled the fragrance of his432 head. He told him everything that he had heard and seen and about the destruction of
the sons of Sagara. He told him that the horse had been brought to the sacriﬁcial ground. On hearing this, King
Sagara stopped grieving for his sons. He honoured Anshuman and completed the sacriﬁce.
‘“When the sacriﬁce was completed, Sagara was honoured by all the gods. He thought of the ocean, Varuna’s
abode, as his son.433 After ruling over the kingdom for a long time, the lotus-eyed one handed over the burden to
his grandson and went to heaven. O great king! Anshuman, with dharma in his soul, ruled over the earth, up to the
frontiers of the ocean, as his grandfather had. His son was Dilipa, devoted to dharma. Having handed over the
kingdom to him, Anshuman left. But Dilipa had heard about the great destruction of his fathers.434 Overwhelmed
with grief, he thought about their end. The king made great efforts to bring down the Ganga. But though he tried
with all his strength, he could not ensure the descent. He had a handsome son, devoted to dharma. He was known
as Bhagiratha. He was truthful and no one spoke ill of him. Instating him in the kingdom, Dilipa resorted to the
forest. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After obtaining success in austerities, in due course of time, that king went to the forest and then to heaven.”’
404(107)

‘Lomasha said, “That great king and emperor, a maharatha and a great archer, was the delight of the minds and
eyes of all the worlds. That mighty-armed one heard about the terrible destruction of his fathers from the greatsouled Kapila and how they had failed to attain heaven. With misery in his heart, the lord of men handed over the
kingdom to his advisers and went to the slopes of the Himalayas to torment himself with austerities. Cleansed of
sins, he performed austerities to worship Ganga. O best of men! He saw the Himalayas, supreme among mountains. It was adorned with peaks of many forms, decorated with minerals. It was embraced on all sides by clouds
ﬂoating on the wind. It was adorned with rivers, groves and ridges. It was infested by lions and tigers in its caves
and caverns. There were birds of diverse forms that sung diverse tunes—bhringarajas,435 swans, datyuhas,436
waterhens, peacocks, shatapatras,437 cuckoos, jivajivakas,438 chakoras with black-tinged eyes and those that
love their young. The waterbodies were beautiful and decorated with lotuses. They were ornamented with the
sweet notes of cranes. The ﬂat plains were frequented by kinnaras and apsaras. In all directions, the trees had been
marked by the sharp tusks of the elephants of the directions.439 The place was frequented by vidyadharas440 and
adorned with diverse gems. It was infested by snakes with virulent poison, their tongues ﬂaming. Some parts were
like gold, others glittered like silver. Some places were like a mass of collyrium. He reached these Himalayas.
‘“The best of men engaged in terrible austerities there. He lived for a thousand years on fruits, roots and water.
After one thousand celestial years had passed, the great river Ganga showed herself in personiﬁed form. Ganga
asked, ‘O great king! What do you wish from me? What can I give you? O best of men! Tell me and I will do as
you say.’ Having been thus addressed, the king replied to the daughter of the Himalayas.441 ‘O granter of boons!
O great river! My grandfathers, the sixty thousand great-souled sons of Sagara, were taken to Vaivasvata’s eternal
world by Kapila, while they were searching for the horse. They confronted Kapila’s energy and were instantly destroyed. Having been destroyed, they cannot reside in heaven until their bodies are sprinkled with your water. O
immensely fortunate one! Take my fathers, Sagara’s sons, to heaven. O great river! I am praying to you for their
sake.’ Having heard the king’s words, Ganga, worshipped by all the worlds, was extremely delighted with Bhagiratha’s words and replied, ‘O great king! There is no doubt that I will do what you say. But when I descend from
the sky to the earth, my force will be difﬁcult to bear. O king! There is no one in the three worlds who can withstand it, other than Nilakantha442 Maheshvara, foremost among the gods. O mighty-armed one! Satisfy Hara, the
granter of boons, through your austerities. The god will sustain my fall on his head. He will do what you desire for
the welfare of your fathers.’ O king! On hearing these words, the great king Bhagiratha went to Mount Kailasa and
satisﬁed Shankara443 through austerities. O king! After some time had passed, the supreme of men obtained from
him the boon that he would bear Ganga, so that his fathers might be entitled to reside in heaven.”’
405(108)

‘Lomasha said, “After hearing Bhagiratha’s words, to do that which would ensure the welfare of the gods, the illustrious one replied to the king, ‘O mighty-armed one! O supreme among kings! For your sake, I will bear the
pure, auspicious and divine river of the gods when she falls from the sky.’ O mighty-armed one! Having said this,
he444 went to the Himalayas, surrounded by his terrible attendants, who held diverse upraised weapons. Having
established himself there, he told Bhagiratha, best of men, ‘O mighty-armed one! Now ask the river, the daughter
of the king of the mountains. I will bear the best of rivers when she falls from heaven. Having heard these words
spoken by Sharva,445 the king bowed and began to meditate on the Ganga, his mind controlled. On seeing the
king meditating and Ishana446 established there, the one with the pure waters was suddenly dislodged from the
sky. On seeing her fall, the gods, together with the maharshis, and the gandharvas, the nagas and the rakshasas, assembled to witness the sight. Then Ganga, daughter of the Himalayas, infested with ﬁsh and crocodiles and full of
giant whirlpools, fell down from the sky. O king! Hara bore Ganga, the girdle of the sky. Falling on his forehead,
she looked like a garland of pearls. O king! Thus did the one who goes to the ocean divide herself into three
streams. Her water, ﬁlled with foam, looks like an array of swans. In some places, she is coiled tortuously. In others, she stumbles. In others, she speeds like a drunken woman, clad in a garment of foam. In some places, her waters raise a great roar, uttering the supreme of sounds. In this fashion, she performed many acts on falling from the
sky.
‘“On reaching the surface of the earth, she told Bhagiratha, ‘O great king! Show me the path that I should follow. O lord of the earth! It is for your sake that I have descended on earth.’ O best of men! Hearing these words,
King Bhagiratha went to the place where the bodies of the great-souled sons of Sagara were kept, so that they
might be puriﬁed with the sacred waters. Having borne Ganga, Hara, worshipped by the worlds, went to Kailasa,
best of mountains, with the thirty gods. Going to the ocean with Ganga, the king forcefully ﬁlled up the ocean,
Varuna’s abode. The king thought of Ganga as his daughter. His desires having been fulﬁlled, he offered oblations
to his ancestors there. I have told you everything about the three-streamed Ganga and how she descended on earth
to ﬁll up the ocean, which was drunk up by the great-souled one for a speciﬁc reason, and how Agastya brought
Vatapi, the killer of brahmanas, to his destruction. O lord! O great king! I have told you everything that you
asked.”’
406(109)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O bull among the Bharata lineage! In due course, Kounteya447 travelled to the two rivers
Nanda and Aparananda, the cleanser of sins and fear. On reaching Mount Hemakuta, the granter of health, the king
saw many extraordinary and unthinkable things. From mere words, clouds are created there and there are showers
of thousands of stones, so that people are saddened that they are incapable of ascending. The wind always blows
there and the gods shower down. In evening and in the morning, the lord who is the bearer of sacriﬁcial
offerings,448 is seen. The Pandava saw many such extraordinary things and again asked Lomasha about these extraordinary things.
‘Lomasha said, “O destroyer of enemies! O king! I will tell you as I have heard it earlier. Listen attentively to
me. An ascetic by the name of Rishabha lived on this Mount Rishabha. The ascetic was aged many hundreds of
years and was extremely prone to anger. On being addressed by others, he angrily told the mountain, ‘Shower
stones on whoever utters a word here.’ The ascetic summoned the wind and said that not a sound should be uttered. Thus, if a man speaks a word, he is restrained by the clouds. O king! Through such deeds, the maharshi performed some acts out of anger and he restrained others from being done.
‘“O king! We have heard that in ancient times, the gods came to Nanda and suddenly men assembled, in their
desire to see the gods. The gods, with Shakra at the forefront, did not desire to be seen. By erecting mountains,
they made the region difﬁcult of access. O Kounteya! From that day, men cannot even look at the mountain, not to
speak of ascending it. O Kounteya! One who has not performed austerities cannot see the great mountain, or climb
it. Therefore, control your speech. It was here that the gods performed great sacriﬁces. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Their marks can be seen even today. The durva grass here is like kusha grass449 and the ground is strewn

with it. O lord of the earth! There are many trees that look like sacriﬁcial stakes. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The gods and the rishis live there even today. Their sacriﬁcial ﬁres can be seen in the evenings and in the
mornings. O Kounteya! If one bathes there, one’s sins are instantly destroyed. O best of the Kuru lineage! Therefore, perform your ablutions there, together with your younger brothers. Then, having washed your limbs in Nanda, go to Koushiki, where Vishvamitra performed terrible and supreme austerities.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘The king and his companions washed their limbs there. Then they went to the sacred and
beautiful Koushiki, the river whose waters are auspicious.’

407(110)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O bull among the Bharata lineage! This is the sacred Koushiki, the river of the gods. Vishvamitra’s hermitage is resplendent here. This is the hermitage of the great-souled Kashyapa, famous by the name
of Punya. His son was Rishyashringa, an ascetic who had controlled his senses. Through the power of his austerities, he made Vasava450 rain. Because of his fear, the slayer of Bala and Vritra451 showered down at the time of a
drought. Kashyapa’s son, the energetic lord, was born from a deer. He performed a great and extraordinary deed in
Lomapada’s territory. When the crops were restored,452 King Lomapada bestowed his daughter Shanta on him, as
Savita did for Savitri.453
‘Yudhishthira asked, “How was Kashyapa’s son Rishyashringa born as the son of a deer? This is against the
norms of sexual intercourse. How did he acquire asceticism? Why was Shakra scared of that wise child? Why did
the slayer of Bala and Vritra shower down at the time of a drought? What kind of beauty did the princess Shanta,
rigid in vows, possess? How did she tempt him when he was in the form of a deer? It has been heard that rajarshi
Lomapada was a follower of dharma. Why did the chastiser of Paka454 not rain down in his territory? O lord! O
exalted one! Tell me all this exactly, and in detail. I wish to hear about Rishyashringa’s deeds.”
‘Lomasha said, “The brahmana rishi Vibhandaka had controlled his soul through austerities. He was as radiant
as Prajapati and his semen was always successful. Hear how the powerful Rishyashringa was born as his son. He
was extremely energetic and though young, was respected by the aged. He was born in a great lake. Going to the
great lake, Kashyapa stayed there for a long time, engaged in austerities. The rishi, worshipped by the gods and the
rishis, became exhausted. O king! There, when he was washing in the water, he saw the apsara Urvashi and spilt
his semen. O king! A thirsty doe drunk it up with the water and conceived. Whatever has been decreed by destiny
and laid down by fate must inevitably happen. From that doe was born a son, the great rishi Rishyashringa.455 He
was always engaged in austerities and grew up in the forest. O king! There was a horn on the head of that greatsouled one and because of that, he became famous as Rishyashringa. O king! Except for his father, he never saw
another man and therefore, his mind was always ﬁxed on brahmacharya.
‘“At that time, there was a lord of Anga famous by the name of Lomapada and he was Dasharatha’s friend. It
has been heard that, driven by desire, he committed falsehoods on brahmanas. That lord of the earth was then
abandoned by brahmanas. Without a priest, the king acted as he willed. The one with the thousand eyes456
stopped showering and the subjects suffered. The lord of the earth asked wise brahmanas, full of austerities, who
were capable of making the lord of the gods shower again. ‘How will Parjanya457 rain again? Show me a way.’
Thus asked, each of those wise ones expressed his own view. But one supreme sage among them told the king, ‘O
Indra among kings! The brahmanas are angry with you. Find a way to appease them. O king! Fetch the sage’s son
Rishyashringa. He lives in the forest, immersed in virtue, and is inexperienced about the female sex. O king! If that
great ascetic comes to your territory, I have no doubt that Parjanya will immediately shower rain.’ On hearing
these words, the king performed deeds to cleanse his soul. He went away and returned only when the brahmanas
had been appeased. On hearing that the king had returned, the subjects received him back. Then the lord of Anga
summoned his advisers, who were wise in offering counsel. He consulted so that endeavours might be made to
bring Rishyashringa. With the aid of his advisers, who were learned in the sacred texts, skilled in the ways of artha
and knowledgeable about policy, the unblemished one thought of a method.
‘“The lord of the earth summoned the foremost of courtesans. The king told the courtesans, who were skilled in
everything, ‘O beautiful ones! Find out some means of bringing the rishi’s son Rishyashringa to my territory.
Tempt him and gain his conﬁdence.’ Those women were scared out of fear for the king’s curse. They turned pale,
lost their senses and said that the task was impossible. But there was one among them who was old and she told the
king, ‘O great king! I will attempt to bring the one with the ascetic riches here. But you will have to ask for some
objects of desire that I have in mind. I will then be able to tempt the rishi’s son Rishyashringa.’ The king ordered
that everything she wished for should be obtained. He gave her a lot of riches and many gems. O lord of the earth!
She took several women with her, endowed with youth and beauty. Then she swiftly went to the forest.”’

408(111)

‘Lomasha said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! To ensure the success of the king’s objective, she contructed
a hermitage on a boat—both because the king ordered it and because it ﬁtted with her own wishes. It was beautifully adorned with many artiﬁcial trees with ﬂowers and fruit. It had many bowers and creepers that yielded succulent fruit to satisfy every desire. She made it extremely beautiful and enticing. That hermitage on a boat was beautiful, extraordinary and an unsurpassed sight. Then she moored the boat a short distance away from Kashyapa’s
hermitage. She sent out some men to survey the area frequented by the sage. Deciding on a course of action and
perceiving a chance, the courtesan summoned her daughter, who possessed great intelligence, and sent her to
Kashyapa’s son. That skilled one went to the hermitage and approached the rishi’s son, who was always engaged
in austerities.
‘“The courtesan said, ‘O sage! Is everything well with the ascetics here? Are there plenty of roots and fruit? Do
you ﬁnd pleasure in this hermitage? I have come here to visit you. Are the austerities of the ascetics increasing? I
hope your father has not diminished in energy. O brahmana! I hope he is pleased with you. O Rishyashringa! Are
you able to pursue your studies?’
‘“Rishyashringa replied, ‘You shine with radiance like the light. I think that you are worthy of showing obeisance. I will give you water to wash your feet, and according to dharma, fruits and roots to satisfy your desires.
Please be seated on this mat made of kusha grass, covered with black antelope skin and made comfortable. Where
is your hermitage? O brahmana! What is the name of the vow that you are observing, like a god?’
‘“The courtesan said, ‘O son of Kashyapa! My beautiful hermitage is three yojanas away, on the other side of
the mountain. My dharma is not to accept obeisance. Nor do I touch water to wash my feet.’
‘“Rishyashringa replied, ‘I will give you ripe fruit, bhallas,458 amlakas,459 parushakas,460 ingudas,461 dhanvanas462 and priyalas463 to satisfy your desires.’”
‘Lomasha said, “But having discarded all of these, she gave him extremely expensive food. This was beautiful
to look at and extremely tasteful and they were very pleasurable to Rishyashringa. She gave him fragrant garlands
and radiant and colourful garments and the best of drinks. Then she played, laughed and amused herself. She
played at his side with a ball, like a ﬂowering creeper that was moving around. She touched his body with hers and
embraced Rishyashringa again and again. She bent the branches and plucked the ﬂowers from trees like sarjas,464
ashokas and tilakas.465 Then, as if without shame, and overcome with liquour, she tempted the maharshi’s son.
Having seen the change in Rishyashringa, she pressed him again and again with her body. Then, pretending that
the time for agnihotra had come, she slowly went away, casting backward glances. At her departure, Rishyashringa
was overcome with desire and lost his senses. Because of his feelings for her, he felt emptiness. He sighed again
and again in distress.
‘“At that instant, Kashyapa Vibhandaka appeared. His eyes were tawny, like a lion’s. He was covered with body
hair, up to the tips of his nails. He possessed learning, conduct and meditative faculties. He approached and saw
his seated son, alone, immersed in thought, and with his mind disturbed. His eyes were raised up and he sighed repeatedly. Vibhandaka told his dejected son, ‘O son! Why has wood for the sacriﬁcial kindling not been brought?
Have you still not performed agnihotra today? Have the sacriﬁcial ladles been cleaned? Have you brought out the
sacriﬁcial cow and her calf today? O son! You do not seem as you used to be. You are immersed in thought and
have lost your senses. Why are you so dejected today? I am asking you. Who came here today?’”’
409(112)

‘“Rishyashringa replied, ‘A brahmachari came. He had matted hair and he was intelligent. He wasn’t too short and
he wasn’t too tall. His complexion was golden. His eyes were long, like lotuses. He was radiant, like a son of the
gods. His prosperous form was as radiant as the sun. His eyes were beautiful and black and white, like those of
chakora birds. His matted hair was blue, clear, fragrant and extremely long, and braided with golden thread. Like
lightning blazing in the sky, there were two receptacles under his throat. There were two balls under his throat.466
They had no hair on them and were extremely beautiful. His waist was thin around the navel. But his hips were ex-

pansive. Like mine, a girdle blazed from under his garment. But his was made of gold. That apart, there was an extraordinary sight—a tinkling sound emerged from his feet.467 Ornaments with a similar sound were also tied to
his wrists. They were like this string of rosaries, but made a musical sound. They made a sound whenever he
moved, like intoxicated swans in a pond. His garments were extraordinary to see. They were not like mine, but
were beautiful. His face was also an extraordinary sight. His words brought gladness to the heart. His speech was
like that of male cuckoos. When I heard it, it saddened the innermost parts of my heart. During the spring months,
the forest is fragrant when fanned by the wind. O father! Like that, there was a supreme and sacred fragrance when
the wind fanned him. His matted hair was tied neatly and arranged so that it divided his forehead into two equal
halves. His ears seemed to be surrounded by circles.468 They were coloured and beautiful of form. He held something that looked like a beautiful circular fruit469 in his right hand. It bounced repeatedly on the ground and rose
up again, in an extraordinary way. He hit it and whirled around. His body was like a tree stirred by the wind. O father! On seeing that son of the immortals, my joy became supreme and desire was born in me. He embraced my
body repeatedly. He grasped me by my matted hair and lowered my mouth. He placed his mouth on my mouth and
uttered a sound that brought great pleasure to me. He did not desire water for washing the feet, or the fruits that I
had brought. He told me that those were the vows followed by him. He gave me other novel types of fruit. I tasted
all the fruits he gave me. These are not as succulent as those. They did not have skins like these have. Nor did they
have seeds like ours. The generous one gave me liquids to drink. They were extremely ﬁne in ﬂavour. As soon as I
drank them, great pleasure engulfed me and the ground seemed to move. These are the beautiful and fragrant garlands that he tied up with silken threads. Having scattered them here, he left for his own hermitage, blazing in austerities. I have lost my senses at his departure. My body seems to be burning. I wish to go to him immediately. I
wish that he should always roam around here. O father! I shall go to him this very instant. Please tell me the name
of the vow observed by him. I wish to observe it, together with him. I wish to observe the severe and austere rites
practised by him.’”’
410(113)

‘“Vibhandaka said, ‘O son! These are rakshasas. They roam around in their extraordinary forms. They are unsurpassed in beauty and are extremely terrible. They always endeavour to create obstacles in the way of austerities. O
son! They assume beautiful forms. They assume different forms to tempt. Those terrible deeds are used to dislodge
the sages of the forest from the happiness of their worlds. Sages who are in control of their souls never serve them,
particularly if they desire the worlds of the virtuous. O one who doesn’t perform evil acts! Those ones of evil
deeds ﬁnd delight in obstructing ascetics and destroying their austerities. O son! Those liquids are for those who
aren’t virtuous. They are wine and desired by evil ones. These garlands, coloured, bright and fragrant, are not regarded by the learned as ﬁt for sages.’”
‘Lomasha said, “Having restrained his son and told him that these were rakshasas, Vibhandaka went out to
search for her. After searching for three days, he failed to ﬁnd her, and returned to his hermitage. When Kashyapa
again went out to gather fruit, as was the practice for hermits, the courtesan again returned to tempt the sage
Rishyashringa. As soon as he saw her, Rishyashringa was delighted. His mind was deluded and he told her, ‘Let us
go to your hermitage before my father returns.’ O king! Then she tempted Kashyapa’s only son into the boat and
unmoored it. She tempted him through various means and brought him to the king of Anga. That extremely beautiful boat was moored within sight of a hermitage. A beautiful wood was created near the bank and named Rajashrama.470 The king brought Vibhandaka’s only son and lodged him in the inner quarters. And he suddenly saw the
god471 showering rain, until the world was full and ﬂooded with water. His wishes fulﬁlled, Lomapada bestowed
his daughter Shanta on Rishyashringa. To counter the wrath,472 he instructed cattle to be placed on the roads and
the land tilled. Along the road that Vibhandaka would follow, the king placed many animals and warriors to look
after the animals. ‘When maharshi Vibhandaka arrives in search of his son and asks you, you must join your hands
in salutation and tell him, “O maharshi! These animals and this tilled land belong to your son. What can we do to
please you? All of us are your servants and await your command.”’473 Meanwhile, after gathering roots and fruit,

the sage who was exceedingly wrathful returned to his hermitage. He searched for his son and on not ﬁnding him
there, became extremely angry. Rent asunder by rage, he suspected that this was the work of the king.
‘“Deciding that he would burn up the king of Anga and all his possessions, he left for Champa.474 Exhausted
and hungry, Kashyapa arrived at settlements that were prosperous with cattle. He was honoured by the herdsmen in
accordance with the prescribed rites, as if he was a king, and spent the night there. Having received great homage
from them, he asked them, ‘O pleasant ones! Whose servants are you?’ All of them respectfully told him, ‘All
these riches belong to your son.’ He was thus worshipped in region after region and heard similar pleasant words.
Thus, his anger was greatly appeased and in a happy frame of mind, he approached the city of the king of Anga.
He was worshipped by that bull among men. He saw his son, like Indra in heaven. He also saw his daughter-in-law
Shanta there, looking like a ﬂash of lightning. Having seen the villages, the settlements of cattle, his son and Shanta, his extreme anger was paciﬁed. O Indra among men! Vibhandaka showed his supreme favours to that lord of
the earth. The maharshi, as resplendent as the sun and the ﬁre, left his son there and told him, ‘Having done everything that pleases the king, you will return to the forest once a son has been born.’ Rishyashringa acted according
to his words. He returned to where his father was. Shanta tended to him,475 like the devoted Rohini attends on the
moon in the sky, like the fortunate Arundhati waits on Vasishtha, like Damayanti on Nala and like Shachi on the
wielder of the vajra.476 O Ajamidha!477 Like Nadayani Indrasena was always obedient to Mudgala,478 thus was
Shanta towards Rishyashringa in the forest. O Indra among men! Driven by love, she tended to him. That sacred
hermitage is radiant here. The great lake, site of sacred deeds, is radiant here. O king! Having bathed here and purifying yourself, you will accomplish all your deeds and then go on to other tirthas.”’
411(114)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O Janamejaya! Then the Pandava left Koushiki and one after another, went to all the other
sacred places. O king! He went to the ocean, to the conﬂuence of the Ganga. He performed his ablutions in the
middle of the ﬁve hundred rivers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then, together with his brothers, the brave
lord of the earth travelled along the shores of the ocean towards Kalinga.
‘Lomasha said, “O Kounteya! This is Kalinga, where the river Vaitarani ﬂows. Here, under the refuge of the
gods, Dharma performed sacriﬁces. This is the northern bank, always frequented by brahmanas and inhabited by
rishis. It is a sacriﬁcial ground that has been made beautiful by a mountain. In ancient times, other rishis have also
performed sacriﬁces here and gone to heaven along the route followed by the gods. O Indra among kings! This is
the place where Rudra grasped the sacriﬁcial animal.479 O Indra among men! Rudra grasped the animal and said,
‘This is my share.’ O bull among the Bharata lineage! When the animal was stolen, the gods told him, ‘Do not
covet the property of others. Do not destroy all dharma.’ Later, they praised Rudra with sweet words. They satisﬁed him with a sacriﬁce and showed him honour. Then, discarding the animal, he followed the path traversed by
the gods. O Yudhishthira! Listen to what is said about Rudra. ‘As a result of their fear of Rudra, the gods resolved
that the supreme share of everything that was not stale would always be set apart for him. A man who touches the
water here, while reciting this verse, has the route of the gods as his path and sees it with his eyes.’”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Then all the immensely fortunate Pandavas, together with Droupadi, descended into
Vaitarani and offered oblations to the ancestors. Yudhishthira said, “O Lomasha! O illustrious one! O one rich in
austerities! Behold. As soon as I have bathed in this river, I have gone beyond what is human. O follower of good
vows! Through your grace, I can see all the worlds. This is the sound of the great-souled hermits, as they recite
their prayers.”
‘Lomasha replied, “O Yudhishthira! O lord of the earth! Keep quiet. The sound that you hear is at a distance of
three hundred thousand yojanas. O king! The beautiful forest that manifests itself here belongs to the one who created himself.480 O Kounteya! The powerful Vishvakarma performed a sacriﬁce here. At that sacriﬁce, the one
who created himself gave the earth, with all its mountains, forests and regions, as a stipend to the great-souled
Kashyapa. O Kounteya! As soon as she had been given away, the earth became dejected. In anger, she spoke to the
illustrious lord of the worlds. ‘O illustrious one! You should not have given me away to a mere mortal. Your giving

me away will be unsuccessful. I will go to rasatala.’481 O lord of the earth! On seeing that the earth was dejected,
the illustrious rishi Kashyapa paciﬁed her. O Pandava! She was satisﬁed by his austerities and once again emerged
from the water, establishing herself as an altar. O king! You can see it there, with all the signs of an altar. O great
king! Ascend it, and you will be extremely valorous. As you ascend it today, I will myself pronounce the benediction. O Ajamidha! As soon as it is touched by a mortal, this altar immerses itself in the ocean again. ‘Agni, Mitra,
the womb, the water, the goddess, Vishnu’s seed, the navel of amrita.’482 O Pandava! Having recited these truthful
words, swiftly climb up onto the altar.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘When the benediction had been pronounced on him, the great-souled Yudhishthira went
into the ocean. When he had done all that he had been asked, he went to Mahendra and spent the night there.’
412(115)

Vaishampayana said, ‘After the lord of the earth had spent a night there, he, together with his brothers, showed the
best of homage to the ascetics. Lomasha told him the names of all the ascetics who were there—the Bhrigus, the
Angirases, the Vasishthas and the Kashyapas. On meeting them, the rajarshi483 greeted them, with his hands
joined in salutation. He then asked Akritavarna, the valorous follower of Rama,484 “When will the illustrious
Bhargava Rama show himself to the ascetics? On that occasion, I also wish to see Bhargava.” Akritavarna replied,
“Rama knows everything in his soul and your arrival is already known to him. The ascetics see Rama on the fourteenth and the eighth lunar day. When this night is over, it will be the fourteenth lunar day.” Yudhishthira said,
“You are a follower of the immensely strong and valorous son of Jamadagni. Earlier, you have yourself witnessed
all his deeds. Therefore, tell us today how Rama vanquished all the kshatriyas in battle. Tell us everything about
how he did it and the reasons.”
‘Akritavarna said, “There was an immensely strong and great king in Kanyakubja. He was famous in the world
as Gadhi. He went to dwell in the forest. While he lived in the forest, a daughter was born to him and she was like
an apsara. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhargava Richika wished to marry her. Then the king told the
brahmana of the rigid vows, ‘There is a custom in our lineage, one that has been established since ancient times. O
supreme among brahmanas! Know that a thousand swift and white horses must be given as a bride price and that
they must each possess one black ear. O illustrious one! O Bhargava! But you cannot be asked to give this. My
daughter should be given to a great-souled one like you.’ Richika replied, ‘I will give you one thousand swift and
white horses, each with one black ear. Let your daughter become my wife.’ O king! Having promised this, he485
told Varuna, ‘As a bride price, give me one thousand swift and white horses, each with one black ear.’ Varuna then
gave him one thousand horses. The place from where the horses arose is famous as the tirtha of horses. In
Kanyakubja, on the banks of the Ganga, Gadhi then bestowed his daughter Satyavati on him and all the gods were
present there. Having obtained one thousand horses, having seen the inhabitants of heaven and having obtained a
wife according to dharma, Richika, supreme among brahmanas, pleasured with the slender-waisted maiden as he
desired.
‘“O king! When the marriage was over, the supreme of the Bhrigus came to see his son, together with his wife.
Having seen them, he was delighted. When the elder was seated, worshipped by the masses of gods, husband and
wife joined their hands in salutation and worshipped him. Then the illustrious Bhrigu was delighted and told his
daughter-in-law, ‘O fortunate one! Ask for a boon. I will grant what you wish for.’ She pleased the elder for the
sake of a son, for herself and for her mother. And he showed her his favours. Bhrigu said, ‘At the time of your seasons, you and your mother must bathe and observe the ritual for having a son. Then you must embrace separate
trees—she an asvattha and you an udumbura.’486 O king! But when they embraced the trees, they got them mixed
up.487 When Bhrigu returned one day, he realized the mix-up. The immensely energetic Bhrigu then told his
daughter-in-law Satyavati, ‘Your son will be a brahmana who will live the life of a kshatriya and your mother’s
great son will be a kshatriya who will live the life of a brahmana. His valour will be great and he will tread the path
of the righteous.’ But she sought her father-in-law’s favours again and again. ‘Let my son not be like this. I desire
that my grandson should be like this.’ O Pandava! He brought her satisfaction and said that it would be that way.

When the time came, her son Jamadagni was born. He was energetic and radiant and was loved by the Bhargavas.
O Pandava! The energetic one grew and surpassed many rishis in his knowledge of the Vedas. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! He was as brilliant as the sun and the knowledge of weapons was revealed to him, together with
that of the four types of weapons.”’488
413(116)

‘Akritavarna said, “The immensely austere Jamadagni devoted himself to the study of the Vedas. Through his austerities, he brought the gods under his control. O king! He went to King Prasenjit and asked for Renuka, and the
king gave her to him. When he obtained Renuka as his wife, the descendant of the Bhargava lineage returned to his
hermitage and with her aid, engaged in austerities again. Four sons were born from her and Rama was the ﬁfth. But
though he was the youngest, Rama was superior to the others.
‘“Once, when her sons had gone to gather fruit, Renuka, rigid in her vows, went to have a bath. She saw the
king of Marttikavata there, Chitraratha by name. On seeing the prosperous king, garlanded with lotuses, sporting in
the water with his wives, Renuka was ﬁlled with desire. Because of this unchaste behaviour, she lost her senses
and moistened herself. Frightened, she returned to the hermitage. But her husband got to know. He saw that she
had been dislodged from her constancy and that she had lost the beauty of purity. The immensely energetic and
valorous one reproached her with words of ‘Shame!’ Then Jamadagni’s eldest son, with the name of Rumanvat,
arrived—and then Sushena, Vasu and Vishvavasu, one by one. One after another, the illustrious one asked them to
kill their mother. But because they were deluded and had lost their senses, they said nothing in reply. He then
cursed them in great anger. As a result of the curse, they swiftly lost their minds and began to follow the conduct
of animals or birds, or that of inanimate objects.
‘“Rama, the destroyer of enemy warriors, entered the hermitage last. The great ascetic Jamadagni told him in
great anger, ‘O son! Kill your evil mother, without any compassion.’ At that, Rama grasped his axe and sliced off
his mother’s head. O great king! The anger of the great-souled Jamadagni was suddenly appeased. He said in a
pleasant voice, ‘O son! At my words, you have performed a difﬁcult feat. O one learned in dharma! Ask for anything you desire, as many wishes as may be there in your heart.’ Thereupon, he asked that his mother might live
again, that he should not retain any memory of the slaying, that he should not be touched by the sin, that his brothers might return to their natural state, that he might be unrivalled in battle and that he should have a long life. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! The great ascetic Jamadagni granted him everything that he wished for.
‘“O lord! One day, when the sons had gone out as before, the brave Kartavirya, the king of the region along the
shore, arrived. When he came to the hermitage, he was shown homage by the rishi’s wife. But insolent from the
madness of battle, he did not accept this homage. He destroyed the hermitage. Through force, he carried off the
sacriﬁcial cow’s calf, though it kept crying. He tore down all the large trees. When Rama returned, his father himself told him what had happened. On seeing the cow weeping, Rama was overcome with great anger. In great
wrath, he rushed towards Kartavirya. Bhargava, the destroyer of enemy warriors, bravely engaged him in battle. O
king! He grasped his beautiful bow and with his sharp arrows, sliced off his one thousand arms,489 each of which
was like a club. Arjuna’s heirs490 became very angry at Rama. When Rama was not in the hermitage, they rushed
at Jamadagni. They killed the immensely valorous ascetic, who refused to ﬁght and unprotected, kept calling out
for Rama. O Yudhishthira! Having pierced Jamadagni with their arrows, Kartavirya’s sons, the destroyers of enemies, departed. When they had gone away and Jamadagni had died, the descendant of the Bhargava lineage returned to the hermitage with ﬁrewood. The brave one saw that his father had been overcome by death. He was miserable and lamented the one who had not deserved to meet this fate.”’
414(117)

‘“Rama said, ‘O father! It is because of my sins that you have been killed, like a deer in the forest, by the arrows of
those mean and foolish wretches, Kartavirya’s heirs. O father! You were learned in dharma. You were always
steady in the path of the righteous. You did not cause harm to any beings. How did you deserve a death like this?

You were aged and you were unwilling to ﬁght. You were established in your austerities. What sins they must have
committed when they killed you with hundreds of sharp arrows. How can they tell their advisers and well-wishers
that they have killed a virtuous man who was unwilling to ﬁght?”’
‘Akritavarna said, “O king! Thus did he lament in piteous tones and in many ways. Then the immensely ascetic
one performed all the funereal rites for his father. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Rama, the vanquisher of
enemy cities, then burnt his father in a ﬁre and swore that he would destroy all kshatriyas. Extremely wrathful, immensely strong in battle and valorous, he then grasped his weapons. Alone, like the god of death, he killed Kartavirya’s sons. O bull among the kshatriya lineage! He then killed all the kshatriyas who were their followers.
Rama, supreme among those who wield arms, destroyed them all. That lord removed kshatriyas from the earth
twenty-one times. He built ﬁve lakes of blood in Samantapanchaka. The extender of the Bhrigu lineage offered
oblations to his ancestors there.
‘“Then Richika appeared before Rama in person and restrained him. Then Jamadagni’s powerful son performed
a great sacriﬁce. He satisﬁed the king of the gods and gave the earth to the ofﬁciating priests. O lord of the earth!
He constructed a golden altar that was ten vyamas491 long and nine in height and gave it to the great-souled
Kashyapa. O king! With Kashyapa’s permission, the brahmanas divided it into many pieces and they492 thus came
to be known as Khandavayanas. Having given the earth to the great-souled Kashyapa,493 the inﬁnitely valorous
one began to live on Mahendra, the king of the mountains. Thus did enmity arise between him and the kshatriyas
of this world. The entire earth was conquered by Rama, whose energy is inﬁnite.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘On the fourteenth lunar day, at the appropriate time, the great-souled Rama showed himself to the brahmanas and to Dharmaraja, together with his younger brothers. The Indra among kings worshipped
the lord, together with his brothers. The supreme of kings offered the highest homage to the brahmanas. Having
worshipped Jamadagni’s son and having been honoured in return, the lord spent a night on Mahendra and then left
for a southern direction.’
415(118)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The magnanimous king then went and saw many beautiful and sacred tirthas, some of which were along the shores of the ocean, and all of which were adorned by the
presence of brahmanas. O son of Parikshit!494 Pandu’s son bathed there and performed donations, together with
his younger brothers, who were the sons and grandsons of kings. He then went to a sacred and broad river. The
magnanimous one bathed there and offered oblations to the ancestors and the gods. Donating riches to the foremost among brahmanas, he went to Godavari, which heads towards the ocean. O king! Having been cleansed of
his sins, he approached the ocean, sacred to the worlds, in Dravida. The brave one saw the extremely sacred
Agastya tirtha and also Nari tirtha. There he heard the story of Arjuna’s feat, incapable of being performed by others.495 He was the foremost of archers. When he496 was worshipped by the supreme rishis, Pandu’s son derived
supreme delight. Accompanied by Krishna497 and with his younger brothers, he bathed his limbs in those tirthas.
Honouring Arjuna’s valour, the lord of kings found delight in the earth there. He donated one thousand cows in
those supreme tirthas that are always full of water. Together with his brothers, he happily recounted the story of
Arjuna’s donations of cattle. O king! One after another, he went to many sacred tirthas, those that were on the
shores of the ocean and others too. When all his desires were satisﬁed, he saw the most sacred Shurparaka.
‘Then, after crossing a region on the shores of the ocean, he came to a forest that is famous on earth. In ancient
times, the gods performed austerities there and kings regard it as the most sacred of places. There, he saw the altar
of Richika’s son,498 the one who was the foremost of archers and long and thick in the arms. It was surrounded by
many ascetics and was worthy of being worshipped by the virtuous. O king! The lord of the earth saw the holy
sites of the Vasus, the masses of Maruts, the two Ashvins, Vaivasvata,499 the Adityas, the lord of riches,500 Indra,
Vishnu, the lord Savita,501 Bhaga,502 the moon, Divakara,503 the lord of the waters,504 the masses of Sadhyas,
Dhata,505 the ancestors, the great-souled Rudra with his masses of ganas, Sarasvati, the masses of Siddhas,

Pushan506 and all the other immortals. The king saw these beautiful sites and observed fasts there. The king gave
away many expensive gems. Having bathed his limbs in all these tirthas, he returned again to Shurparaka. With his
brothers, he again went to the tirthas along the shores of the ocean. He then went to the great tirtha of Prabhasa,
acclaimed by brahmanas throughout the earth. With his younger brothers and with Krishna, the one with the large
and red eyes bathed there, and offered oblations to the masses of gods and the ancestors. So did the brahmanas, together with Lomasha. He lived on water and air for twelve days. He performed ablutions at dawn and dusk. He
surrounded himself with ﬂames on all sides. Thus did the supreme upholder of dharma scorch himself with austerities. Rama507 and Janardana got to know about his practice of severe austerities. The foremost of all the Vrishnis
went to Ajamidha Yudhishthira, together with their armies. The Vrishnis saw the sons of Pandu lying down on the
ground, their bodies smeared with dirt. On seeing Droupadi, who did not deserve this, they were extremely distressed and lamented loudly. But, strong in spirit, and in accordance with the prescriptions of dharma, he508 went
and offered homage to Rama, Janardana, Krishna’s son Samba, Shini’s grandson509 and all the other Vrishnis. All
of them also returned the homage to the Parthas and were welcomed by Pandu’s sons. O king! They seated themselves around Yudhishthira, like the masses of gods around Indra. Extremely happy, he told them about the deeds
of his enemies and about their dwelling in the forest. He told Krishna that Partha,510 son of the king of the gods,
had gone to Indra for weapons. They heard his words and were relieved. On seeing them lean and pitiful, the magnaminous ones from Dasharha511 were saddened and tears streamed down from their eyes.’
416(119)

Janamejaya said, ‘O one rich in austerities! When the Vrishnis and the Pandavas met in the tirtha of Prabhasa, what
did they do? What did they converse about? All of them were great-souled and they were skilled in the use of
every weapon. The Vrishnis and the Pandavas were well-wishers of each other.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having arrived at the sacred tirtha of Prabhasa, on the shores of the great ocean, the Vrishnis surrounded the heroic Pandavas and offered them homage. Then Vanamali Rama,512 the wielder of the
plough, the one who is as white as cow’s milk, the kunda ﬂower,513 the moon, the lotus and silver, spoke to the
lotus-eyed one.514 “O Krishna! The pursuit of dharma does not lead to good and the pursuit of that which is not
dharma does not lead to defeat. The great-souled Yudhishthira wears matted hair and is miserable in the forest,
clad in the bark of trees. Duryodhana is the ruler of the earth and the earth does not swallow him up. From this, a
man with limited intelligence will think that the pursuit of that which is not dharma is superior to dharma. When
Duryodhana prospers and Yudhishthira is in grief, robbed of his kingdom, what is the duty of subjects in the matter? This is a doubt that perplexes men. This was a lord of men whose power was dharma. He followed the path of
truth and dharma and was generous. Partha gave up his kingdom and his happiness. Should one forsake dharma
and prosper? After banishing the Parthas, will Bhishma, the brahmana Kripa, Drona and the king,515 the eldest of
the lineage, ﬁnd happiness? Shame on the evil-minded chiefs of the Bharata lineage! In the hereafter, what will
that evil chief of the earth516 tell his ancestors, when he meets them? Having deprived his innocent sons517 of the
kingdom, will he be able to say that he has treated his sons properly? He does not see with his intelligence the reasons behind his having been born sightless, among all the kings of this earth. It is because he banished the
Kounteyas from the kingdom. There is no doubt that Vichitravirya’s son,518 together with his sons, after the performance of this cruel act, will not see trees of gold blossom in the world of the ancestors. Yudhishthira and his
younger brothers are armed. They are tall, wide of shoulder and have red eyes. Did he not ask them and hear their
reply? How could he have fearlessly banished them to the forest? Without any weapons, the long-armed Vrikodara
can slay a large army of enemies. On hearing his roars, soldiers release their bowels and their bladders. He suffers
now from hunger and thirst and is emaciated from journeys. But when he meets them, he will have weapons and
arrows in his hands. He will then remember the extremely terrible dwelling in the forest. I am certain that he will
not leave any survivors. On this earth, there will be no one else who is his equal in valour and strength. He is now
thin from cold, heat, wind and sun. But in battle, he will not leave any survivors. Atiratha Vrikodara conquered the

kings of the east519 in battle, together with their followers, alone on a chariot and swiftly returned, unharmed,
even though he is now miserable in the forest and is clad in barks. Look now at Sahadeva, an ascetic dressed in the
garb of an ascetic now. In Dantakura, he defeated all the lords, the kings who had assembled from the south.520
This brave one,521 valorous in battle and alone on a chariot, conquered the kings of the west. He now lives in the
forest on roots and fruit. He now sports matted hair and has dirt smeared on his body. This queen,522 the daughter
of an atiratha, arose from a prosperous sacriﬁcial altar. She was always accustomed to a life of comfort and ease.
How can she endure the great misery of dwelling in the forest? These are the sons of Dharma,523 the wind, the
lord of the gods and the Ashvins. They are the sons of the gods and deserve to be happy. Deprived of happiness,
how can they roam around in the forest? Dharma’s son was conquered, together with his wife, his brothers and his
attendants, and was driven out. Duryodhana has begun to ﬂourish. Why did the earth, with all her mountains, not
collapse?”’
417(120)

‘Satyaki said, “O Rama! This is not the time for lamentations. That time is past. Even if Yudhishthira does not say
anything, let us all act according to what must be done now. There are those in the world who have protectors.
They do not need to act themselves. O Rama! In all their deeds they have protectors, like Shibi and Yayati. O
Rama! There are those who have to act themselves, but in their deeds, they ﬁnd protectors in this world. Those
brave ones among men are also protected. They never encounter difﬁculties, like those without protectors. The
Parthas have Rama, Janardana, Pradyumna, Samba and me, all capable of protecting the three worlds. How can it
be said that he and his brothers must live in the forest? It is appropriate that the army of Dasharha should march
out today, with many kinds of weapons and coloured armour. Let Dhartarashtra524 go to the eternal world of
Yama. Let all his relatives be overcome with Vrishni’s strength. In your anger, you can encompass the entire earth,
not to speak of the wielder of the Sharnga bow.525 Slay Dhartarashtra and all his relatives, like Vritra was destroyed by the great Indra, the king of the gods. Partha526 is my brother. He is my friend and my preceptor. He is
like Janardana’s own soul. It is for this reason that the best time has come. Let us perform this great and difﬁcult
deed. Through my supreme weapons, I will counter his527 shower of arrows. I will kill all of them in battle. O
Rama! With my supreme arrows, which are like the venom of serpents and the ﬁre, I will forcefully slice off his
head from his body. With the force of strength, I will use my sharp sword to slice off his head from his body in battle. Then I will kill all his companions, Duryodhana and all the other Kurus. O Rohini’s son!528 I will take up my
weapons on the ﬁeld of battle and bring joy to all the residents of earth. I will alone kill the foremost warriors
among the Kurus, like ﬁre burns down straw at the great time of destruction. Nor will Kripa, Drona, Vikarna and
Karna be able to withstand the sharp arrows shot by Pradyumna. I know the valour of your son.529 I know the action of Krishna’s son in battle.530 Let Samba use the strength of his arms to subdue Duhshasana, with his chariot
and his charioteer. When he is maddened in battle, there is no one who can withstand Jambavati’s son in battle.
When he was still a child, he suddenly destroyed Shambara’s daitya army.531 Ashvachakra’s thighs were round
and his arms were long and thick. He killed him in battle.532 Where is the man who can go elsewhere, once Samba has grasped him in his arms in battle? If the time has come, a man who is in the clutches of death can never escape. Like that, once one has entered the clutches of battle, who can escape with his life? The two maharathas
Drona and Bhishma, Somadatta surrounded by his sons, and all their armies, will be burnt down by Vasudeva’s
ﬂaming arrows. Who is there in all the worlds, including the gods, whom Krishna cannot withstand? When he
grasps his weapons and holds excellent arrows in his hand, when he holds the chakra weapon, he is invincible in
battle. Let Aniruddha533 hold his sword and shield in his hands. Let him bedeck the earth with Dhritarashtra’s
sons—their heads severed from their bodies and dead, like a sacriﬁcial altar strewn with kusha grass. Gada, Ulmuka, Bahuka, Bhanu, the youthful Nishatha—heroes in battle—Sarana and Charudeshna, who are maddened in battle—they must perform deeds that are deserving of their lineage. Let the brave kshatriya armies, with the foremost

among the Vrishnis, the Bhojas and the Andhakas, kill the sons of Dhritarashtra in battle and earn extensive fame
in this world. Let Abhimanu rule the earth as long as the great-souled Yudhishthira, supreme among the Kurus and
best among those who serve dharma, fulﬁls the oath he swore at the time of the game with the dice.534 After his
enemies are vanquished by the arrows we unleash, let Dharmaraja enjoy the earth. There will be no sons of Dhritarashtra and the son of the suta535 will be dead. This is our most important task and it will bring us fame.”
‘Vasudeva said, “O Madhava!536 There is no doubt that what you have said is true. O one whose spirit is
strong! We accept your words. But the bull among the Kurus537 will certainly not wish for land that has not been
won through the strength of his own arms. For the sake of desire, or fear, or avarice, Yudhishthira will never abandon his own dharma. Nor will Bhima or Arjuna, or the atirathas the twins, or Krishna, the daughter of Drupada.
Both Vrikodara and Dhananjaya are unrivalled in war on earth. Why should he not rule the earth when he has
Madri’s two sons worshipping him? When the great-souled lord of Panchala, the lords of Kekaya and Chedi538
and we, march into battle together against the enemies, Suyodhana will depart the world of the living.”
‘Yudhishthira said, “O Madhava!539 It is not surprising that you should speak in this way. I must protect my
truth more than my kingdom. Krishna alone knows what I am. I alone know what Krishna truly is. O Madhava! O
foremost among the Shinis!540 When this foremost of men541 knows that the time has come to display valour,
then you and Keshava will vanquish Suyodhana in battle. Let the warriors of Dasharha now depart. I stand ﬁrm
with my protectors and they are the protectors of the world of men. O you who cannot be measured! Stand fast in
dharma. I will see you again, when we assemble together in happiness.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Then they greeted one another and showed mutual respect. They embraced the elders and
all those who were young. The foremost among the Yadus returned to their own houses and the king542 went on to
the tirthas. Having parted from Krishna, Dharmaraja went to the excellent tirtha constructed by the king of Vidarbha. He went and dwelt near Payoshni, whose waters were mingled with the soma juice that had been extracted
there.’
418(121)

‘Lomasha said, “O king! When Nriga sacriﬁed there with soma and gratiﬁed Purandara, it has been heard that
he543 was extremely intoxicated. Here the gods, together with Indra and the Prajapatis, performed many different
kinds of great sacriﬁces and donated large amounts of stipends. At seven horse sacriﬁces, King Amurtarayasa satisﬁed the wielder of the vajra with soma here. At these seven sacriﬁces, everything was made of gold, though at
usual sacriﬁces, they are made of wood and clay. At these sacriﬁces of his, seven rituals became renowned. On
each of his sacriﬁcial stakes, seven rings were established. O Yudhishthira! The gods themselves, together with Indra, erected radiant and golden stakes at his sacriﬁces. At the grand sacriﬁces of Gaya,544 the lord of the earth, Indra was intoxicated on soma and the brahmanas on stipends they received. The many grains of sand on this earth,
the many stars in the sky and the many drops in rain can never be counted. O great king! Like that, uncountable
were the riches that Gaya gave away to the sadasyas545 at those seven sacriﬁces. Even if those objects can be
counted, it is impossible to count the stipends given by that giver of stipends. The golden cows were constructed
by Vishvakarma and he used these to gratify the brahmanas who assembled from many directions. O lord of the
earth! When the great-souled Gaya performed his sacriﬁces, the earth was covered everywhere with sacriﬁcial
stakes and there was little space left for more. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He attained Indra’s world
through his deeds. One who bathes in Payoshni goes to the world attained by him. O Indra among kings! O unblemished one! Therefore, together with your brothers, bathe here. O protector of the earth! You will be cleansed
of all sin.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Together with his brothers, the best of men bathed in Payoshni. Together with his brothers, the unblemished and energetic one went to Mount Vaidurya and the great river Narmada. O lord of the earth!
In each place, the illustrious rishi Lomasha recounted for him the names of all the beautiful tirthas. As it pleased

him and as it suited him, together with his brothers, he went to them one by one, donating riches in thousands to
the brahmanas.
‘Lomasha said, “O Kounteya! On seeing Mount Vaidurya and descending into the Narmada, one attains the
world of the gods and that of the kings. O best of men! This is the union of treta and dvapara. O Kounteya! Once
one has reached this spot, one is cleansed of all sins. O son! This is the place of Sharyati’s sacriﬁce, where the
Ashvins drank soma in person, with Koushika.546 The immensely ascetic Bhargava, the lord Chyavana, was angry
with the great Indra and paralysed Vasava in his anger. He also obtained the princess Sukanya as his wife.”
‘Yudhishthira asked, “How did the illustrious one paralyse the chastiser of Paka? For what reason was the great
ascetic Bhargava angered? O brahmana! Why were the Nasatyas547 made to become drinkers of soma? O illustrious one! Tell me all this exactly as it happened.”’
419(122)

‘Lomasha said, “Maharshi Bhrigu had a son by the name of Bhargava Chyavana. This immensely radiant one performed austerities near this lake. O Pandava! That immensely energetic one established himself like a pillar in this
spot for the brave. O lord of the earth! He remained in the same spot for a very long period of time. O king! After a
long period of time, the rishi was covered by an anthill and that was covered with creepers. This was coverd by
ants. Thus that intelligent one became like a mound of earth on every side. O king! He continued with his austerities inside that anthill.
‘“After a long period of time, a king named Sharyati came to amuse himself in that beautiful and supreme lake.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were four thousand women with him, ones he had married. There was
also a daughter named Sukanya and her brows were beautiful. Surrounded by her friends and adorned in diverse
ornaments, she roamed around and approached Bhargava’s anthill. On seeing the beautiful trees there, the one with
the beautiful teeth began to roam around, surrounded by her friends. She was beautiful, young and intoxicated with
pangs of love. She broke off the branches of the trees in the forest, burdened with heavy blossoms. The wise Bhargava saw her alone, when she was without her friends. Like a ﬂash of lighning, he saw her clad in a single piece of
garment and adorned in her ornaments. On seeing her roaming in the forest alone, the supremely radiant brahmarshi, endowed with the strength of austerities, was stirred by desire. He spoke to the fortunate one in his broken
voice, but she could not hear him. Then Sukanya saw Bhargava’s eyes through the anthill. Because of her curiosity,
she was deluded of her intelligence. Exclaiming, ‘What is this!’ she pierced the eyes with a thorn.
‘“He was easily stirred to great rage and when his eyes had been pierced, he was angered. He cursed Sharyati’s
soldiers that all their bowel and bladder movements should cease. On seeing that the bowel and bladder movements of his soldiers had stopped, the king was saddened and asked, ‘The great-souled Bhargava is old and is especially prone to anger. He is always engaged in austerities. Who has injured him today, knowingly or unknowingly?
Tell me the truth immediately.’ At that, all the soldiers replied, ‘We do not know of any injury. Do what you wish
and ﬁnd out through some other means.’ Then the king himself used conciliation and threats. He asked his group
of well-wishers, but they did not know anything. On seeing her father saddened and his soldiers oppressed by distress, Sukanya then said, ‘When I was roaming, I saw some shining being inside the anthill. I thought that it was a
ﬁreﬂy and I pierced it.’ Having heard this, Sharyati immediately went to the anthill. He saw Bhargava there, aged
in austerities and aged in age. Joining his hands in salutation, the lord of the earth prayed for his soldiers. ‘Please
pardon what that girl did to you out of ignorance.’ Bhargava Chyavana then told the lord of the earth, ‘She is beautiful and generous. But she has been overcome by grief and delusion. O king! Give your daughter to me as a wife.
O lord of the earth! I tell you truly that only then will I pardon.’ On hearing the rishi’s words, Sharyati did not hesitate at all. He gave his daughter to the great-souled Chyavana.
‘“After having married the maiden, Chyavana became paciﬁed. Having obtained the favours, the king returned,
together with the soldiers. The unblemished Sukanya obtained the ascetic as her husband. She always tended to
him lovingly and observed the rules of austerities. The one with the beautiful face, devoid of discontentment,
served the ﬁre and the guests and swiftly began to worship Chyavana.”’

420(123)

‘Lomasha said, “O king! After some time, the gods who were the two Ashvins saw Sukanya. She had just bathed
and was naked. On seeing the beautiful limbs of the one who was like the daughter of the king of the gods, the
Nasatyas, the Ashvins, came to her and said, ‘O one with the beautiful thighs! Whose are you? What are you doing
in this forest? O fortunate one! We wish to know about you. O beautiful one! Therefore, tell us.’ At that, Sukanya
covered herself and told the best of the gods, ‘I am Sharyati’s daughter. I am Chyavana’s wife and property.’ The
Ashvins laughed and again told her, ‘O fortunate one! Why has your father bestowed someone like you on a man
who has already ﬁnished his travels?548 O timid one! You are radiant in this forest like a ﬂash of lightning. O
beautiful one! We have not seen someone equal to you even among the gods. If you are adorned with every ornament and attired in excellent garments, you will dazzle even more with your unblemished limbs, and not smeared
in dirt like this. Why does someone like you serve a husband who is overcome with age? O beautiful one! Love
and desire have deserted him. O one with the sweet smiles! He is not capable of protecting you and sustaining you.
Therefore, give up Chyavana. Therefore, accept one of us as your husband. You are like one born from a divine
womb. Do not waste your youth.’ Having been thus addressed, Sukanya again told the gods, ‘I am devoted to my
husband Chyavana. Do not have any doubts about that.’ They again told her, ‘We are the physicians of the gods.
We will make your husband young and beautiful. Then choose a husband from the three of us. O one with the
beautiful face! Tell him about this arrangement and bring him here.’ O king! At these words, she went to Bhrigu’s
son and reported this to him. On hearing this, Chyavana told his wife that they should act in that way.
‘“On obtaining her husband’s permission, she said that the act should be done. On hearing her words that the act
should be done, the Ashvins said that her husband should immerse himself in the water. Desirous of becoming
handsome, Chyavana swiftly entered the water. O king! O lord! The Ashvins also entered the lake. After an instant
had passed, all of them climbed out of the lake. All of them were young and divine in beauty, with dazzling earrings. All of them were equal in beauty, bringing delight to the mind. Then all of them told her together, ‘O fortunate one! O blessed one! O beautiful one! Choose one of us for your husband, whomsoever you desire. O one with
the beautiful features! Choose whichever one is desired by you.’ On seeing all of them standing there, equal in
beauty, the lady chose with her own mind and intelligence and chose her own husband.
‘“Having obtained a wife and the youthful beauty that he desired, Chyavana happily spoke these words to the
greatly energetic Nasatyas. ‘You have endowed an aged one with youthful beauty and I have also obtained this
lady as my wife. I am pleased with you because you have made me young and I give you the right to drink soma,
even in the presence of the king of the gods. I tell you this truthfully.’ Having heard this, the two happily returned
to heaven. Chyavana and Sukanya sported themselves, like the gods.”’
421(124)

‘Lomasha said, “On learning that Chyavana had become young, Sharyati was delighted and came with his soldiers
to visit Bhargava in his hermitage. He saw Chyavana and Sukanya, beautiful like the children of the gods. King
Sharyati was as delighted as if he had won the entire earth. With his wife, the lord of the earth was received with
honour by the rishi. The king seated himself with the fortunate one549 and began to converse about weighty matters. Then Bhargava told the king in a conciliatory tone. ‘O king! I will perform a sacriﬁce for you. Arrange for the
ingredients.’ Sharyati, lord of the earth, was extremely delighted at this. O great king! He welcomed Chyavana’s
words.
‘“On an auspicious day for the sacriﬁce, Sharyati constructed an excellent sacriﬁcial ground and ﬁlled it with
every desirable object. O king! It was there that Bhargava Chyavana performed a sacriﬁce. Hear about the extraordinary events that occurred there. Chyavana grasped a cup of soma then, so as to offer it to the divine
Ashvins. But when he was about to offer the cup, Indra restrained him. Indra said, ‘In my view, these two Nasatyas
are unworthy of being offered soma. They are the physicians of the gods and their acts make them unworthy of
worship.’ Chyavana replied, ‘They are great in powers. They are great in soul. They are wealthy in beauty and
riches. O Maghavan! They have made me young, like the ageless gods. Together with you and the other gods, why
should they be unworthy of receiving offerings? O lord of the gods! O Purandara! Know that the Ashvins are also

gods.’ Indra said, ‘These two are physicians and nothing but servants. They can adopt any form they desire. They
roam the world of the mortals. How can they be deserving of soma?’ Despite Vasava repeating these words, Bhargava paid no heed to Shakra’s words and grasped the cup. On seeing that he was about to offer a share of the excellent soma to the Ashvins, the god, who was the destroyer of Bala, spoke these words. ‘If you willingly grasp the
soma and offer it to them, I will hurl my vajra, supreme and terrible in form, at you.’ Having been thus addressed,
Bhargava smiled and looked at Indra. Following the procedure, he grasped some excellent soma and offered it to
the Ashvins.
‘“Then Shachi’s husband hurled the vajra, terrible in form, at him. Just as he was about to hurl it, Bhargava
paralysed his arm. Having paralysed him, Chyavana uttered mantras and made offerings to the ﬁre. Having succeeded in his objective, the greatly energetic one was about to cause violence to the god. Having decided this, with
the strength of his austerities, the sage created a gigantic asura by the name of Mada,550 great in valour and immense in form. His body was incapable of being measured by the gods or the demons. His mouth was terrible. It
was gigantic and full of sharp teeth. One of the jaws rested on earth and the other stretched up to heaven. He had
four fangs that extended for ten thousand yojanas. His other fangs extended for ten yojanas. They had forms like
walls and looked like the tips of spears. His arms were like mountains and each was ten thousand yojanas long. His
eyes resembled the sun and the moon. His mouth looked like death. He licked his mouth with his darting tongue,
as ﬁckle as lightning. His mouth was agape and his sight terrifying, as if he was about to swallow up the earth by
force. In great rage, he rushed at Shatakratu, as if to devour him. The world resounded from the noise of his great
and terrible roar.”’
422(125)

‘Lomasha said, “On seeing Mada, terrible of face and with a gaping mouth like that of death himself, approach
with the intention of devouring him, the god Shatakratu licked the corners of his mouth in fear. His arm was paralysed. Oppressed by fear, the king of the gods told Chyavana, ‘O Bhargava! From today, the Ashvins will be deserving of soma. O brahmana! I truthfully give you my word. You do not undertake an endeavour that is unsuccessful. Your words are the supreme law. O brahmarshi! I know that you never act out of falsehood. You have decided today that these Ashvins are deserving of soma offerings. O Bhargava! I engineered this to ensure that the
power of your valour might spread once more and so that the fame of Sukanya and her father might spread in the
world. Therefore, show your favours to me. Let it be as you wish.’ At these words of Shakra, the great-souled
Bhargava’s wrath was swiftly appeased and he set Purandara free.
‘“The valorous one divided Mada and distributed him in drinks, women, gambling and hunting, in which, it had
earlier been created again and again. Having thus thrown Mada away, he satisﬁed Indra with soma and also the
Ashvins, together with the other gods. Having performed the sacriﬁce for the king, the supreme among eloquent
ones became famous in the worlds because of his valour and sported with his beloved Sukanya in the forest.
‘“O king! His lake shines there, noisy with birds. Together with your brothers, you must offer oblations to the
ancestors and the gods there. O protector of the earth! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having seen this and
Sikataksha, you should go to the Saindhava forest and see the streams there. O great king! You should touch the
water at all the pushkaras.551 There is Mount Archika, inhabited by the learned. It is always full of fruit and always has ﬂowing streams. The winds make it the supreme of regions. O Yudhishthira! There are many hundreds of
sanctuaries constructed by the thirty gods there. This is the moon’s tirtha, worshipped by the rishis, the vaikhanasa
rishis and the valakhilyas. There are three sacred peaks and three springs. You can circumambulate them one by
one and perform your ablutions, as you desire. O Kounteya! O lord of men! Shantanu, Shunaka and both Nara and
Narayana obtained the eternal regions here. O Yudhishthira! The gods and the ancestors always sleep with the maharshis on Mount Archika and perform austerities there. Worship them. O lord of the earth! The rishis prepared the
charu there. There is also Yamuna with the eternal currents, where Krishna engaged in austerities. O destroyer of
enemies. The twins, Bhimasena, Krishna and we—all of us will go there together, lean and extremely ascetic. O
lord of men! This is Indra’s sacred stream. Dhata, Vidhata and Varuna ascended upwards there.552 O king! They
dwelt here, forgiving and engaging in supreme dharma. This pure mountain is appropriate for those who are

friendly and of upright minds. O king! Here is the Yamuna, frequented by masses of rajarshis. O king! Many sacriﬁces have been performed here. It is holy and banishes fear of sin. O Kounteya! The great archer, King Mandhata,
himself performed a sacriﬁce here and so did Somaka Sahadeva, supreme among those who gave.”’
423(126)

‘Yudhishthira asked, “Mandhata was a tiger among kings, famous in the three worlds. O great brahmana! How was
that supreme of kings, the son of Yuvanashva, born? How did that inﬁnitely radiant one attain the supreme objective? The three worlds were as much under his control as under the great-souled Vishnu. I wish to hear about the
character of that wise one. He was as resplendent as Shakra. How did he obtain the name of Mandhata? How was
the one with unmatched valour born? You are a skilled one.”553
‘Lomasha said, “O king! Listen attentively to how that great-souled king came to obtain the name of Mandhata,
recounted in the worlds. There was a lord of the earth named Yuvanashva, in the lineage of Ikshvaku. The protector of the earth performed many sacriﬁces and gave away a lot of stipends. The foremost among those who uphold
dharma performed one thousand horse sacriﬁces and many other sacriﬁces, in which, there were many stipends.
But the rajarshi, great in his soul and ﬁrm in his vows, had no sons. He entrusted the kingdom to his ministers and
lived permanently in the forest. Contemplating his own soul, he engaged in the rules laid down in the sacred texts.
‘“Once, his heart was dry with thirst and he entered Bhrigu’s hermitage. O Indra among kings! On that night, the
great-souled maharshi, who was Bhrigu’s son, performed a sacriﬁce so that Soudyumni554 might obtain a son.
Mantras were recited over water and a large pot was ﬁlled with this. O Indra among kings! It had been established
there earlier, so that his wife might drink it and give birth to a son who was Shakra’s equal. The maharshis had
placed the pot on the altar. Exhausted as a result of staying up at night, they had gone to sleep. Soudyumni passed
them. The king’s throat was parched from thirst and he was desperate for a drink. He was exhausted. On entering
the hermitage, he asked for a drink. Because he was tired, his throat was dry and no one heard him. His tone was
like a bird’s notes. On seeing the pot ﬁlled with water, the king swiftly ran towards it. Having drunk the cold water,
the intelligent king’s thirst was quenched and he was happy. He threw the rest of the water away and slept.
‘“Later, the rishis awoke, along with the lord of men. On seeing that the pot was empty of water, all of them assembled together and asked, ‘Who has done this?’ Yuvanashva truthfully replied, ‘It was I.’ The illustrious Bhargava then said, ‘This was not right. After austerities, this water had been collected for the sake of your son. O rajarshi! I performed terrible austerities in the name of the brahman, so that you might have an immensely strong and
valorous son and passed it on.555 He would have been immensely strong and immensely valorous and would have
been full of the power of austerities. His valour would have been such that he would even have sent Shakra to
Yama’s abode. O king! These were the rituals through which the water had been prepared by me. O king! Your
drinking the water today is not an act that should have been done. But it is now impossible to reverse the deed that
has been done. What you have done must certainly have been decreed by destiny. Because you were thirsty, you
drank water that had been sanctiﬁed with rites and mantras. O great king! That water was infused with my power
and austerities. Therefore, you will yourself give birth to a son with these characteristics. We will perform the rites
and sacriﬁces for you so that this supremely extraordinary event may occur and a valorous son, the equal of
Shakra, is born.’ Then one hundred years passed. The left side of the great-souled king was rent asunder and a son
emerged, extremely energetic like the sun. But Yuvanashva, the lord of men, did not die and this was certainly
extraordinary.
‘“The immensely energetic Shakra came there to see him and Shakra inserted his own foreﬁnger into the child’s
mouth. The wielder of the vajra said, ‘He will suck me.’ Then Indra and the other gods named him Mandhata.556
O protector of the earth! Having sucked the foreﬁnger offered by Shakra, the child grew to thirteen cubits.557 O
great king! The knowledge of the Vedas, together with that of dhanurveda and that of all the divine weapons, appeared before this lord at the instant that he thought about them. The bow named Ajagava, arrows made of horn
and impenetrable armour instantly followed his commands. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Maghavan
Shakra himself instated him. He conquered the three worlds with his dharma, like Vishnu in his valour.558 The

great-souled one’s realm559 was unobstructed. Gems ﬂowed to the rajarshi of their own accord. O lord of the
earth! This earth, with all its riches, belonged to him. He performed many varied sacriﬁces and gave away abundant stipends. O king! Having erected many sanctuaries in accordance and acquired abundant dharma, that immensely energetic and greatly radiant one obtained half of Shakra’s kingdom. In a single day, the wise one, always
with dharma, brought the entire earth, with all its habitations and stores of jewels, under his control. O great king!
The four corners of the earth are covered with his sacriﬁcial grounds, where he performed sacriﬁces with donations. There is no spot that was not covered. O great king! It is said that the great-souled one gave brahmanas ten
thousand padmas560 of cattle. When there was a drought for twelve years, the great-souled one made it rain, so
that the crops might grow, while the one with the vajra in his hand,561 looked on. The great king of Gandhara was
born in the lunar dynasty. But with a roar like that of the giant clouds, he killed him with his sharp arrows.562 O
king! The great-souled one subjugated the four types of beings. Through his austerities and energy, he established
the worlds. This is the place where he, as radiant as the sun, offered sacriﬁces to the gods. Behold this sacred region, in the middle of Kurukshetra. O protector of the earth! I have narrated to you everything about the great character of Mandhata and his wonderful birth, about which you had asked me.”’
424(127)

‘Yudhishthira asked, “O supreme among eloquent ones! What was the valour of King Somaka? I wish to hear accurately about his deeds and his powers.”
‘Lomasha said, “O Yudhishthira! There was a king named Somaka, devoted to dharma. O king! He had one hundred wives, all equal to one another. Though he made great efforts, a son was not born to the lord of the earth, despite a long period of time having passed. One day, after he had grown old and continued to make efforts, a son
named Jantu was born to him from those one hundred wives. O lord of the earth! When he was born, all those
mothers surrounded him and always gave him everything that might bring him pleasure. One day, an ant bit Jantu
on his hips and the child cried out in pain at this bite. Then all the mothers were extremely distressed. They surrounded Jantu and raised a great lamentation. The lord of the earth suddenly heard these loud cries, while he was
seated in the midst of his advisers and priests. The king sent for news about what had occurred and the steward
brought him news about what had happened to his son. Somaka swiftly arose with his advisers and went to the inner quarters. The chastiser of enemies consoled his son. Having consoled his son, the king emerged from the inner
quarters. O king! He sat down with his advisers and priests.
‘“Somaka said, ‘Shame on having a single son. It is better to have none. All beings are always prone to distress
and a single son is cause for misery. O brahmana! O lord!563 I examined these one hundred wives and married
them for the sake of obtaining sons. But they did not produce offspring. As I endeavoured with all of them, somehow this single son named Jantu was born. What can be greater misery than that? O supreme among brahmanas!
My time has passed and so has that of my wives.564 Their lives are dependent on this single son and that is also
the way for me. Isn’t there some ceremony or deed, large, small or difﬁcult, so that I can obtain one hundred
sons?’ The ofﬁciating priest replied, ‘There is such a deed, so as to obtain one hundred sons. O Somaka! If you can
perform it, I will explain it to you.’ Somaka said, ‘Whether it is a good deed or a bad one, if it can get me one hundred sons, know that I will perform it. O illustrious one! Explain it to me.’ The ofﬁciating priest replied, ‘O king! I
will perform the rite and you will sacriﬁce Jantu. Then, within a short while, one hundred fortunate sons will be
born. When he is offered in the sacriﬁce, his mothers will inhale the smoke and all of them will give birth to extremely valorous sons. Jantu will also be born as your son from the same woman. A golden mark will be seen on
his left side.’”’
425(128)

‘“Somaka said, ‘O brahmana! Whatever needs to be done, in whichever way, let it be done accordingly. In a desire
to obtain sons, I will do everything that you ask me to.’”

‘Lomasha said, “Then Somaka peformed a sacriﬁce and offered Jantu. Out of affection for their son, the mothers
forcibly tugged at him and cried out, ‘Alas! We are dead!’ Overcome with great distress, the mothers grasped him
by his right hand. But the ofﬁciating priest grasped him by the left hand and pulled. As they screamed like female
ospreys, he dragged their son away. Following the prescribed rites, he offered him as an oblation into the ﬁre. O
descendant of the Kuru lineage! As the offering was made, the distressed mothers inhaled the smoke and suddenly
fell down on the ground. All the king’s women then conceived. O lord of the earth! O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! After ten months had passed, a total of one hundred sons were born to all of them and Somaka. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Jantu was the eldest and he was born to his former mother. They loved him more than
their own sons. He had the golden mark on his left side. Among those one hundred sons, he was the best in terms
of qualities.
‘“Then Somaka’s preceptor565 went to the supreme world and after some time had passed, Somaka also followed him there. He saw him566 being cooked in a terrible hell and asked, ‘O brahmana! Why are you being
cooked in this hell?’ Then the preceptor, who was being cooked in terrible ﬁres, told him, ‘O king! I sacriﬁced for
your sake and these are the fruits of that deed.’ Having heard this, the rajarshi told Dharmaraja,567 ‘I will enter
this place. Set my priest free. This immensely fortunate one is being cooked in the ﬁres of hell because of my
deed.’ Dharma replied, ‘O king! No one ever obtains the fruits of someone else’s action. O supreme among givers!
Behold! Your fruits are there.’ Somaka said, ‘Without this one, learned about the brahman, I do not desire these
sacred worlds. I only desire to dwell with him, be it in the abode of the gods, or in hell. O Dharmaraja! My deed is
identical with his. O god! Therefore, the merits or the demerits should be equal.’ Dharma replied, ‘O king! If that
is your desire, then suffer those fruits with him, for an equal length of time. Later, you will obtain the objective of
the virtuous.’ Then the lotus-eyed king did all that. He was the beloved of his preceptor. Together with his brahmana preceptor, and by virtue of his own deeds, he again obtained the radiant worlds. This is his sacred hermitage,
radiant before us. A man who controls himself and spends six nights here, obtains the end of the virtuous. O Indra
among kings! O extender of the Kuru lineage! Devoid of fever, and controlling our souls, we must spend six nights
here. Ready yourself.”’
426(129)

‘Lomasha said, “O king! It is said that Prajapati himself sacriﬁced here in ancient times. That sacriﬁce, named
ishtikrita, lasted for one thousand years. Ambarisha, the son of Nabhaga, performed a sacriﬁce on the banks of the
Yamuna. Through his sacriﬁces and austerities, he attained the supreme objective. This is the region where King
Nahusha568 performed an extremely holy sacriﬁce and gave away ten padmas to the assisting priests. O
Kounteya! The immensely energetic Yayati was a universal emperor who rivalled Shakra. Behold his sacriﬁcial
ground there. See how the ground is spiked with many different kinds of sacriﬁcial altars and seems to sink down,
under the weight of Yayati’s sacriﬁcial deeds. Here is a shami tree569 with a single leaf. There is a supreme sanctuary. Behold Rama’s570 lake. Behold Narayana’s hermitage. O lord of the earth! This is the path followed by
Richika’s immensely energetic son571 when he traversed the earth, immersed in yoga, on the banks of the stream
Roupya.
‘“O descendant of the Kuru lineage! When I recited this genealogy, listen to what a pishacha woman, adorned
with ulukhalas,572 once said. ‘Eat curds in Yugandhara.573 Spend the night in Achyutasthala. Then bathe in
Bhutilaya and dwell there with your sons. After having spent one night there, if you stay for a second night, then
the deeds of the day will be different from the deeds of the night.’574 O supreme among the Bharata lineage! O
Kounteya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Therefore, we will stay here tonight. This is Kurukshetra’s gate. O
king! It is here that King Yayati Nahusha performed sacriﬁces where many jewels were given away, and Indra was
delighted. This is Plakshavatarana, the supreme tirtha on the Yamuna. The learned ones say that it is the gate to the
vault of heaven. The supreme rishis performed sarasvata sacriﬁces here. O son! With their sacriﬁcial stakes and
mortars, they then went to take their ﬁnal baths. Following dharma, King Bharata performed a horse sacriﬁce right
here and let loose a black sacriﬁcial steed to roam the earth. It was here that Marutta, tiger among men, performed

a supreme sacriﬁce and seated himself, protected by Samvarta, foremost among devarshis. O Indra among kings!
Bathe here and you will be able to see all the worlds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having touched the water here, you will be cleansed of all evil deeds.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having bathed there with his brothers and having been worshipped by the great rishis, the
foremost among the Pandavas then spoke these words to Lomasha. “I can see all the worlds through my austerities.
O one for whom truth is valour! From here, I can also see the foremost among the Pandavas,575 with his white
steeds.” Lomasha replied, “O mighty-armed one! That is true. Thus do the great rishis see. Look at the sacred
Sarasvati, crowded by those for whom she is a refuge. O best of men! By bathing here, you will be cleansed of all
sins. The celestial rishis performed the sarasvata sacriﬁce here. O Kounteya! So did the rishis and the rajarshis.
This is Prajapati’s altar, extending ﬁve yojanas in every direction. This is the ﬁeld of the great-souled sacriﬁcer
Kuru.”’576
427(130)

‘Lomasha said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If mortals perform austerities here, they go to heaven. O
king! Men who desire to die, come here by the thousands. In ancient times, a benediction was pronounced by Daksha when he sacriﬁced here. ‘The men who die here will have conquered heaven.’ This is the sacred, divine and
ﬂowing river Sarasvati. O lord of the earth! This is Sarasvati’s Vinashana. This is the gate to the land of the
nishadas. O brave one! It is out of hatred for them that the Sarasvati enters the earth, so that the nishadas may not
know her. This is Chamasodbheda,577 where the Sarasvati can be seen. All the sacred and divine rivers that go towards the ocean merge into her here. O destroyer of enemies! This is the great tirtha known as Sindhu, where
Lopamudra went to Agastya and accepted him for her husband. O one who shines like the sun! This is the dazzling
tirtha of Prabhasa. This is sacred and holy, the cleanser of sin, and is favoured by Indra. The supreme tirtha by the
name of Vishnupada can be seen there. Here is the extremely sacred and beautiful river Vipasha.578 Because of
sorrow for his sons, the illustrious rishi Vasishtha tied himself up and threw himself down, arising again, freed of
his bonds.579
‘“O destroyer of enemies! Behold, with your brothers, the region of Kashmira,580 sacred in every way and frequented by maharshis. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is here that a conversation took place between all
the rishis from the northern region, Nahusha,581 Agni and Kashyapa. O great king! The gate to Manasa582 is evident here. In the midst of this mountain, the illustrious Rama583 created a region for the rainwater to ﬂow. This is
the renowned Vatikashanda, where valour comes from truth. It is to the north of Videha and its gate cannot be
breached. This is the auspicious place named Ujjanaka, where sacriﬁces of barley were made and where the illustrious rishi Vasishtha lived with Arundhati. This is the lake named Kushavan, where there are one trillion584 beds
of kusha grass. Rukimini’s585 hermitage is here and she conquered her anger and found peace here. O Pandava! O
great king! You have heard of the great mountain Bhrigutunga, where meditations assemble. You will see it and the
rivers Jala and Upajala, near the Yamuna. Performing a sacriﬁce there, Ushinara surpassed Vasava. O lord of the
earth! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! To know whether the king was an equal of the gods, Vasava and Agni
came there. To test the great-souled Ushinara and desirous of granting him a boon, Indra became a hawk and Agni
became a dove and came to his sacriﬁce. As a result of fear from the hawk, the dove alighted on the king’s thigh,
seeking refuge there. O king! Oppressed by fear, it nestled there.”’
428(131)

‘“The hawk said, ‘All the kings of the earth say that you have dharma in your soul. Why do you therefore perform
a deed that is against all dharma? O king! I am suffering from hunger and this is my decreed food. Do not protect it
out of avarice for dharma. Otherwise, you will discard dharma.’
‘“The king replied, ‘O great bird! This bird is terriﬁed out of fear for you and has sought shelter. To protect its
life, it has sought refuge with me. O hawk! Do you not see that it is supreme adharma for me to give up this dove,

which has sought refuge from fear? O hawk! It can be seen that this dove is agitated and trembling. It has come to
me for its life. Giving it up merits condemnation.’
‘“The hawk said, ‘O lord of the earth! All beings sustain themselves through food. They prosper through food
and live because of food. One can live for many nights after giving up objects that are difﬁcult to discard. But one
cannot live for a long time after giving up food. O lord of the earth! If I am deprived of my food, my life will give
up my body and tread the path from which one does not return.586 O one with dharma in your soul! After my
death, my son and wife will perish. While protecting the dove, you are not protecting many lives. Dharma that
stands in the way of another dharma is not dharma at all. It is evil dharma. O one for whom valour is based on
truth! Dharma that does not conﬂict with anything is the right dharma. O lord of the earth! When there is a conﬂict,
you must decide in accordance with what is important and what is unimportant. That should be dharma where
there is no conﬂict. O king! After measuring the important with the unimportant and determining what constitutes
dharma, and what does not constitute dharma, you must decide that to be dharma which is weightier and act
accordingly.’
‘“The king replied, ‘O supreme bird! Your words seem to bring much welfare. Are you Suparna,587 king of the
birds? There is no doubt that you are conversant with dharma. You have spoken many attractive words, full of
dharma. I do not see anything that is not evident to you. Then how can you think it virtuous to discard someone
who has sought refuge? O bird! All your efforts are to get food. You are capable of appeasing your hunger through
other food, that which is more plentiful. For your sake, I will now cook whatever you desire—cow, bull, boar, deer
or buffalo.’
‘“The hawk said, ‘O great king! I do not desire a boar, a bull, a deer or anything else. I do not eat them. What
use are they to me now? O bull among the kshatriyas! O protector of the earth! Give up the food that has been earmarked for me by destiny. Release the dove. It is the eternal rule that hawks eat doves. O king! Not knowing a
plantain tree, do not climb it.’588
‘“The king replied, ‘O one who is worshipped by masses of birds! Rule over this prosperous kingdom of Shibi.
O hawk! Alternatively, I will give you everything that you desire. O hawk! But I will not give up the bird that has
sought refuge with me. O supreme bird! Tell me what deed I must perform so that you give this up. I will not give
up this small bird.’
‘“The hawk said, ‘O Ushinara! O lord of men! If you have so much affection for the dove, then cut some ﬂesh
from your body and weigh it, so that it is equal to the dove. O king! When your ﬂesh is equal to the dove, you can
give it to me and I will ﬁnd satisfaction.’
‘“The king replied, ‘O hawk! I think this request of yours is a favour. I will right now give you an equal amount
of my own ﬂesh.’”
‘Lomasha said, “O Kounteya! The king was learned in supreme dharma. The illustrious one cut his own ﬂesh
and weighed it against the dove. When he found that the dove was heavier than this ﬂesh, King Ushinara again cut
some more ﬂesh and gave it. Thus, there was no more ﬂesh left to weigh against the dove. Having given up all the
ﬂesh, he himself ascended the scales.”
‘“The hawk said, ‘O one learned in dharma! I am Indra and that dove is the bearer of the sacriﬁcial offerings.589
We came to your sacriﬁcial grounds to test you about dharma. O lord of the earth! This deed of yours, your cutting
off ﬂesh from your body, will be resplendent in the world. O king! As long as men talk in this world, so long will
your eternal deed be established in this world.’”
‘Lomasha said, “O Pandava! Behold the seat of that great-souled king. It is sacred and the cleanser of all sins.
Look at it with me. O king! It is here that the gods and the eternal sages are always seen by brahmanas, who are
great-souled and performers of holy deeds.”’
429(132)

‘Lomasha said, “O Indra among men! Behold the sacred hermitage of Shvetaketu, the son of Uddalaka, whose
fame as a knower of mantras was recounted on earth. It always has trees full of fruit. Shvetaketu saw Sarasvati herself there, in her human form. When Sarasvati appeared, Shvetaketu told her, ‘Give me the power of speech.’ O

king! At that time, Ashtavakra, the son of Kahoda, and Shvetaketu, the son of Uddalaka, were the foremost among
those who knew the brahman and were uncle and nephew. Uncle and nephew, the illustrious brahmanas, went to
the sacriﬁce of King Videha, lord of earth. They vanquished the immeasurable Bandi in a debate.”
‘Yudhishthira asked, “What was the power of the brahmana who thus vanquished Bandi? Why was he born as
Ashtavakra? O Lomasha! Tell me everything accurately.”
‘Lomasha replied, “Uddalaka had a self-controlled disciple. O king! He was known by the name of Kahoda. He
served his preceptor and was devoted to him. He studied for a long time. There were many brahmanas who served
as disciples. But the preceptor knew him to be the one. He gave him all his knowledge and his daughter Sujata as a
wife. She conceived and the child, who was radiant as the ﬁre, spoke to his studious father. ‘You have studied all
night. O father! But you are not right.’ The maharshi was insulted among his own students. He cursed the child
who was still inside the womb. ‘Since you spoke while you were still inside, you will be crooked in eight ways.’
He was born exactly as had been spoken and this maharshi became famous as Ashtavakra.590 His maternal uncle
was Shvetaketu, who was equal to him in age. While her son grew inside her, Sujata was extremely distressed. She
was poor and desired riches. In a conciliatory tone, she privately spoke to her husband. ‘O maharshi! What will we
do without riches? The tenth month is upon me. You have no riches. Once the delivery takes place, how will we
overcome the calamity that confronts us?’ Having been thus addressed by his wife, Kahoda went to Janaka for
riches. Bandi was skilled in debate. The brahmana was defeated by him and drowned in the waters.
‘“Uddalaka got to know that he had been defeated by a suta591 and had drowned in the waters. He told Sujata,
‘This must be kept a secret from Ashtavakra.’ She kept this secret extremely well. When he was born, the brahmana heard nothing and thought that Uddalaka was his father and Shvetaketu was his brother. When Ashtavakra
was twelve years old, Shvetaketu saw him seated on his father’s lap.592 He grasped him by the hand and told the
weeping one, ‘This is not your father’s lap.’ These harsh words pierced his heart and remained there, making him
extremely unhappy. Weeping, he went home and asked his mother, ‘Where is my father?’ Sujata was extremely
distressed. Scared of being cursed, she told him everything. Having got to know everything from his mother, the
brahmana593 spoke to Shvetaketu. ‘Let us go to King Janaka’s sacriﬁce. It has been heard that his sacriﬁce has
many extraordinary things. We will hear debates among the brahmanas. We will also eat excellent food. We will
become wiser. The chants of the brahman are auspicious and pacifying.’ Thus, the maternal uncle and nephew
went to King Janaka’s prosperous sacriﬁce. Ashtavakra encountered the king on the road and was restrained.594
He spoke these words to him.”’595
430(133)

‘“Ashtavakra said, ‘The road belongs to a blind one. The road belongs to a deaf one. The road belongs to a woman.
The road belongs to a bearer of loads. The road belongs to a king. But when a brahmana is encountered on the
way, the road must belong to the brahmana.’
‘“The king replied, ‘Then I now give up this road to you. Travel whichever way you desire. There is no ﬁre that
is a minor one.596 Even Indra always bows down before brahmanas.’
‘“Ashtavakra said, ‘O son!597 We have come to see the sacriﬁce. Our curiousity cannot be greater. We have
come as guests. Let us enter. O gatekeeper! We are waiting for your command. We wish to see the sacriﬁce of Indradyumna’s son.598 We wish to see and speak to King Janaka. O gatekeeper! We are being consumed with anger
and let that not cause afﬂiction to you.’
‘“The gatekeeper said, ‘We are bound by the commands of Bandi. “Listen to the words I utter.599 No brahmanas who are children will be allowed entry. Only the old and the learned, the best of brahmanas will be allowed
to enter.”’
‘“Ashtavakra replied, ‘O gatekeeper! If entry is allowed to the aged, then I have a right to enter. We are aged because we have observed vows. We have a right to enter because of our knowledge of the Vedas. We have

served600 and are in control of our senses. We have faithfully trodden the path of knowledge. It is said that children should not be slighted. If touched, a young ﬁre also burns.’
‘“The gatekeeper said, ‘If you know, recite the single-syllabled and many-formed verse invoking Sarasvati.
Look at your limbs. You are a child. Do not boast. It is difﬁcult to obtain success in debates.’
‘“Ashtavakra replied, ‘Age cannot be deduced from the growth of the body, just as the number of knots on a
shalmali tree601 does not indicate its age. Whether it is short or small in form, it is aged because it is full of fruit.
A tree without fruit has no traits of age.’
‘“The gatekeeper said, ‘The young receive intelligence from the old, and in due course of time, become aged
too. It is impossible to obtain learning in a short time. Therefore, despite being a child, why do you speak as if
aged?’
‘“Ashtavakra replied, ‘One does not become old because one’s hair has turned white. The gods know that, a
child who is learned is old. The rishis have not decreed that the merit of dharma depends on years, grey hair, riches
or relatives.602 “One who has learning is great.”603 I have come here to meet Bandi in the king’s presence. Go
and announce this now to the king who is garlanded with lotuses. O gatekeeper! Today, you will witness me engaged in a debate with the learned. I may become superior, or I may become inferior, when all the others become
silent today.’
‘“The gatekeeper said, ‘You are only ten years old. How can you enter a sacriﬁce reserved for entry to the humble and the learned? I will have to devise a means for you to enter. But you must take due care.’
‘“Ashtavakra said, ‘O king! O supreme among those of the Janaka lineage! You are worthy of praise. You have
all the riches. You are the performer of sacriﬁcial deeds, like King Yayati was the only one in ancient times. We
have heard that the wise Bandi, after defeating those who know the Vedas in debate, employs your servants to immerse those broken ones in water. Having heard this from the brahmanas, I have come here today to engage in debate. Where is Bandi? Where can I ﬁnd him? I will destroy him today, like the sun causing the stars to fade.’
‘“The king replied, ‘You hope to vanquish Bandi without knowing the other’s power with words. Those who
know his powers are incapable of speaking thus. He has been tested by brahmanas skilled in debate.’
‘“Ashtavakra said, ‘Those who debated were not like me. That made him like a lion and he roars thus. When he
meets me today, he will be destroyed, like a cart on the road with its axle broken.’
‘“The king replied, ‘He alone is supremely wise who knows what has six parts, twelve axles, twenty-four segments and three hundred and sixty spokes.’
‘“Ashtavakra said, ‘May the wheel604 with twenty-four segments, six parts, twelve axles and three hundred and
sixty spokes always protect you.’
‘“The king asked, ‘They are joined like horses and descend like hawks. Who among the gods gives them birth
and who do they give birth to?’
‘“Ashtavakra said, ‘O king! Let them steer away from your house and even from the houses of your enemies.
The one with the wind as a charioteer gives them birth and they also give birth to him.’605
‘“The king asked, ‘What does not close its eyes when it sleeps? What does not move when it is born? What has
no heart? What increases in speed when force is imposed?’
‘“Ashtavakra said, ‘A ﬁsh does not close its eyes when it sleeps. An egg does not move when it is born. A stone
has no heart. A river increases in speed when force is imposed.’
‘“The king replied, ‘I do not think that you are a man. You possess divine energy. You are not a child. I regard
you as aged. There is no one who is your equal in the power of words. Therefore, I am throwing the gate open.
There is Bandi.’”’
431(134)

‘“Ashtavakra said, ‘O king! There are kings who are assembled here, unrivalled in power, with their dreadful
armies. The ones who debate, like swans cackling in a great expanse of water, should not ﬁnd a means of escape.

You pride yourself on being a great debater.606 When you engage with me today, you will not ﬂow like a river’s
current. O Bandi! My energy will blaze like ﬁre on kindling. Stand ﬁrm before me today.’
‘“Bandi replied, ‘Do not awaken a sleeping tiger. The virulent snake is licking its mouth. If you kick it on the
head with your feet, you will not excape. Be sure that you will be bitten. The extremely weak man is insolent and
strikes a mountain, only to lacerate his hands and nails himself. No wounds can be seen on the mountain. Like all
mountains before Mainaka, like calves before a bull, all the other kings are inferior to the king of Mithila.’”
‘Lomasha said, “Ashtavakra roared in that assembly. O king! His wrath was aroused and he spoke to Bandi.
‘Tell me the answer to my question. I will tell you the answer to your question.’”
‘“Bandi said, ‘There is only one ﬁre, but it is kindled in many forms. There is only one sun that illuminates
everything. There is only one warrior and slayer, the king of the gods. There is only one Yama, the lord of the
ancestors.’
‘“Ashtavakra replied, ‘Indra and Agni roam together, as friends. There are two devarshis, Narada and Parvata.
There are two Ashvins. There are two wheels to a chariot. As decreed by the creator, wife and husband live
together.’
‘“Bandi said, ‘Beings are born thrice as a result of their deeds.607 The vajapeya is united with three.608 Thrice
do the adhvaryus perform the act of pressing.609 It is said that there are three worlds and three sources of
light.’610
‘“Ashtavakra replied, ‘There are four stages of life for a brahmana.611 Four are required to complete the sacriﬁce. There are four directions and four varnas. It has always been said that cows have four feet.’612
‘“Bandi said, ‘There are ﬁve ﬁres.613 The pankti has ﬁve feet.614 There are ﬁve sacriﬁces.615 There are ﬁve
organs of sense. It has been seen in the Vedas that apsaras have ﬁve tufts of hair.616 There are ﬁve sacred rivers in
the world.’617
‘“Ashtavakra replied, ‘When the sacriﬁcial ﬁre is prepared, six cows are the dakshina. There are six seasons in
the wheel of time. There are six organs of sense.618 There are six in Krittika.619 It has been seen in all the Vedas
that there are six sadasykas.’620
‘“Bandi said, ‘There are seven kinds of domestic animals and seven that are wild.621 There are seven meters
that carry the sacriﬁce.622 There are seven rishis.623 There are seven forms of offering homage.624 The veena is
known to have seven strings.’
‘“Ashtavakra replied, ‘Eight shanas bear a hundred.625 Sharabha, the destroyer of the lion, has eight feet.626
We have heard that among the gods, there is a class of eight Vasus. In all sacriﬁces, the sacriﬁcial post has eight
corners.’
‘“Bandi said, ‘When kindling sacriﬁces for the ancestors, nine verses are used. It is said that there are nine
stages in creation. The brihati meter has nine syllables. Nine digits are always used in calculations.’627
‘“Ashtavakra replied, ‘In the world of men, it has been said that there are ten stages.628 It has been said that a
thousand is made up of ten complete hundreds. A woman who has conceived bears for ten months. There are ten
Dasherakas, Dashas and Dasharnas.’629
‘“Bandi said, ‘Eleven animals are used in the ekadashi rite.630 There are eleven sacriﬁcial stakes. There are
eleven changes in the breath of life.631 It has been said that there are eleven Rudras among the gods.’
‘“Ashtavakra replied, ‘It has been said that there are twelve months in a year. The jagati meter is formed out of
twelve syllables. It has been said that an ordinary sacriﬁce lasts for twelve days. The brahmanas say that there are
twelve Adityas.’
‘“Bandi said, ‘It has been said that the thirteenth lunar day is terrible. The earth is formed out of thirteen islands
…’”632
‘Lomasha said, “Having said this, Bandi fell silent. Then Ashtavakra completed the other half of the shloka.
Keshi travelled for thirteen days.633 It has been said that the atichhanda meter has thirteen syllables.” At that,

when they saw that the suta’s son had fallen silent, a loud applause arose. His head was lowered and he was immersed in thought. But Ashtavakra went on reciting. In King Janaka’s grand sacriﬁce, there was a tremendous uproar. Hands joined in salutation, all the brahmanas went to Ashtavakra and worshipped him.
‘“Ashtavakra said, ‘I have heard that, vanquishing learned brahmanas in debate, this one immersed them in water. Let Bandi follow the same dharma today. Seize him and immerse him also.’
‘“Bandi said, ‘I am the son of King Varuna. O Janaka! A sacriﬁce that will last for twelve years is taking place,
equal in duration to your sacriﬁce. Therefore, I have sent the foremost brahmanas there. All of them had gone to
witness Varuna’s sacriﬁce. But behold. They are returning. I worship the venerable Ashtavakra. Because of him, I
will join the one who gave me birth.’
‘“Ashtavakra replied, ‘You immersed brahmanas in the water of the ocean. Though they were learned and intelligent, they lost in debate. I have now rescued their speech through my learning. Let the learned examine these
words. Jataveda634 Agni knows the houses of the learned and does not consume them. Thus the learned examine
the words that are spoken, even if they are uttered by children, sons and those to be pitied. Has your energy become lean because of shleshmataki?635 Or is that ﬂattery has intoxicated you? You are like an elephant that has
been goaded. O Janaka! You are hearing. But you are not paying attention to these words of mine.’
‘“Janaka said, ‘I am listening to your words. They are divine in form and superhuman. Your form is also celestial. Since you have vanquished Bandi in debate today, Bandi is yours, to do as you desire.’
‘“Ashtavakra replied, ‘O king! I have no use for Bandi alive. If Varuna is his father, immerse him in the water.’
‘“Bandi said, ‘I am the son of King Varuna. I have no fear from being immersed in the water. Ashtavakra will
soon see his father Kahoda, who had been destroyed a long time ago.’”636
‘Lomasha said, “Then Varuna’s great-souled son showed homage to all the brahmanas. All of them arose and
approached Janaka. Kahoda said, ‘O Janaka! It is for this reason that men desire sons who will perform deeds. My
son has performed the deed that I was unable to. O Janaka! To a weak one may be born a strong son, to a foolish
one an intelligent one and to an ignorant one a wise one.’ Bandi said, ‘O king! May you be fortunate. Yama will
use your sharp axe to chop off the heads of your enemies. At this sacriﬁce of King Janaka’s, there were great
recitations and the best of sama hymns were sung. Soma was drunk in copious amounts at the sacriﬁce. Delighted
in heart, the gods themselves partook of their sacred shares.’ O king! When all the brahmanas arose, more resplendent than they had been before, Bandi obtained King Janaka’s permission and entered the waters of the ocean.
Ashtavakra showed homage to his father. As is proper, he was worshipped by the brahmanas. Having vanquished
the Bandi, he returned to the best of hermitages with his uncle. O Kounteya! Therefore, with your brothers and
with the brahmanas, dwell here happily. O Ajamidha! With me, you will then go to other sacred places, devoted
and pure in your deeds.”’
432(135)

‘Lomasha said, “O king! Madhuvila Samanga can be seen here.637 This is the place where Bharata638 bathed,
known by the name of Kardamila. After Shachi’s husband killed Vritra, we have heard that he was struck by misfortune.639 He was cleansed of all his sins after bathing in Samanga. O bull among men! This is the place where
Mainaka sunk into the earth. In ancient times, Aditi cooked food here, so as to obtain sons. O bull among men!
Ascend this king of mountains and dispel your ill fame and misfortune, incapable of being expressed in words. O
king! These are the Kankhala mountains, loved by the rishis. O Yudhishthira! The great river Ganga is resplendent
here. In ancient times, the illustrious Sanatkumara obtained success here. O Ajamidha! By bathing here, you will
be cleansed of all your sins. O Kounteya! With your advisers, silently touch the waters of this lake, known as Punya, the mountain Bhrigutunga and the Ganga. The beautiful hermitage of Sthulasirasa is there. O Kounteya! Discard all sense of ego and anger. O Pandava! The beautiful hermitage of Raibhya is resplendent here. The wise
Yavakrita, Bharadvaja’s son, died there.”
‘Yudhishthira asked, “What powers did the rishi who was Bharadvaja’s son possess? Why did the sage’s son,
Yavakrita, die? I wish to hear all this exactly as it happened. O Lomasha! I ﬁnd delight in listening to the deeds of
those who were equals of the gods.”

‘Lomasha said, “Bharadvaja and Raibhya were friends. They lived here happily, in the interior of the forest and
in great friendship. Raibhya had two sons named Arvavasu and Paravasu. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Bharadvaja had a son named Yavakrita. Raibhya and his sons were learned. The other one640 was an ascetic. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Right from childhood, their friendship was unparalleled. Yavakrita noticed that
his father was an ascetic and received no honours. O unblemished one! But Raibhya and his sons were honoured
by brahmanas. The energetic one was tormented by this and became overcome with anger. O Pandava! He performed terrible austerities in order to obtain knowledge of the Vedas. He burnt his body in a gigantic and ﬂaming
ﬁre. The great ascetic generated anxiety in Indra’s mind. O Yudhishthira! Indra went to Yavakrita and asked him,
‘Why are you engaged in these supreme torments?’ Yavakrita replied, ‘O one who is worshipped by the masses of
gods! I am performing this supreme austerity so that the Vedas, studied by brahmanas, become manifest in me. O
chastiser of Paka! My efforts are for my own knowledge. O Koushika!641 O illustrious one! The knowledge of the
Vedas must be acquired from a preceptor and take a long time. Therefore, I am engaged in this great endeavour.’
Indra replied, ‘O brahmana rishi! This is not the path for you. This is not the road you wish to traverse. O brahmana! Why do you wish to destroy yourself? Go and learn from a preceptor’s mouth.’
‘“O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having spoken these words, Shakra left. Yavakrita, whose valour was
inﬁnite, also left and once again engaged in austerities. O king! We have heard that with his terrible and great austerities, he caused great distress to the king of the gods. He was burnt by the terrible austerities of the great sage.
The god who was the slayer of Bala came to restrain him again. ‘The goal that you have set for yourself is not possible. You have not thought properly about how the knowledge of the Vedas can be manifested to you and your father.’ Yavakrita replied, ‘O king of the gods! If I do not succeed in my desired objective through these deeds, I will
torment myself with greater austerities and engage in greater vows. O Maghavan! O king of the gods! Listen. If
you do not satisfy my desires, everything that I wish for, I will slice off my limbs and offer them into the ﬁre.’ On
realizing that the great-souled sage’s resolution was ﬁrm, the intelligent and wise one thought of a means of restraining him.
‘“Then Indra assumed the form of a brahmana ascetic, who was several hundred years old, feeble and overcome
with consumption. He began to construct a bridge of sand on the Bhagirathi, at the tirtha where Yavakrita used to
go for his ablutions. Since that supreme of brahmanas had not paid any heed to his words, Shakra sought to ﬁll up
the Ganga with scoops of sand. He ﬁlled his ﬁsts with sand and threw them into the Bhagirathi. Shakra attempted
to construct the bridge so as to attract Yavakrita’s attention. When Yavakrita, bull among sages, saw his attempts to
bind up the river, he broke into loud laughter and uttered these words. ‘O brahmana! What is going on? What do
you wish to do? Why are you expending this great endeavour on this fruitless objective?’ Indra replied, ‘When I
have bound up the Ganga through a bridge, it will be easy to cross. O son! People suffer great difﬁculties when
they repeatedly try to cross it.’ Yavakrita said, ‘It is not possible to bind this mighty torrent. Refrain from that
which is impossible and embark on something that is possible.’ Indra replied, ‘I have embarked on this task, just as
you have embarked on austerities for the Vedas, a burden of mortiﬁcation that is impossible to accomplish.’
Yavakrita said, ‘O lord of the thirty gods! O chastiser of Paka! If you think that my endeavours are as fruitless as
yours, then tell me what you think is possible for me. O lord of the masses of gods! Favour me with boons so that I
become superior to others.’ Then Indra granted the boons the great ascetic asked for. ‘As you desire, the Vedas will
become manifest in you and your father. All your other desires will also be satisﬁed. O Yavakrita! You can go
now.’ Having attained his objective, he went to his father and said …”’
433(136)

‘“Yavakrita said, ‘O father! The Vedas will become manifest in both you and me. I have obtained other boons
through which we will be superior to others.’
‘“Bharadvaja replied, ‘O son! Since you have obtained all the boons that you desired, you must be proud. But
once you are ﬁlled with pride, you will soon be miserably destroyed. O son! On this, an account recited by the
gods is cited. In ancient times, there was a valorous sage by the name of Valadhi. He was afﬂicted by grief over his
son and engaged in difﬁcult austerities so that he might obtain a son who was immortal. He obtained this. But

though the gods showed him their favours, they did not make him the equal of the immortals. “A mortal one can
never be immortal and life must be subject to causes.”642 Valadhi said, “O supreme among the gods! These mountains have been established for an eternal time and are indestructible. They will determine my son’s span of
life.”643 Later, a son was born to him. His name was Medhavi and he was prone to anger. Having heard about his
origins, he became insolent and insulted the rishis. He roamed the earth, causing injury to the sages. Then he met
the immensely energetic and intelligent Dhanushaksha. Medhavi insulted him and the valorous one cursed him.
“Be reduced to ashes.” But at these words, he was not reduced to ashes. On seeing that Medhavi was not hurt, the
valorous Dhanukaksha caused the determinant of his life to be shattered by buffaloes. When the determinant was
destroyed, the child instantly died. The father grasped his dead son and began to lament. On seeing him loudly
lament in great misery, all the ancient sages who were learned in the Vedas, recited a verse. Listen to it. “Under no
circumstances, can one who is mortal change his destiny. Dhanushaksha shattered the mountains with buffaloes.”
Having thus obtained boons, young ascetics are ﬁlled with pride and swiftly meet their destruction. Do not become
like them. Raibhya is immensely valorous and his sons are like that. O son! Therefore, be careful that you do not
cross him. O son! If he is angered, he can crush you with his wrath. Raibhya is a learned ascetic and a great rishi
prone to anger.’
‘“Yavakrita replied, ‘O father! I will do as you say. Have no anxiety on my account. You are my father and I will
honour Raibhya as I honour you.’”
‘Lomasha said, “Having thus replied to his father in sweet words, Yavakrita, who had nothing to fear, took great
pleasure in causing injury to other rishis.”’
434(137)

‘Lomasha said, “One day, in the month of Madhava,644 Yavakrita, who was without any fear, roamed around and
arrived at Raibhya’s hermitage. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He saw the beautiful hermitage, adorned with
trees in blossom. He saw his645 daughter-in-law, roaming around like a kinnara lady. Having lost his senses because of desire, Yavakrita shamelessly told the bashful one, ‘Come to me.’ Knowing his conduct and fearing his
curse, as well as the energetic Raibhya, she went to him and said, ‘Let it be that way.’ O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Taking her to a lonely spot, he injected her with seed. Raibhya, the destroyer of enemies, then returned to
his own hermitage and saw his daughter-in law, Paravasu’s wife, distressed and weeping. O Yudhishthira! He comforted her with sweet words and asked her the reason. The fortunate one then told him everything that Yavakrita
had said and also what she had replied, after carefully thinking it over.
‘“Having heard of Yavakrita’s misconduct, Raibhya was consumed by great anger and it seemed as if his heart
would burn. The ascetic’s anger was great. He plucked a lock from his matted hair, and observing the rites, offered
it into the ﬁre. A woman arose, exactly like the other one646 in beauty. He again plucked out another lock and offered it into the ﬁre. A rakshasa with terrible eyes, fearful in form, arose. The two of them then asked Raibhya,
‘What should we do?’ In anger, the rishi replied, ‘Kill Yavakrita.’ They promised that they would act as they had
been asked to and went to kill Yavakrita. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The kritya647 whom the greatsouled one had created went to Yavakrita, and having deluded him, robbed him of his water-pot.648 Without his
water-pot, Yavakrita became unclean. The rakshasa then rushed at him, with an upraised spear. On seeing him approach with an upraised spear and with intent to kill, Yavakrita swiftly arose and dashed towards a pond. On ﬁnding that the pond was bereft of water, Yavakrita swiftly went to all the rivers. But they had also dried up.
‘“Pursued by the terrible rakshasa with the upraised spear and in fear, he suddenly went to his father’s agnihotra.
But his entry was forcibly barred by a shudra guard who was blind. O king! The doorkeeper restrained him by
force. While the shudra restrained Yavakrita, the rakshasa pursued him with the spear. His heart pierced, he fell
down. Having killed Yavakrita, the rakshasa returned to Raibhya. With Raibhya’s permission, he began to roam
around with the one who was not an arya.”’649
435(138)

‘Lomasha said, “O Kounteya! Having completed the studies and rituals and having collected ﬁrewood, Bharadvaja
entered his hermitage. On seeing him, all the ﬁres used to stand up to greet him. But because his son had been
killed, they did not stand up then. On witnessing this distortion in the agnihotra, the great ascetic spoke to the blind
shudra house-guard who was seated there. ‘O shudra! Why are the ﬁres not delighted on seeing me? Nor are you,
as you used to earlier.650 Is everything well in the hermitage? Is there any chance that my dim-witted son has gone
to Raibhya? Tell me all this quickly. My mind is not at peace.’ The shudra replied, ‘Indeed, your dim-witted son
did go to Raibhya. He is now lying dead, killed by a powerful rakshasa. He was pursued by the rakshasa with an
upraised spear. But as a doorkeeper, I restrained him at the door of the place where the ﬁre is kept. He desired water, but was certainly in an unclean state.651 He was then swiftly killed by the rakshasa with the upraised spear.’
‘“On hearing these unpleasant words of the shudra, Bharadvaja grasped his dead son and lamented in great misery. ‘You performed austerities for the welfare of brahmanas, so that the Vedas not studied by brahmanas might become manifest in you. Your conduct towards the great-souled brahmanas was always driven by welfare. You exhibited no sin towards all beings. Nevertheless, you became harsh. O son! I prohibited you from seeing the place
where Raibhya lives, because it is like Yama, the bringer of death. But you went to that mean place. The immensely energetic one knows me to be old and that you were my only son. But that supremely ill-minded one fell prey to
anger. Because of Raibhya’s deed, I am now mourning for my son. O son! Because of your loss and your death, I
will give up my life, the most precious thing on earth. Just as I am giving up my body out of sorrow for my son,
Raibhya’s eldest son will soon kill him, though he will be innocent. Happy are men to whom sons have not been
born. They roam happily, without having to grieve over a son. Who can be more evil than those who, grieving over
the death of their sons and miserable and disturbed in senses, curse their dearest friends? Having seen my son
dead, I have cursed my best friend. Where is there a second one who confronts such calamity?’ Having thus
lamented in many ways, Bharadvaja cremated his son. Later, he himself entered a ﬁre that had been kindled well.”’
436(139)

‘Lomasha said, “At this time, the powerful and immensely fortunate King Brihaddyumna, for whom Raibhya was
the sacriﬁcial priest, performed a sacriﬁce. The intelligent Brihaddyumna appointed Raibhya’s two sons, Arvavasu
and Paravasu, as assistants at the sacriﬁce. O Kounteya! Having obtained their father’s permission, they went
there. Raibhya remained in the hermitage with Paravasu’s wife. One day, Paravasu returned home to see her. He
saw his father in the forest, attired in black antelope skin. It was late in the night and he was blind from sleep. He
saw his father roaming in the dense forest and took him to be an animal. Thinking that his father was an animal, he
killed him. He did not do this out of a desire for violence, but because he wanted to protect his own body. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He performed all the funeral rites.
‘“Then he returned to the place where the sacriﬁce was being held and told his brother, ‘You will never be able
to accomplish this deed alone. I have killed our father, mistaking him to be an animal. Therefore, you observe the
righteous rite that must be observed for killing a brahmana. O sage! I am capable of accomplishing the deed
alone.’ Arvavasu replied, ‘Then you complete the intelligent Brihaddyumna’s sacriﬁce. For your sake, I will control my senses and act so as to expunge the sin of killing a brahmana.’ O Yudhishthira! Having completed the vow
required for killing a brahmana, the sage Arvavasu again returned to the sacriﬁce.
‘“On seeing that his brother had returned, Paravasu spoke these words to Brihaddyumna, who was with his advisers. ‘See that this killer of a brahmana is not permitted to enter the sacriﬁce. There is no doubt that the mere
glance of a killer of a brahmana will cause you injury.’ O king! Arvavasu was then thrown out by the servants,
though he cried out repeatedly, ‘I am not the killer of a brahmana.’ O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The servants kept calling him the killer of a brahmana. He did not admit that he had observed the vow of killing a brahmana for his own sake. ‘My brother performed the deed and I have freed him.’ O king! The gods were delighted at
Arvavasu’s deeds. They instated him as the priest and Paravasu was dismissed. With Agni at the forefront, the
gods granted him boons. He asked for the boon that his father might stand up alive, that his brother might be freed
from the sin of killing their father and that both Bharadvaja and Yavakrita might rise up again. O Yudhishthira! All
of them manifested themselves again.

‘“Yavakrita then told the gods, with Agni at the forefront, ‘I have observed and accomplished the vow of knowing the brahman. O supreme among the immortals! Using that particular rite, how was it that Raibhya was capable
of slaying a learned ascetic like me?’ The gods replied, ‘O Yavakrita! O sage! Do not think it is the way you have
spoken. Earlier, you have learned the Vedas in an easy way, without resorting to a preceptor. But he studied it with
a great deal of difﬁculty, after satisfying his preceptors with his own deeds. He learnt about the supreme brahman
over a long period of time and after tolerating suffering.’ Thus did the gods speak to Yavakrita, with Agni at the
forefront. Having revived all of them, the gods returned to heaven. O tiger among kings! This is the supreme hermitage, with trees that are always full of ﬂowers and fruit. Spend the night here and you will be cleansed of all
sins.”’
437(140)

‘Lomasha said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O Kounteya! O king! You have now left behind the mountains Ushirabija, Mainaka and Shveta and also the mountain Kala. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The Ganga is
resplendent here in seven streams. This region is beautiful and sacred. Agni always burns here. But this cannot be
now seen by a mere man. But if you are collected and concentrate your minds, you will be able to see these tirthas.
We will now ascend Mount Shveta and Mount Mandara. The yaksha Manichara, and Kubera, the king of the yakshas, dwell there. O king! O best of men! Eighty-eight thousand gandharvas who are swift in travelling and four
times that number of kimpurushas and yakshas, in many different forms and wielding many different weapons,
wait upon Manibhadra, the Indra of the yakshas. Their prosperity is immense. Their speed is equal to that of the
wind. They are certainly capable of dislodging the king of the gods from his seat. O son! This region is secret and
is protected by powerful yatudhanas.652 O Partha! These mountains are difﬁcult of access. Therefore, use
supreme concentration. Kubera has other terrible advisers and rakshasas as friends. O Kounteya! We will meet
them. Therefore, concentrate your valour. O king! Mount Kailasa extends for six hundred yojanas. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! The gods assemble there, in that extensive region. O Kounteya! There are innumerable yakshas, rakshasas and kinnaras, serpents, divine birds653 and gandharvas, in the direction of Kubera’s abode. O
Partha! O king! Protected by me and through Bhimasena’s strength, and with your own austerities and control, mix
with them now. May King Varuna and Yama, victorious in battle, and Ganga and Yamuna, and the mountains give
you safety. ‘O goddess Ganga!654 I hear your sounds from the top of Indra’s golden mountain. O fortunate one!
Protect him from these mountains, this Indra among men who is honoured by all those of the Ajamidha
lineage.655 O daughter of the mountains! This king is about to enter these mountains. Therefore, grant him your
protection.’”
‘Yudhishthira said, “Lomasha’s confusion is unprecedented.656 All of you guard Krishna and do not be careless. His view is that this region is difﬁcult of access. Therefore, let us observe complete cleanliness.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘He then told the greatly valorous Bhima, “O Bhimasena! Protect Krishna carefully. O
son!657 Whether Arjuna is far or whether he is near, it is you Krishna resorts to in times of fear.” Then the greatsouled one went to the twins and inhaled the fragrance of their hands and embraced their bodies. In a voice choking with tears, the king said, “Do not be afraid. Tread carefully.”’
438(141)

‘Yudhishthira said, “There are hidden beings here, powerful rakshasas. O Vrikodara! We are capable of passing
them with ﬁre and austerities. O Kounteya! Resorting to strength, control your hunger and thirst. O extender of the
Kuru lineage! Resort to your strength and dexterity. You have heard the words of the rishi about Mount Kailasa. O
Kounteya! Use your intelligence to think about how Krishna will pass this place. O lord! Alternatively, return from
here with Sahadeva, Dhoumya, the cooks, the superintendents of the kitchen, all the servants, the chariots, the
horses and other brahmanas who cannot bear the difﬁculties of the road, with all of them. O Bhima! O one with the
large eyes! The three of us will go on, restrained in our food and rigid in our vows—the immensely ascetic Lomasha, I and Nakula. Wait carefully for my return at Gangadvara. Dwell there and protect Droupadi until I return.”

‘Bhima replied, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The princess is oppressed by exhaustion and miserable.
But in a desire to see Shvetavahana,658 there is no doubt that she will travel. Your suffering is also acute at not being able to see him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It will be even more without Sahadeva, I and Krishna. If
you so wish, let all the chariots return with the servants, the cooks, the superintendents of the kitchen and whoever
else you think of. I do not wish to leave you here, in these mountains infested by rakshasas, in this uneven and difﬁcult region. This immensely fortunate princess is devoted to her vows. O tiger among men! She will not be able
to return without you. Like that, Sahadeva is always devoted to you. I know his mind and he will never return. O
great king! In addition, all of us wish to see Savyasachi. All of us are desirous and therefore, all of us will travel
together. If we cannot use our chariots to travel over these mountains with many caverns, we will travel on foot. O
king! Do not worry. I will carry Panchali wherever she is incapable of travelling on her own. This is what I have
decided in accordance with my intelligence. O king! Do not worry. I will also carry these two delicate warriors
who are the delight of Madri.659 I will bear them over difﬁcult terrain, if they are incapable of doing it
themselves.”
‘Yudhishthira said, “O Bhima! Since you have spoken like this, let your strength increase, so that you are capable of carrying Droupadi on this long journey, and also the twins. O fortunate one! No one else can do it. May your
strength, fame, devotion to dharma and deeds increase. O mighty-armed one! If you are able to carry your brothers
and Krishna, may you not suffer from exhaustion. May defeat never confront you.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Then the beautiful Krishna laughed and spoke these words. “O descendant of the Bharata
lineage!660 I will travel. Do not be anxious on my account.”
‘Lomasha said, “It is possible to traverse Mount Gandhamadana with austerities. O Kounteya! O king! Therefore, let all of us be united with austerities—Nakula, Sahadeva, Bhimasena, I and you—so that we are able to see
Shvetavahana.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! Having happily conversed in this fashion, they happily saw the extensive region
of Subahu, prosperous with many elephants and horses, infested with kiratas, tanganas and full of hundreds of
kunindas.661 This Himalayan region is frequented by the gods and has many extraordinary things. On seeing
them, Subahu, lord of the kunindas, was extremely delighted. He met them at the frontiers and welcomed them
with homage. Having been thus worshipped, all of them happily dwelt there for some time. When the sun was
clear,662 they left for the Himalaya mountains. O king! The servants, Indrasena being the foremost, the superintendents of the kitchen, the cooks and all of Droupadi’s retinue were entrusted by the maharathas to the king who
was the lord of the kunindas. The Pandavas, the immensely valorous descendants of the Kourava lineage, then
slowly left that region on foot, together with Krishna. They were extremely happy at the prospect of seeing
Dhananjaya.’
439(142)

‘Yudhishthira said, “O Bhimasena! O twins! O Panchali! Listen. There exists nothing in beings that is destroyed.
Look at us roaming in the forest. We may tell each other that we are weak and oppressed, but though incapable,
must travel in a desire to see Dhananjaya. It663 burns my body, like ﬁre on a pile of cotton. I do not see the brave
Dhananjaya by my side. In a desire to see him, I live with my younger brothers in the forest. Because of the extreme oppression meted out to Yajnaseni, that brave one must also be burning.664 I do not see the inﬁnitely energetic Partha, Nakula’s elder, the terrible wielder of the invincible bow. O Vrikodara! I am tormented on that account. With a desire to see him, I have visited beautiful tirthas, forests and lakes, together with you. I have not seen
the brave Dhananjaya, devoted to the truth, for ﬁve years. O Vrikodara! Since I do not see Bibhatsu, it is consuming me. O Vrikodara! Since I do not see the dark and mighty-armed Gudakesha,665 whose brave gait is like that of
a lion, I am tormented. O Vrikodara! I do not see that best of men, accomplished in the use of weapons, skilful in
battle and the equal of any archer. It is for this reason that I am tormented. Among the masses of enemies, he
strides like angry Yama, the destroyer. Dhananjaya has the shoulders of a lion and is like a maddened elephant. He
is not inferior to Shakra in strength and valour. Partha, the one with the white horses, is inﬁnitely brave and is elder

to the twins. On not being able to see Phalguna, I am immersed in immense grief. Even when he was insulted by
an inferior man, he was always forgiving in his conduct. He gave shelter and protection to those who walked the
straight path. But to those who were crooked and to those who sought to kill him through deceitful means, even if
it happened to be the wielder of the vajra himself,666 he was like virulent poison. The greatly strong Bibhatsu is
inﬁnite in his soul. The powerful one always granted protection to an enemy who sought refuge with him. He was
always our refuge. He destroyed his enemies in battle. He robbed all their jewels and he brought all of us happiness. In earlier times, it was through his valour that I obtained many celestial jewels of different types, those that
Suyodhana now possesses. O brave one! In earlier times, through the strength of his arms, I once possessed an assembly hall. O Pandava! It was full of all kinds of gems and was famous in the three worlds. He is like Vasudeva
in his valour. He is Kartavirya’s equal in war. He is invincible and unconquered in battle. I do not see Phalguna.
The one who slew enemies with his valour was born after the immensely valorous Sankarshana,667 after Bhima
who is unvanquished in battle and after Vasudeva. The strength of his arms is equal to the power of Purandara. He
is equal to the wind in his speed, to the moon in the beauty of his face and to eternal death in his anger.
‘“O might-armed one! O brave one! Desiring to see that tiger among men, all of us will now enter Mount Gandhamadana. The exetensive Badari is there and the hermitage of Nara and Narayana. It is always inhabited by yakshas. We will see that supreme mountain. We will see Kubera’s beautiful lotus pond, protected by rakshasas. Observing great austerities, we will traverse on foot. O Vrikodara! One who has failed in austerities cannot reach that
region. Nor can one who is cruel or avaricious, or one who has not calmed himself. O Bhima! In order to follow
Arjuna’s footsteps, all of us will go there. We will be armed and strap our swords. We will be accompanied by
brahmanas who observe great vows. Those who are not controlled encounter ﬂies, gnats, mosquitoes, tigers, lions
and reptiles. O Partha! But those who are controlled do not see them. Therefore, let us control our souls. Let us be
restrained in our food. We will enter Mount Gandhamadana to see Dhananjaya.”’
440(143)

Vaishampayana said, ‘All of those inﬁnitely energetic warriors were excellent archers. They had tautened bows
and quivers full of arrows. They had armour for their arms and their ﬁngers. They had swords. They grasped them
and took the best of the brahmanas with them. O king! Together with Panchali, they proceeded towards Gandhamadana. They saw lakes, rivers, mountains and forests on the top of the mountain and trees that provided a lot of
shade. There were regions that always had ﬂowers and fruit, frequented by masses of devarshis. The brave ones
controlled their souls and lived on roots and fruit. They travelled through high lands and low, regions that were uneven and full of dangers. They saw many different kinds of animals. The brave and great-souled ones then entered
Mount Gandhamadana, frequented by rishis, siddhas and immortals, loved by gandharvas and apsaras and a mountain peopled by kinnaras.
‘O lord of the earth! As the brave ones entered Mount Gandhamadana, a violent storm arose, with a large quantity of rain. A gigantic cloud of dust arose, raising a mass of dry leaves. This suddenly covered the earth, the sky
and heaven. Nothing could be seen when the sky was covered with dust. They were not even capable of communicating to one another what they thought in their minds. Their eyes were enveloped in the darkness and they could
not see. They could not even see each other. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were battered by the storm
of rocks and dust. The trees were torn asunder by the wind and were forcibly ﬂung down on the ground. A great
sound arose from other trees. “Is the sky falling down on the ground? Are the mountains splitting asunder?” Deluded by the wind, this is what all of them thought in their minds. They were battered by the wind and were frightened. They felt their way with their hands, groping for trees, anthills and uneven terrain along the road and lay
down. Grasping his bow and grasping Krishna, the immensely strong Bhimasena sought shelter under a tree. Dharmaraja and Dhoumya lay down in that great forest. Sahadeva, who had the agnihotra with him, lay down under a
mountain.668 Nakula, the other brahmanas and the greatly asectic Lomasha were alarmed, and seeking refuge in
the trees, lay down.
‘Then the wind died down. The storm of dust was calmed. A great downpour started from the heavy clouds.
Aided by the swift wind, there was torrential rain and hail, incessantly. This ﬂooded the ground on all sides. O lord

of the earth! On every side, rivers that were headed towards the ocean were covered with foam and dirt and overﬂowed. Bearing large quantities of water and overﬂowing with foam, they rushed with a thunderous roar, uprooting gigantic trees. When the rain subsided, the wind died down, the water ﬂowed down to the lower regions and
the sun appeared, all of them slowly emerged and assembled. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Once again, the
brave ones proceeded towards Mount Gandhamadana.’
441(144)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the great-souled Pandavas had travelled a short distance, Droupadi, who was not accustomed to travelling on foot, sat down. She was exhausted and miserable from the storm and the wind. The famous Panchali was delicate and fainted. When the black-eyed one fell down with faintness, she clasped her thighs
with her round and beautiful arms. Trying to support herself with her thighs, which were like the trunks of an elephant, she suddenly fell down on the ground, like a trembling plantain tree. On seeing the one with the beautiful
hips fall like a clinging creeper, the valorous Nakula dashed forward and grasped her. Nakula said, “O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The dark-eyed daughter of the king of Panchala is exhausted and has fallen down
on the ground. Be considerate. She does not deserve unhappiness. But the one whose gait is slow has suffered
great unhappiness. O great king! Comfort her. She is tired out through exhaustion.” On hearing these words, the
king was extremely distressed. Bhima and Sahadeva also swiftly rushed towards her.
‘Kounteya669 looked at her. She was wan in face and emaciated. Taking her on his lap, the one with dharma in
his soul began to lament. “She was accustomed to sleeping on beautifully spread beds, in houses that were guarded
well. This beautiful one is deserving of happiness. How is it that she has fallen down on the ground? Her feet are
delicate. She is deserving of boons. Her face is like a lotus, but because of me, it is now darkened. Having been addicted to dice, what have I done out of my stupidity? With Krishna, I am now wandering around in this forest, infested by masses of animals. Her father, King Drupada, bestowed the large-eyed one, thinking that with the Pandavas as her husbands, Panchali would obtain happiness. None of that has happened. She is oppressed by exhaustion and unhappiness. She has fallen down on the ground because of my evil deeds.” When Dharmaraja Yudhishthira lamented in this fashion, Dhoumya and all the other supreme among brahmanas came to him. They comforted him and pronounced their benedictions over him. They recited mantras to keep the rakshasas away and performed rites. The supreme rishis recited mantras for the sake of peace. The Pandavas repeatedly touched her with
their cold hands. Fanned by the cool breeze that had drops of water mixed in it, Panchali slowly recovered and regained consciousness. They laid out the distressed Krishna on antelope skins that were spread out. After having
rested, the ascetic lady regained her senses. With calloused hands,670 the twins slowly rubbed her red-soled feet,
marked auspiciously. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira also comforted her.
‘The best of Kurus then spoke to Bhimasena. “O Bhima! There will be many mountains. They will be uneven,
covered with ice and difﬁcult of access. O mighty-armed one! How will Krishna be able to traverse them?” Bhimasena replied, “O king! I will myself carry the princess, the twins and you, bull among men. O Indra among
kings! Do not unnecessarily be anxious. Alternatively, my son is great in valour. He can roam the skies and is my
equal in strength. If you say so, Ghatotkacha will carry all of us.” Having been instructed by Dharmaraja, he remembered his rakshasa son. As soon as his father had thought of him, Ghatotkacha, with dharma in his soul, appeared. The mighty-armed one greeted the brahmanas and the Pandavas, hands joined in salutation, and they also
welcomed him. Truth was his valour and he spoke to his father Bhimasena. “You thought of me and I swiﬂy arrived to serve you. O mighty-armed one! What is your command? Without a doubt, I will do everything.” On hearing this, Bhimasena embraced the rakshasa.’
442(145)

‘Yudhishthira said, “O Bhima! This bull among rakshasas is learned in dharma. He is always brave and strong.
This son born from you is devoted to us. Let him immediately carry his mother.671 O Bhima! With the strength of
your arms and your terrifying valour, I will remain unhurt and will journey to Gandhamadana with Panchali.”’

Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing his brother’s words, Bhimasena, tiger among men, commanded his son Ghatotkacha, the destroyer of enemies. “O Hidimba’s son! Your unvanquished mother is exhausted. O son! You are capable of going anywhere at will. You are strong. Take her up into the sky. O fortunate one! Carry her on your
shoulders. Follow us in the sky. But travel low, so that she does not feel oppressed.” Ghatotkacha replied, “I am
alone capable of carrying Dharmaraja, Dhoumya, the princess and the twins. It shouldn’t be surprising that I can
do it now, when I have help.”672 Having said this, Ghatotkacha carried Krishna in the midst of the brave Pandavas. Others673 carried the Pandavas. Lomasha, whose splendour was unrivalled, travelled along the path followed by the siddhas through his own powers, like a second sun. Commanded by the Indra among the rakshasas,
other immensely powerful rakshasas took up all the brahmanas and travelled. They glanced at the extremely beautiful forests and groves and travelled towards the extensive Badari. Carried by those swift rakshasas whose
strength was immense, the brave ones quickly covered a long distance in a short span of time.
‘They saw many regions infested by mlecchas,674 full of many stores of jewels. They saw mountains and
foothills, the stores of many minerals. They were populated by vidyadharas and had large numbers of monkeys and
kinnaras, in addition to kimpurushas and gandharvas. There were networks of rivers, frequented by many different
kinds of birds. They were visited by many different kinds of animals. They were adorned by monkeys. Having
passed over many regions and over northern Kuru, they saw the supreme and extraordinary Mount Kailasa. Near
it, they saw the hermitage of Nara and Narayana. It was full of celestial trees that always bore ﬂowers and fruit.
They saw the beautiful Badari, with a circular trunk.675 It was always tender and offered unfettered shade. It was
supremely beautiful. It had tender leaves and was smooth and radiant. Its branches were large. They were expansive and were limitless in lustre. It was full of fruit that was tasty and divine. They dripped honey and were always
celestial, beloved of the masses of maharshis. It was always populated by masses of different kinds of birds that
frolicked madly. It grew in a region where there were no mosquitoes or gnats. There were many roots and fruits
and a lot of water there. It was covered with blue grass and frequented by the gods and the gandharvas. It stood on
a ﬂat stretch of ground that was naturally beautiful. It was gentle from the touch of snow and was a beautiful region bereft of thorns.
‘Having reached the spot with the bulls among the brahmanas, all the great-souled ones descended slowly from
the shoulders of the rakshasas. O king! Together with the bulls among the brahmanas, the Pandavas saw the beautiful hermitage, the refuge of Nara and Narayana. The sacred place was devoid of darkness, though it was untouched
by the sun’s rays. It was free from afﬂictions like hunger, thirst, coldness and heat. It was the destroyer of all sorrow. It was crowded by masses of maharshis and complete with the attainment of the brahman. O great king! It
was difﬁcult of access to men who were outside the pale of dharma. It was celestial with the homage of offerings
and oblations. It was maintained well and fragrant. There were offerings of celestial ﬂowers and it was radiant
everywhere. There were large stores for ﬁre. It had lovely ladles. It was adorned with large and ﬁrm pots full of
water. It was a place of refuge for all beings and resounded with the sound of the brahman. That hermitage destroyed all exhaustion and was a celestial hermitage. It was full of beauty and produced immeasurable merit. It was
frequented by those who worshipped the gods. They lived on roots and fruit. They were in control of their senses
and were attired in bark and black antelope skins. They were like the sun and the ﬁre in their austerities and were
controlled in their souls. Those maharshis had restrained their senses and were in search of salvation. Those immensely fortunate ones were learned in the brahman and were immersed in the brahman.
‘The intelligent Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, approached those immensely energetic rishis with his brothers,
with restraint and purity. All the maharshis had divine sight. When they saw Yudhishthira, they welcomed him
with great delight. Those who were always devoted to studies, pronounced their blessings over him. They were the
equal of the ﬁre and they happily welcomed him in accordance with the prescribed rites. They offered him pure
water, ﬂowers, roots and fruit. Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, was restrained and happily accepted the offerings of
the maharshis. That beautiful place was divinely scented and was like Shakra’s abode. O unblemished one! Together with Krishna and his brothers, and the brahmanas who were learned in the Vedas and the Vedangas, the Pandava happily entered the pure place that was like heaven itself. The one with dharma in his soul saw Nara and
Narayana’s spot, worshipped by the gods and the devarshis. It was rendered beautiful by the Bhagirathi. The divine

fruit dripped with honey and it was frequented by masses of brahmarshis. The great-souled ones approached and
dwelt there with the brahmanas. They saw Mount Mainaka with its golden peak, frequented by masses of brahmanas, the auspicious Bindusara and the sacred and great tirtha of Bhagirathi, with its cool and clear water, with
gems, corals and stones and adorned with beautiful trees. There were divine blossoms that heightened the pleasure
of the mind. The great-souled Pandavas saw and roamed around there. They repeatedly made offerings to the gods
and the ancestors. The brave bulls among men dwelt there with the brahmanas. The Pandavas, tigers among men,
who were the equals of the immortals, took great pleasure in watching Krishna sport there in various ways.’
443(146)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Those brave tigers among men observed great purity and lived there for six nights, hoping to
see Dhananjaya. The Pandavas sported with delight in that beautiful grove that was pleasing to all beings. It had
trees ladened with blossoms and were bent down, burdened with fruit. It was beautiful everywhere, astir with
ﬂocks of male cuckoos. The foliage was tender and uninterrupted. It was cool with shade and charming. There
were beautiful ponds with clear water. There were lotuses and lilies there, making every side dazzling.676 The
Pandavas were delighted at witnessing these beautiful sights there. A fragrant breeze wafted there, pleasant to the
touch. This gladdened the hearts of all the Pandavas, Krishna and the bulls among the brahmanas.
‘Then, in accordance with its own wishes, a breeze blew from the north-east. It carried with it a divine lotus with
one thousand petals. Panchali saw that beautiful and pure lotus descend on the ground, redolent with divine fragrance and carried by the wind. O king! The fortunate one approached that pure and supremely fragrant ﬂower and
extremely happily, told Bhimasena, “O Bhima! Look at this divine, dazzling and supreme blossom. It is full of fragrance and has delighted my heart. O destroyer of enemies! I will give this to Dharmaraja. But to satisfy my desire,
get me others, so that I can take them back to the hermitage in Kamyaka. O Partha! If I am your beloved, get them
for me in large numbers. I wish to take them back to the hermitage in Kamyaka.” Having addressed these words to
Bhimasena, the unblemished Panchali then took the ﬂower to Dharmaraja.
‘Learning about the queen’s wishes, the immensely strong Bhima, bull among men, departed, to do that which
would bring pleasure to his beloved. He swiftly left in the direction from which the breeze had carried the ﬂower,
so that he might obtain more ﬂowers. He grasped his bow that was inlaid with gold and arrows that were like the
virulent venom of snakes. He was like an angry king of the animals, or like an elephant in rut. The one with the
strength of his arms wished to do that which would bring pleasure to Droupadi. The strong one was without fear or
delusion and climbed up the mountain.
‘It was covered with trees, creepers and lantanas and strewn with blue stones. The destroyer of enemies went up
the sacred mountain, frequented by kinnaras. There were many kinds of minerals, trees and birds of different types.
Adorned with all kinds of ornaments, it seemed to be like an arm of the earth, stretching upwards. Gandhamadana’s peak was beautiful everywhere. His eyes and his desires were on it and he thought about it in his heart.
The inﬁnitely valorous one’s ears, mind and eyes were ﬁxed on the peaks that resounded to the sounds of male
cuckoos and the humming of bees. The greatly energetic one inhaled the fragrance of the blossom everywhere and
proceeded to climb up Gandhamadana, like a mad elephant in the forest. His father, the cool breeze that blows
from Gandhamadana, took away his exhaustion and fanned by this, his body hair stood up.677 To obtain the ﬂowers, the destroyer of enemies traversed a region frequented by yakshas, gandharvas, gods and masses of brahmarshis. The clean sides of the mountain were streaked with minerals—golden, black and silver. The patterns were
uneven, as if the mountain had been painted with ﬁngers. With clouds clinging to the sides, the mountain seemed
to be dancing, as if on wings. Because of the gushing of water from streams, it seemed to wear a string of pearls. It
had lovely groves, waterfalls and caverns. Peacocks danced there, in tune with the anklets of apsaras. The elephants that guard the cardinal directions678 had rubbed the rocky surface with their tusks. When the water was
swiftly released from the streams and descended, it seemed as if the mountain was loosening its garments. The
deer approached and curiously looked at him, unused to fear, with grass in their mouths. Vayu’s son, the handsome
Kounteya, proceeded happily, as if in sport, tearing away many nets of creepers with the force of his thighs. The
one with the beautiful eyes wished to do that which would bring pleasure to his beloved. The youth was as tall as a

golden palm and his body was like that of a lion. He was as strong as a mad elephant and he possessed the speed of
a mad elephant. His copper-hued eyes were like that of a mad elephant and he was capable of withstanding a mad
elephant. Seated by the sides of their beloveds, and invisible to the sight, the wives of yakshas and gandharvas,
watched him and made expressive gestures.
‘As if having adopted a new body, Pandava happily ascended Gandhamadana’s beautiful peak. He remembered
the many woes that had been inﬂicted by Duryodhana. Eager to perform the task that the forest-dwelling Droupadi
had given, he thought, “Arjuna has gone to heaven. I have come away to fetch the ﬂowers. What will the arya Yudhishthira do? Out of affection and out of distrust for what is in the forest, Yudhishthira, the best of men, will not
release Nakula and Sahadeva.679 How can I obtain the ﬂowers quickly?” Thinking in this way, the tiger among
men travelled with the speed of the king of the birds.680 The earth shook when his feet struck it, like a storm at the
end of an era. The immensely strong Vrikodara’s speed frightened herds of elephants, lions, tigers and animals.
The strong one forcefully uprooted many gigantic trees and brushed them aside with his chest. Pandu’s son swiftly
tore aside creepers and lantanas, as he climbed higher and higher up the peak of the mountain, like an elephant. He
roared like a monsoon cloud, streaked with lightning. O lord! Awakened by that terrible sound and the twang of his
bow, herds of animals were frightened and ﬂed in all directions.
‘On the slopes of the peak of Gandhamadana, the mighty-armed one then saw a beautiful grove of plantain trees
that extended for many yojanas. The immensely strong one swiftly dashed towards it. Like a giant elephant oozing
musth, like the wind among many trees, Bhima, supreme among those who are strong, uprooted the trunks of
many plantain trees that were as large as many palm trees and thrust them aside. There were many large animals,
herds of ruru,681 monkeys, lions, buffaloes and aquatic animals. The lions and tigers were angered and attacked
Bhimasena. They were extremely fearsome. Their jaws gaped and their roars were terrible. But Vayu’s son, Bhima,
used the strength of his arms and angrily killed elephants with elephants and lions with lions. The lord, the strong
Pandava, used the palm of his hand to kill others. Thus killed by Bhima, lions, tigers and hyenas crept away fearfully, discharging urine and dung. Pandu’s handsome and immensely strong son then swiftly entered the forest and
ﬁlled all the directions with his roar. Hearing that terrible roar let out by Bhimasena, all the animals and birds in
the forest were frightened and ﬂed elsewhere. On hearing the sounds of the animals and the birds, thousands of
birds ﬂew up. Their wings were wet with water. On seeing those masses of aquatic birds, the bull among the
Bharata lineage followed them and saw a beautiful and giant lake. Though it was fanned by clumps of golden plantain trees along its shores, stirred by the breeze, it was tranquil. The lake was adorned with many lotuses and lilies.
Descending into the water, the strongest among strong ones sported around, like a gigantic elephant. Having sported there for a long time, the inﬁnitely energetic one climbed out and swiftly entered the forest that was full of
many trees. With the force of his breath, the Pandava blew on his conch shell. The sound of the conch shell, Bhimasena’s roars and the terrible sound of the slapping of his arms resounded in the mountainous caverns. Hearing
the loud sound of the slapping, like the roar of thunder, lions that were asleep in the mountainous caverns let out
loud roars. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The roar of the lions frightened the elephants. The great mountain
was ﬁlled with their loud trumpeting.
‘Hanuman, bull among monkeys, was asleep. On hearing these roars, the monkey, gigantic in form, began to
yawn. He was as gigantic as Indra’s ﬂagpole and he had been asleep in that clump of plantain trees. As he yawned,
he lashed the ground with his tail and the sound was like that of Indra’s vajra. Like a bellowing cow, on every side,
the mountain echoed from the sound of the tail, through the mouths of the giant caverns. Rising above the sound
created by the mad elephants, the sound of the lashing of the tail spread throughout the colourful peak of the
mountain. On hearing the noise, Bhimasena’s body hair stood up. In an attempt to identify the source, he roamed
around the grove of plantain trees. Then the mighty-armed one found the lord of the monkeys in the middle of the
plantain grove, lying down on an elevated and ﬂat slab of stone. He was difﬁcult to look at, like a ﬂash of lightning. He was yellow, like lightning. He looked like a ﬂash of lightning. He was as swift as lightning. His short and
stout head rested on the crook of his arms. Because his shoulders were so large, the waist above his hips seemed to
be slender. His tail was bent at the end and was covered with long hair. It was erect and dazzling, like a banner. His
lips were red and his tongue had the complexion of copper. His ears were red and his brows moved. His face was
like the moon with its beams and the teeth were round and sharp. The inside of the mouth was adorned with white

and dazzling teeth. Above it, the extensive mane looked like a mass of ashoka ﬂowers. The immensely radiant one
was lying down in the midst of the golden plantain trees. His form was as resplendent as a blazing ﬁre and he
looked fearlessly with eyes that were as yellow as honey.
‘Bhima, terrible in prowess, swiftly approached that gigantic and supremely powerful one, supreme among
monkeys. He roared like a lion, so that the monkey might be forewarned. At Bhima’s roar, the animals and the
birds were frightened. The immensely powerful Hanuman only opened his eyes a little. He looked at him contemptuously, through eyes that were yellow like honey. Smiling, the monkey addressed the human Kounteya. “I was ill
and was happily asleep. Why did you wake me up? Do you not know that it is your duty to show compassion towards all beings? Since we have been born from inferior wombs, we do not know what dharma is. But men have
intelligence and should show compassion towards animals. Why do you commit cruel deeds that cause injury to
the body, speech and heart? They are against dharma. You are blessed with intelligence. You do not know what
dharma is. You have not served old ones. You have limited intelligence and in your childlishness, are injuring animals. Who are you? Tell me. Despite being a man, why have you come to this forest that is shunned by men? From
here onwards, the mountain is insurmountable and inaccessible, except by the siddhas. O brave one! You cannot go
there. O immensely powerful one! I am restraining you out of compassion and friendliness. O lord! You cannot go
beyond this place. If you accept my words, relax and eat these roots and fruit that taste like amrita. Then return.”’
444(147)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing these words of the intelligent Indra among monkeys, Bhimasena, the destroyer
of enemies, said, “Who are you? Why have you assumed the form of an ape? It is a kshatriya, right after the brahmana varna, who is asking you. I am a Kourava and have been born in the lunar dynasty. Kunti bore me in her
womb. I am a Pandava and am Vayu’s son. I am known by the name of Bhimasena.” On hearing these words of
Bhimasena, Hanuman, Vayu’s son, smiled and told Vayu’s son.682 “I am a monkey. I will yield you the path, as
you wish. Do not continue on this path. Else, you will meet with destruction.” Bhima replied, “O monkey! I am not
asking you about destruction, or about anything else. Arise and grant me right of way. Otherwise, you will confront destruction from me.” Hanuman said, “I am ill and therefore, do not have the strength to get up. If you are
determined to go, then jump over me.” Bhima replied, “The paramatman without qualities683 pervades your body
and can be known only through knowledge. I cannot insult Him684 by jumping over you. Through my studies, I
know Him and all beings result from Him. Had that not been the case, I would have jumped over you and this
mountain, just as Hanuman leapt over the ocean.” Hanuman asked, “Who is the one named Hanuman who leapt
over the ocean? O best of the Kuru lineage! I am asking you. Tell me if you can.” Bhima answered, “He is my
brother and is renowned because of his qualities. He has intelligence, power and strength. That handsome bull
among the monkeys is extremely famous in the Ramayana. For the sake of Rama’s consort, this Indra among the
apes leapt over the ocean that was one hundred yojanas wide in a single leap. That greatly valorous one is my
brother. I am his equal in energy, strength and prowess and can chastise you in battle. Arise and grant me right of
way. Otherwise, witness my manliness today. Do what I am asking you to, and do not go to Yama’s abode.” Knowing him to be strong and insolent because of the strength of his arms, Hanuman laughed at him in his heart.
‘He spoke these words. “O unblemished one! Show me your favours. Because of old age, I do not have the
strength to get up. Exhibit compassion towards me. Pass by moving my tail aside.” With a contemptuous smile,
Bhima grasped the giant ape’s tail with his left hand, but he was not able to move it. Then he tugged at the tail,
raised erect like Indra’s weapon,685 with both his hands. But even with both arms, the immensely strong Bhima
was unable to move it. His eyebrows contracted. His eyes were dilated. His face became wrinkled with frowns. His
body began to sweat. But Bhima could not dislodge it. However much he tried, he was not able to raise the handsome tail. With a face lowered in shame, Bhima stood by the monkey’s side. Kounteya bowed down and joining
his hands in salutation, spoke these words. “O tiger among monkeys! Please show me your favours and pardon my
harsh words. Whether you are a siddha, a god, a gandharva or guhyaka, please tell me who you are. I am asking
you and wish to know. Who are you in the form of an ape?”

‘Hanuman said, “O destroyer of enemies! Since you are curious to know everything about me, I will tell you
everything in detail. O descendant of the Pandava lineage! Listen. I was born in Kesari’s ﬁeld686 from Vayu, who
gives life to the universe. O one with the lotus eyes! I am the monkey named Hanuman. All the chiefs of the monkeys waited upon the two kings of the apes, Sugriva the son of the sun, and Vali the son of Indra. I was a friend to
the immensely brave Sugriva, the destroyer of enemies, like wind to the ﬁre. For some reason, Sugriva was driven
out by his brother687 and lived with me, for a long time, in Rishyamukha. At that time, the immensely strong hero
Dasharathi688 Rama, who was Vishnu in human form, roamed on this earth. In order to please his father, that
greatest of archers resorted to Dandakaranya, with his wife, with his younger brother and with his bow. Ravana abducted his wife forcibly from Janasthana, having deceived the immensely wise Raghava in the form of a deer.689
Having lost his wife, together with his brother, Raghava searched for the path she had taken and met Sugriva, bull
among monkeys, on the peak of a mountain. The great-souled Raghava became his friend. Having killed Vali, he
instated Sugriva in the kingdom. He690 sent monkeys to search for Sita. We and crores of monkeys left in one direction and a vulture gave us news about Sita.691 To complete the task given by Rama, the performer of unblemished deeds, I swiftly jumped over the ocean that extended for one hundred yojanas. I saw the goddess in Ravana’s
abode and after having told her my name, returned. Then brave Rama killed all the rakshasas. He regained his
wife, who had been lost like the knowledge of the Vedas. When the brave Rama was instated,692 I asked him that
as long as the deeds of that enemy-destroying hero were recounted on earth, I should be alive that long. He agreed.
Rama ruled over his kingdom for eleven thousand years and then went to heaven. O unblemished one! O son!693
Since then, apsaras and gandharvas sing of the deeds of that great hero and bring me pleasure here. O descendant
of the Kuru lineage! This road is inaccessible to mortals. That is the reason I have restrained you from travelling
along this road, frequented by the gods. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I do not wish you to be oppressed or
cursed. This is the celestial path of the gods and humans cannot travel along it. But the lake that you came in
search of, is not far away.”’
445(148)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having been thus addressed, the powerful and mighty-armed Bhimasena prostrated himself
before his brother and happily spoke these gentle words to Hanuman, lord of the monkeys. “Since I have been able
to see your illustrious self, no one is more fortunate than I am. Since I have been able to see you, this is a great
favour to me. But I desire that you should today do that which is my wish. O brave one! I wish to see your unmatched form that you assumed when you leapt across the ocean, the abode of sharks. I will then be satisiﬁed and
will have faith in your words.” Having been thus addressed, the energetic ape began to laugh and said, “Neither
you, nor anyone else, can see that form of mine. That was in another age that no longer exists. Time was different
in krita yuga and it is different in treta and dvapara.694 This is the time of decay and I no longer possess that form.
The earth, rivers, ranges, mountains, siddhas, gods and maharshis must all conform to time and adjust their forms
from one yuga to another yuga. Strength, size and power decline, and then increase again. O extender of the Kuru
lineage! Therefore, do not wish to see that form. I am conforming to the rules of the yugas and no one can overcome time.” Bhima said, “Then tell me the number of yugas and the conduct from one yuga to another yuga. What
are the different forms of dharma, kama and artha, and variations in size, inﬂuence, existence and death?”
‘Hanuman replied, “O son! Krita is the yuga when dharma is eternal. At the time of krita, supreme among yugas, there are no deeds to be done. Dharma knew no decay then. Nor were beings destroyed. That is the reason this
yuga was known as krita.695 Those qualities have gone now. O son! In krita yuga, there are no gods, demons,
gandharvas, yakshas, rakshasas or serpents. There is no buying or selling. The sounds of Rig, Sama and Yajur did
not exist. Nor did rites, or manual labour. When thought of, the desired fruits appeared. The only dharma was sannyasa. At the conjunction of the yugas, there is no disease, or decay of the senses. There is no discontentment, no
lamentation, no insolence, no wickedness, no strife, no laziness, no enmity, no distortion, no fear, no sorrow, no
envy and no jealousy. The supreme brahman, the supreme objective of all yogis, and the white Narayana were then

in the souls of all beings. Brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras were all auspiciously marked in krita yuga
and were equal in deportment. All beings were engaged in their own tasks. The stages of life, conduct, knowledge,
wisdom and deed were equally distributed among the varnas and all of them obtained equal dharma. All of them
were united with one Veda. All rituals were performed with one mantra. Though they may have followed different
forms of dharma, they actually followed one Veda and one dharma. They followed the four ashramas and performed tasks without seeking the fruits, in accordance with the dictates of that time. They attained the supreme objective. Everyone sought for yoga in one’s soul and being united with dharma, attained the objective. In krita yuga,
the four varnas had four eternal feet.696 This was known as krita yuga, devoid of the three qualities.”697
‘“Now hear about treta yuga. Sacriﬁces were introduced then. Dharma decayed by one quarter then and
Achyuta698 assumed a red complexion. Men were always addicted to the truth and devoted to the dharma of rituals. Sacriﬁces were introduced and many rituals became part of dharma in treta. These were motivated by reasons
and rituals and donations were because of the fruits that they would bring. People never deviated from the path of
dharma and were devoted to austerities and donations. In treta yuga, people performed deeds in accordance with
their own dharma.
‘“In dvapara yuga, dharma decayed by half. Vishnu assumes a yellow complexion and there are four Vedas.
Some people know four Vedas. Others know three, or two, or one. Still others know no hymns. The sacred texts
have thus been divided into many parts and there are many rituals. Beings are engaged in austerities and donations
because of their passions.699 Because the single Veda is no longer known, the Vedas have been divided into many
parts. There has been a deviation from the truth and there are only a few who are established in the truth. When
one deviates from the truth, one becomes a prey to many diseases. One resorts to desire and there are many natural
disasters. Being afﬂicted by these, some men resort to terrible austerities. Others, motivated by a desire to attain
heaven, resort to deeds. Thus, having attained dvapara, beings decay because they are no longer devoted to
dharma.
‘“O Kounteya! Only one quarter of dharma remains in kali yuga. When this yuga arrives, Keshava’s complexion
becomes black. The rituals of the Vedas, dharma, sacriﬁces and deeds fall into disuse. There is excessive rain, disease, sin and vices like anger. There are many natural calamities. There are ailments and sicknesses. As the yugas
proceed, dharma repeatedly decays. As dharma decays, beings repeatedly deteriorate. As beings deteriorate, the
forces that sustain the world also go into a decline. As the yugas decay, even tasks performed in the name of dharma lead to perverse outcomes. This is the name of kali yuga, which will soon manifest itself. Even those who live
for a long time must conform to the changes in the yugas. O destroyer of enemies! You were curious to know
everything about me. Why should a learned man wish to know about things that are useless? O mighty-armed one!
I have told you everything that you had asked me, including about the number of yugas. May you be blessed.
Leave now.”’
446(149)

‘Bhima said, “I will never go without seeing your earlier form. If you are pleased with me, show me your own
form.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘At these words of Bhima, the ape smiled and showed him the form that he had adopted
when he leapt over the ocean. In order to please his brother, he adopted that gigantic shape. His body grew in
length and breadth. The immensely radiant monkey stood as large as a mountain, covering the plantain grove.
Having attained that gigantic shape that was like a second mountain, with copper-coloured eyes, sharp teeth and
eyes marked by frowns, the monkey lashed his long tail and enveloped the directions. Bhima, the descendant of the
Kourava lineage, saw his brother’s gigantic shape and was astounded. He was repeatedly delighted. On seeing his
blazing energy, like the sun, or a golden mountain, or the sky on ﬁre, Bhima closed his eyes.
‘Hanuman then smiled and spoke to Bhimasena. “O unblemished one! You are capable of seeing my body up to
this point. I can go on extending my body, as much as I desire. O Bhima! Amidst enemies, my body becomes gigantic through its own energy.” On seeing Hanuman’s immensely terrible body, the equal of Mounts Vindhya and
Mandara, Pavana’s son was bewildered.700 Though he was delighted, his soul trembled. Bhima joined his hands

in salutation and spoke to Hanuman, who was still established in that form. “O lord! O immensely valorous one! I
have seen your extensive body. Now decrease it through your own powers. I am unable to look at you. You are like
the rising sun. You are immeasurable. You are as inaccessible as Mount Mainaka. O brave one! It is a source of
great wonder to me today that, though Rama had you at his side, he had to ﬁght with Ravana himself. With the
strength of your arms alone, you were capable of destroying Lanka with its armies and vehicles. O Marut’s
son!701 There is nothing that is impossible for you. Ravana, with all his armies, was no match for you in battle.”
‘Having been thus addressed by Bhima, Hanuman, bull among monkeys, replied in a soft and deep voice. “O
mighty-armed one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is as you say. O Bhimasena! That evil rakshasa was no
match for me. But if I had killed that Ravana, the thorn of the worlds, Raghava’s glory would have been diminished.702 That is the reason I ignored him. By killing the rakshasa king, together with his armies, and taking Sita
back to his own city, that brave one established his fame in this world. O immensely wise brother! You are devoted
to ensuring my welfare. Protected by Vayu, depart now, along a path that is safe and secure. O best among the
Kuru lineage! This path will lead you to Sougandhika forest703 and the grove of the lord of riches,704 guarded by
yakshas and rakshasas. Do not perform the rash act of plucking any ﬂowers there yourself. A man must specially
honour the gods there. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When satisﬁed
with sacriﬁces, oblations, reverence and mantras, the gods exhibit favours towards the faithful. O son!705 Therefore, do not act out of bravery. Observe your own dharma. Abiding by your own dharma, know and follow the
supreme dharma. Without knowing dharma and without serving the aged, even the likes of Brihaspati are incapable of comprehending dharma and artha. One should carefully discriminate among situations where that which is
not dharma goes by the name of dharma, and that which is dharma goes by the name of that which is not dharma.
Those who are deluded in intelligence cannot distinguish. Dharma results from conduct. The Vedas are established
on dharma. Sacriﬁces originate from the Vedas. The gods are established in sacriﬁces. The gods are sustained
through sacriﬁces and rituals prescribed in the Vedas. Even men sustain themselves through the ordinances decreed
by Brihaspati and Ushanas706—buying and selling, mining, trading, agriculture and animal husbandry. Everything
is sustained through such vocations and dharma. For the three varnas,707 three pursuits have been indicated in the
sacred texts—study of the three Vedas, following a vocation and governing. When these are properly followed, the
world’s welfare is ensured. But if there is no pursuit of dharma and these three routes to dharma are not followed,
this earth is not controlled and there is no governance. If beings do not follow dharma and their vocations, they
will perish. By regularly following the three pursuits, beings prosper. There is one characteristic that marks the
eternal dharma of the three varnas—sacriﬁcing, studying and giving. These are three pursuits that are common to
everyone. Performing sacriﬁces, studying and accepting708 constitute the dharma of brahmanas. Protection is that
of kshatriyas and providing sustenance is the dharma of vaishyas. Servitude to the other three varnas is known to
be the dharma of shudras, as it is of those who are in their preceptor’s house709 and cannot therefore beg for alms
or perform oblations and vows. O Kounteya! Your dharma is that of a kshatriya. Your dharma is protection. Be
humble. Control your senses and follow your own dharma. He who has consulted elders, the honest, the intelligent
and the learned, and then resorts to punishment by the staff, governs well. But a decadent one suffers. When a king
punishes and rewards according to what is needed, it is then that the contours of the world are properly laid out.
Therefore, spies must constantly be used to ascertain the state of the nation, the fortiﬁcations, the forces of friends
and enemies, and their conditions of prosperity and adversity. Kings possess four means that lead to success—wise
counsel, valour, punishment and reward and sagacity. Whether applied together or in isolation, sama, dana, danda
and bheda can lead to success.710 O bull among the Bharata lineage! Spies and counsel are the source of policies.
Good counsel leads to success and one should consult with those who are skilled. In secret matters, one should not
consult with a woman, with a fool, with a child, with one who is greedy, with one who is mean and with one who
is touched by insanity. One should only consult with wise ones and get tasks undertaken by those who are capable.
Policies must be devised by those who are gentle. Fools must always be avoided. Those who follow dharma must
be engaged in matters related to dharma, learned ones in matters connected to artha, eunuchs in matters connected
to women and cruel ones for the performance of cruel deeds. The nature of action, what should be done and what

should not be done and the reasons behind any particular task, should be decided on the basis of the relative
strengths and weaknesses of one’s enemy, as well as one’s own. Using one’s intelligence, favours should be shown
to righteous ones who have sought refuge. However, evil and unskilled ones must be repressed. When a king follows reward and chastisement properly, the boundaries of the world are laid out properly. O Partha! This is the difﬁcult and terrible dharma that I have delineated for you. Follow this humbly, in accordance with what has been
prescribed as your own dharma. The brahmanas go to heaven through the dharma of austerities, control of the self
and oblations. The vaishyas obtain the desired objective through donations, serving guests and rituals. Like that,
the kshatriyas attain heaven on earth through protection and punishments. Without being addicted to desire and hatred, without avarice and controlling their anger, and chastising appropriately, they reach the worlds attained by the
virtuous.”’
447(150)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Then the monkey contracted his huge body, which he had extended through his own wishes.
He once again embraced Bhimasena with his arms. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having been thus embraced by his brother, Bhima’s exhaustion was destroyed and everything was at ease. With tears in his eyes, the
ape once again told Bhima, in a voice that was choked and affectionate. “O brave one! Return to your own abode.
But remember me in your thoughts. O best of the Kurus! Do not tell anyone that I am here. O immensely powerful
one! When they have obtained leave from the abode of the lord of the riches, the wives of the gods and the gandharvas come to this region and to this time. My eyes have been satisﬁed and I have remembered Raghava. O Bhima! Through you, I have touched another human body. O brave one! O Kounteya! Now let your sight of me be
successful too. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Because of our brotherhood, ask for a boon. If you wish that I
should go to Hastinapura and kill the low sons of Dhritarashtra, I will do that. Or I will grind that city down with
rocks. O immensely strong one! I will perform whatever deed you desire.” On hearing these words of the greatsouled one, Bhima was delighted and replied to Hanuman with happiness in his heart, “O bull among apes! You
have already done everything for me. O mighty-armed one! May you be fortunate. Forgive me. I desire your
favours. With a protector as valorous as you, all of us Pandavas have found a protector. With your energy, all of us
will triumph over our enemies.” Having heard these words, Hanuman told Bhimasena, “From brotherhood and out
of my well wishes towards you, I will do that which will bring you pleasure. O brave one! O mighty-armed one!
When you rush into the enemy’s battle formations, armed with arrows and spears, and utter a roar like that of a
lion, I will add my own roars to that of yours. Seated on Vijaya’s ﬂagstaff,711 I will let loose terrible roars that will
rob the enemies of their lives.” Having said this, he disappeared.
‘When that supreme of apes had left, Bhima, foremost among strong ones, travelled along that road to the extensive Gandhamadana. He thought about his712 resplendent body, unmatched on earth. He thought about
Dasharathi’s greatness and power. Travelling eagerly towards Sougandhika forest, he made lovely forests and
groves tremble. He saw forests with blossoms and many colourful ﬂowers and lotuses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He saw mad elephants that were streaked with mud, like masses of monsoon clouds. Proceeding fast,
the handsome one saw bucks with does in the forest. They had grass in their mouths and their darting eyes looked
at him. With great valour, Bhimasena entered the mountain that was infested with buffaloes, boars and tigers, as if
forest trees that were in blossom, stirred by the breeze and with branches lowered by the burden of delicate and
copper-red shoots, had invited him in. He passed ponds teeming with lotuses, with beautiful tirthas and groves,
swarming with intoxicated bees. The lotuses seemed to join their hands in salutation. But Bhima’s mind was set on
the peak of the mountain, full of ﬂowers. With Droupadi’s words providing sustenance, he travelled faster. When
the day had turned,713 in the forest that was infested with deer, he saw a wide river. It was full of unblemished and
golden lotuses. It was aswarm with intoxicated karandavas714 and adorned with chakravakas.715 It was as if a
garland of spotless lotuses had been designed for the mountain. Near that river, the greatly powerful one saw the
large Sougandhika forest. It was as radiant as the rising sun and brought him joy. On seeing this, Pandu’s son
thought that his desires had been satisﬁed. His mind went out to his beloved, who was suffering as a result of
dwelling in the forest.’

448(151)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On the peak of Kailasa and in that beautiful grove, he saw that beautiful pond, guarded by
rakshasas. Its source was the mountainous waterfalls that were near Kubera’s abode. It was extremely beautiful,
with a lot of shade and full of many trees and creepers. It was covered with yellow lotuses and divine golden lotuses. It made the world pure. It was auspicious and extraordinary to behold. Pandava, Kunti’s son, saw the clear,
cool, light and pure water there, like amrita. He drank a lot of that auspicious water. The beautiful pond was covered with sougandhika lotuses. There were golden lotuses, with supreme fragrance. The stalks were made out of
lapis lazuli.716 They were beautiful and had many colours. Disturbed by the swans and the karandakas,717 they
scattered white pollen. This was the pleasure ground of the great-souled Kubera, king of the yakshas. It was shown
great homage by the gandharvas, the apsaras and the gods. It was frequented by the rishis, yakshas, kimpurushas,
rakshasas and kinnaras and was protected well by Vaishravana.718
‘On seeing that celestial pond, the immensely strong Kounteya Bhimasena was ﬁlled with great delight. On the
instructions of their king,719 hundreds and thousands of rakshasas, named krodhavashas, stood guard, armed with
many different kinds of weapons. They saw Kounteya, the destroyer of enemies. Bhima, terrible in valour, was
clad in deerskin and golden armour for his upper arms. He was armed and his sword was girded. When they saw
him fearlessly advance to gather the lotuses, they shouted at one another, “Why has this maharatha, tiger among
men, come here? He is clad in deerskin and bears arms. Inquire.” Then all of them approached the mighty-armed
Vrikodara and asked the resplendent one, “Who are you? Tell us. You wear the garments of a hermit and we see
that you are attired in bark. O immensely intelligent one. Tell us why you have come.”’
449(152)

‘Bhima replied, “I am Pandava Bhimasena. I am next in birth to Dharma’s son.720 O rakshasas! I have come with
my brothers to the extensive Badari. There, Panchali saw the supreme sougandhika. The wind carried it from here
and she immediately wanted many more. O those who roam in the night! Know that I have come here to gather
ﬂowers, to do that which brings pleasure to the one with the unblemished limbs, my wife in accordance with
dharma.”
‘The rakshasas said, “O bull among men! This is Kubera’s beloved pleasure garden. One who is subject to the
laws of mortal earth cannot sport here. O Vrikodara! Devarshis, yakshas and gods have to seek the permission of
the lord of the yakshas before they can drink or amuse themselves here. O Pandava! So do the gandharvas and the
apsaras before sporting here. If an evil-minded one sports here against these rules, insulting the lord of riches, there
is no doubt that he will meet with destruction. Ignoring him, you wish to take these lotuses away by force. Why do
you then describe yourself as Dharmaraja’s brother?”
‘Bhima replied, “O rakshasas! I do not see the lord of riches anywhere near. Even if I were to see the great king,
I would not trouble him by asking. It is the eternal dharma that kings should not beg. I do not wish to deviate from
the dharma of kshatriyas by even a triﬂe. This beautiful lotus pond has been created from mountainous water
springs. It is not part of the abode of the great-souled Kubera. It belongs equally to all beings, just as it does to
Vaishravana. Since this is the state of affairs, who should ask whom for permission?”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having said this to all the rakshasas, the powerful Bhimasena plunged in. All the rakshasas tried to restrain him, asking him to desist. They angrily abused him from all directions. But not paying any
attention to the rakshasas, the one who was terrible in valour plunged in. All of them tried to restrain the immensely energetic one. “Grasp him.” “Bind him.” “Slash him.” “We will cook and feed on Bhimasena.” Angrily uttering
such words, they raised their arms and distending their eyes, swiftly rushed at him. He grasped his giant club, inlaid with gold, and like Yama’s staff. He grasped it and swiftly hurled himself at them, shouting, “Stay there! Stay
there!” The extremely terrible krodhavashas suddenly rushed at him with great force. They had spears, battleaxes
and other weapons. Desiring to kill him, they encircled Bhima in terrible fashion. But the powerful one was born
in Kunti’s womb from the wind. He was swift and brave and the destroyer of his enemies. He was always devoted
to truth and dharma. In valour, he was incapable of being vanquished by any foe. The great-souled one used many

techniques. He destroyed the weapons of his enemies. On the banks of that pond, the brave one slew hundreds of
them, including those who were the foremost. On seeing his valour and strength, the strength of his knowledge and
the strength of his arms and unable to withstand him, despite their numbers, they suddenly ﬂed in all directions, the
foremost ones having been slain. They were destroyed and crushed, and bereft of their senses, took to the sky.
Crushed by Bhima, the krodhavashas were shattered and ran away, towards the peak of Kailasa.
‘Having thus vanquished hordes of daityas and danavas in battle, like Shakra, the one who was victorious over
his enemies again plunged into the pond and collected lotuses, in accordance with his desires. Having drunk the
water, which was like amrita, his valour and energy were completely restored. He plucked and gathered sougandhika lotuses, with a supreme fragrance. The krodhavashas had been overcome with Bhima’s strength. They went to
the lord of riches and extremely frightened, told him about Bhima’s valour and strength in battle. Having heard
their words, the god laughed and told the rakshasas, “Let Bhima take as many lotuses as he wishes for Krishna. I
know the reason.” Having taken their leave of the lord of riches and having controlled their anger, they returned to
the foremost among the Kurus. They saw Bhima alone in that pond full of lotuses, sporting happily.’
450(153)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Then the bull among the Bharata lineage started to gather large numbers of those precious,
divine, unblemished and colourful ﬂowers. Suddenly, a large storm arose. It swiftly threw up the stones from below. It was harsh to the touch and carried with it the portents of battle. A giant meteor descended, immensely ﬁery
in the storm. Covered in the darkness, the sun’s rays were dimmed and it lost its radiance. While Bhima resorted to
his terrible valour, a terrible whirlwind gathered. The earth began to tremble and a storm of dust descended. The
directions turned red. Animals and birds screamed in harsh voices. Everything was covered in darkness and nothing could be seen.’
‘On seeing these extraordinary happenings, Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son and the foremost among speakers,
spoke these words. “Who is attempting to overcome us? O Pandavas! You are always powerful in battle. Be fortunate and prepared. From what I can see, the time for displaying our valour has come.” Having spoken these words,
the king looked around. But Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, could not see Bhima. Then the destroyer of enemies
asked Krishna and the twins, who were close by, about his brother Bhima, the performer of terrible deeds in battle.
“O Panchali! Did Bhima desire to perform some deed? Or has the brave one, who is addicted to valour, already
performed some courageous deed? Portents can suddenly be seen in all the directions. They indicate a great battle
and foretell great dangers.” The intelligent Krishna, his sweet-smiling and beloved queen, who always wished to
bring him pleasure, replied to his words, “O king! A sougandhika was brought here by the wind today. I showed it
to Bhimasena and lovingly told the brave one to bring many more back to me, if he should see them, and return
quickly. O king! To bring me pleasure, the mighty-armed Pandava must have gone to the north-eastern direction.”
Having heard these words, the king told the twins, “In that case, let us immediately go where Vrikodara has gone.
Let the rakshasas bear the brahmanas who are exhausted and tired, as the case may be. O Ghatotkacha! You are the
equal of the immortals. You carry Krishna. It is my certain view that Bhima has gone a long distance away. He has
been away for a long time and he is like the wind in his speed. In swiftly leaping over the ground, he is like Vinata’s son.721 He will leap up into the sky and descend, as he pleases. O those who roam in the night!722 With the
aid of your powers, we will follow him, before he causes any offence to the siddhas and those who are learned in
the brahman.” They agreed to these words.
‘O bull among the Bharata lineage! They were all led by Hidimba’s son, who was foremost among them and
knew the region around Kubera’s pond. In a delighted frame of mind, they grasped the Pandavas and many other
brahmanas, together with Lomasha. All of them travelled together until they saw the grove and the extremely
beautiful pond with sougandhika lotuses. They saw the intelligent and great-souled Bhima along its banks and the
bodies of the large-eyed yakshas that he had slain. He was standing on the banks of the river,723 his club raised in
his two arms, like Yama with a staff in his hand at the time of the destruction of beings. On seeing him, Dharmaraja embraced him again and again. He spoke to him in gentle words. “O Kounteya! What have you done? O fortunate one! Because of your courage, you have brought displeasure to the gods. If you wish to bring me pleasure,

never commit such deeds again.” After having thus instructed Kounteya, they collected lotuses and amused themselves in that lotus pond, like the immortals.
‘At that time, the guards appeared. Their bodies were gigantic and they were armed with rocks. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! When they saw Dharmaraja, maharshi Lomasha, Nakula, Sahadeva and all the other bulls
among brahmanas, they prostrated themselves in humility. Dharmaraja paciﬁed those roamers of the night and they
became calm. With Kubera’s permission, the bulls among the Kurus lived there for some time and sported
themselves.’

Section Thirty-Four
Jatasura-vadha Parva
This parva has sixty-one shlokas and one chapter.
Vadha means to kill or slay and this section is about Bhima killing the demon named Jatasura.
451(154)

Vaishampayana said, ‘The Pandavas lived comfortably on that mountain. When the rakshasas and Bhimasena’s
son1 had left, and they were without Bhimasena, who had gone to roam around as he willed, a rakshasa abducted
Dharmaraja, the twins and Krishna.2 He had pretended to be a brahmana skilled in mantras and well versed in
weapons. Having said this, he had served the Pandavas every day. He lived with the Parthas, covetous of their
quivers and bows and waited for his chance. He was known by the name of Jatasura. When Bhimsena, the destroyer of enemies, went out to hunt, he assumed a different form. It was distorted, terrible and gigantic. Having grasped
all the weapons and seizing Droupadi and the three Pandavas, he ﬂed. But with a great deal of effort, Pandava Sahadeva extricated himself. Shouting for Bhimasena, he ran in the direction that the immensely strong one had
taken.
‘While he was thus being abducted, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira told him, “O stupid one! Dharma declines in you,
but you do not see it. Whether one is a human or whether one belongs to inferior species, the gandharvas, the yakshas and the rakshasas, birds and animals, draw their sustenance from humans and so do you. If there is prosperity
in our world, there is prosperity in your world too. If our world suffers, the gods suffer along with us. They prosper
through worship and oblations to the gods and the ancestors,3 offered through rituals. O rakshasa! We are the
guardians and the protectors of the kingdom. If kingdoms are unprotected, how can there be prosperity? How can
there be happiness? Unless there has been an act of injury, no rakshasa should ever harm a king. O one who lives
off men! We have not committed the least bit of injury. One should never injure friends and those who are trustful,
those whose food has been partaken of and those who have provided shelter. You found shelter with us. We
showed you honour and you lived happily. O one who is not wise! Having partaken of our food, how can you
abduct us? Since your conduct is fruitless, your age is fruitless and your intelligence is fruitless, you deserve a
fruitless death—and these words will not be fruitless today. If you are truly evil-minded and devoid of all dharma,
then return our weapons and win Droupadi after vanquishing us in battle. But if you are driven by ignorance in
your mind and persist in performing this act, you will follow that which is not dharma and will only obtain ill fame
in this world. O rakshasa! You have today laid your hands on this human woman. It is as if you have stirred up a
vessel and drunk poison from it.” Then Yudhishthira bore down heavily on him and oppressed by this weight, he4
could not travel very fast.
‘Yudhishthira told Nakula and Droupadi, “Do not be frightened of this stupid rakshasa. I have robbed him of his
speed. Pavana’s mighty-armed son cannot be far away.5 He will arrive in an instant and the rakshasa will have no
future.” O king! On seeing that the rakshasa was deluded of his intelligence, Sahadeva spoke to Kunti’s son, Yudhishthira. “O king! Nothing brings greater merit to a kshatriya than to fall in the ﬁeld of battle and give up his life,
or triumph over an enemy. O scorcher of enemies! Let us ﬁght him in the ﬁeld of battle. Either he will kill us, or

we will kill him. O mighty-armed one! O king! The time and the place are right. O one for whom valour is truth!
The time has come to show the dharma of kshatriyas. Whether we triumph or whether we are slain, we will attain
the supreme objective. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If the rakshasa is still alive when the sun sets, I will
no longer be able to say that I am a kshatriya. O rakshasa! Stop! I am Pandava Sahadeva. Either kill me and take
them today, or fall senseless.” While he was speaking thus, Bhimasena appeared by chance. The mighty-armed one
looked like Vasava6 with his vajra. He saw his two brothers and the famous Droupadi, and Sahadeva on the
ground, challenging the rakshasa. He saw the stupid rakshasa, who had lost his path, his intelligence having been
robbed by time. Driven by destiny, he was roaming around here and there.
‘On seeing his brothers and Droupadi being thus abducted, the mighty-armed Bhima was overcome with rage
and told the rakshasa, “I had got to know about you earlier, when I saw you scrutinize our weapons. But though I
did not have my trust in you, I did not kill you then. You were in the form of a brahmana and you had not uttered
any unpleasant words towards us. You did what brought us pleasure and you did nothing that brought us displeasure. You were in the form of an innocent brahmana who was a guest. Anyone who kills such a person, even if he
knows him to be a rakshasa, goes to hell. That apart, the time for your killing was not ripe. That time is ripe now,
since your inclination is of this nature. Extraordinary destiny has made you abduct Krishna. You have swallowed
the hook that stretches from the line of fate, like a ﬁsh in the water. How will you escape from me today? You will
not be able to reach the region you have left for and where your mind has already gone. You will not be able to
reach and you will traverse the path travelled by Baka and Hidimba.”7 The rakshasa was driven by destiny. Having
been thus addressed by Bhima, he was frightened and threw them all down.8 Then he approached, so as to ﬁght.
His lips trembling in anger, he told Bhima, “O deluded one! I did not lose my directions because I was deluded. I
was waiting for your sake. I have heard about the rakshasas whom you killed in battle. With your blood, I will offer funeral oblations to them today.” Having been thus addressed, Bhima smilingly licked the corners of his mouth.
He was bursting with rage, like time and death personiﬁed.
‘With great force, he dashed at the rakshasa, to engage him in a bout of wrestling. On seeing that Bhima stood
ready to ﬁght, the rakshasa also forcefully dashed towards him, like Bali towards the wielder of the vajra.9 When
they were about to engage in that terrible battle with arms, Madri’s two sons10 were also extremely angered and
rushed forward. But Vrikodara, Kunti’s son, laughingly restrained them. He said, “Behold. I am capable of handling this rakshasa. O king!11 By myself, with my brothers, by the dharma that I have observed well and by my
oblations, I swear that I will ﬁnish off this rakshasa.” Having said this, the two brave ones challenged each other.
The rakshasa and Vrikodara grasped each other with their arms. They did not spare each other. Angrily, Bhima and
the rakshasa engaged each other in a terrible battle, like a god and a danava. Uprooting trees, the two immensely
strong ones hurled them at each other, roaring like clouds when the summer season is over. Those two, supreme
among strong ones, shattered the trunks of trees with the force of their thighs. They rushed at each other, each desirous of victory. The duel with trees went too, causing the destruction of many large trees, like that ancient battle
between the brothers Vali and Sugriva, lions among apes.12 For some time, they repeatedly hurled trees at each
other and struck each other, continuously roaring. When all the trees in the region had been torn down, and in an
attempt to kill each other they had reduced them to hundreds of heaps, they immediately took up rocks. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those two immensely strong ones fought, like a king of mountains ﬁghting with
clouds. Those hard and terrible rocks ﬂew around, like the vajra. They repeatedly struck each other with these.
They were insolent because of their strength. After this, they rushed at each other and grasped each other with their
arms, tugging like elephants. They struck each other with extremely terrible ﬁsts. The two great-souled ones raised
a noise by gnashing their teeth. Then Bhima clenched his ﬁst, like a serpent with ﬁve heads, and struck the rakshasa’s neck with great force. The rakshasa was exhausted from the force of Bhimasena’s blow with the ﬁst. On
seeing this, Bhimasena grasped the one who was extremely tired. The mighty-armed one, equal to the immortals,
raised him up in his two arms. With great force, Bhima then ﬂung him down on the ground. Pandava shattered all
his limbs. Holding him with his elbow, he detached the head from the trunk. As a result of Bhimasena’s force, Jatasura’s head was severed and fell down on the ground, drenched in blood, the eyes bulging and the teeth clenched,

like a fruit dislodged from a tree. Having killed him, the mighty archer went to Yudhishthira. The foremost among
brahmanas praised him, like the Maruts praise Vasava.’

Section Thirty-Five
Yaksha-yuddha Parva
This parva has 727 shlokas and eighteen chapters.
Chapter 452(155): 90 shlokas
Chapter 453(156): 31 shlokas
Chapter 454(157): 70 shlokas
Chapter 455(158): 59 shlokas
Chapter 456(159): 35 shlokas
Chapter 457(160): 37 shlokas
Chapter 458(161): 29 shlokas
Chapter 459(162): 16 shlokas
Chapter 460(163): 53 shlokas
Chapter 461(164): 58 shlokas
Chapter 462(165): 23 shlokas
Chapter 463(166): 23 shlokas
Chapter 464(167): 28 shlokas
Chapter 465(168): 30 shlokas
Chapter 466(169): 35 shlokas
Chapter 467(170): 69 shlokas
Chapter 468(171): 17 shlokas
Chapter 469(172): 24 shlokas
Yuddha means battle or ﬁght and the section is named after a ﬁght between Bhima and the yakshas. In this section, the Pandavas visit the
sage Vrishaparva on Mount Gandhamadana and then travel to the hermitage of the sage Arshtishena, where they dwell, waiting for Arjuna’s
return. Reminiscent of Section 33, Droupadi sends Bhima to search for celestial ﬂowers. Bhima ﬁghts with yakshas and rakshasas and kills
the rakshasa Maniman. The Pandavas meet Kubera and Indra. Arjuna returns and recounts his adventures, repeating much of what has already been said in Sections 31 and 32 (Volume 1). These parts of Section 35 are not only repetitive, and sometimes inconsistent, they don’t
quite seem to belong. The only new information is about Arjuna’s ﬁght with the nivatakavacha demons and the demons who inhabited
Hiranyapura.
452(155)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the rakshasa had been killed, the lord Kounteya, the king,1 returned to Narayana’s
hermitage and began to live there again. One day, he assembled all his brothers, together with Droupadi, and remembering his brother Jaya,2 told them, “Pure in our ways, we have lived in the forest and four years have passed.
Bibhatsu promised that in the ﬁfth year, he would come to the king of the mountains, the supreme peak that is
white at the top. In a desire to meet him, we should also go to that region. The immensely energetic Partha3 had
decided on the time and had earlier made an agreement with me. ‘I will live as a student for ﬁve years.’ We will
see Gandivadhanva, the destroyer of enemies, there, after he has returned from the world of the gods with the
weapons he has obtained.” Having uttered these words, the Pandava consulted all the brahmanas and informed all
the ascetics about the reasons. Having thus pleased the ones who were terrible in their austerities, Partha4 circumambulated them. The brahmanas approved, because this was auspicious and would bring about welfare. “O bull
among the Bharata lineage! These difﬁculties will soon be replaced by happiness. O one learned in dharma! After
having traversed the road, you will protect the earth in accordance with the dharma of kshatriyas.”5 Then the king
accepted the words of these ascetics.

‘The destroyer of enemies departed with his brothers and the brahmanas. The fortunate one was accompanied by
Droupadi and followed by Hidimba’s son6 and the other rakshasas and protected by Lomasha. He travelled part of
the way on foot. In other parts, the immensely energetic one, who was rigid in his vows, together with his brothers,
was carried by the rakshasas. Reﬂecting on the many difﬁculties, King Yudhishthira headed in a northern direction,
infested by lions, tigers and elephants. He saw the mountains Mainaka and Kailasa, the foothills of Gandhamadana
and the tall peak of Meru. There were many auspicious streams higher up on the mountains. He reached the sacred
plateau of the Himalayas on the seventeenth day. O king! Near Gandhamadana, the Pandava saw the auspicious
crest of the Himalayas, covered with many trees and creepers and the extremely holy hermitage of Vrishaparva,
surrounded by many trees in blossom that grew along whirlpools of water. The destroyers of enemies, the Pandavas, approached rajarshi Vrishaparva, with dharma in his soul. When he welcomed them, their exhaustion vanished. The rajarshi welcomed those bulls of the Bharata lineage, as if they were his sons. Thus honoured, those destroyers of enemies remained there for seven nights. On the eighth day, after consulting the rishi Vrishaparva who
was famous in the worlds, they decided to start on their journey. One by one, they introduced the brahmanas to Vrishaparva. He honoured them, and they remained in his charge for the moment, like relatives. The Pandavas also
left their supreme garments and pure ornaments in Vrishaparva’s hermitage. He7 was learned, skilled, knowledgeable on everything concerning dharma and knew the past and the future. The one who was learned in dharma instructed the bulls of the Bharata lineage, like his sons. Having obtained his permission, the brave and great-souled
ones left in a northern direction, accompanied by Krishna and the great-souled brahmanas. King Vrishaparva went
with them for a short distance. Then entrusting the Pandavas to the immensely energetic brahmanas, and instructing and blessing the sons of Kunti, Vrishaparva returned, after having given them directions about the road to
follow.
‘Truth was valour for Kounteya Yudhishthira. He proceeded on foot with his brothers, through a region that was
infested with many kinds of animals. They sometimes dwelt on the slopes of mountains, covered with many different kinds of trees. On the fourth day, the Pandavas reached Mount Shveta. It looked like a gigantic cloud and was
beautiful, with plenty of water. The beautiful top was covered with jewels and gold and had many peaks. They followed the route that had been indicated by Vrishaparva and saw many mountains in that region. They climbed
higher up the mountain, with extremely inaccessible caverns and many impenetrable spots, without any discomfort. Dhoumya, Krishna and the great rishi Lomasha travelled together, and none of them faltered. Those immensely valiant ones reached the great Mount Malyavan. It was full of the noise of many animals and birds and was populated by many kinds of birds. It was extremely beautiful and was frequented by masses of monkeys. There were
sacred ponds full of lotuses. There were pools and extensive groves. With their body hair standing up, they happily
saw Mount Gandhamadana, the habitation of kimpurushas, frequented by vidyadharas and lady kinnaras, infested
with elephants and lions and innumerable sharabhas.8 They reached a region that resounded with the sweet sounds
of many animals. With all this, Gandhamadana resembled the pleasure garden of Nandana.9 In a happy frame of
mind, Pandu’s brave sons slowly entered this beautiful and sacred forest that brought delight to the mind and the
heart. With Droupadi and the great-souled brahmanas, the brave ones heard the delightful, pleasant, melodious and
charming sounds emerging from the mouths of birds.
‘They saw many trees that were bent down because of the burden of their fruit. All of them were full of every
kind of fruit and were radiant with every kind of ﬂower—mangoes, blossoming hog-plums,10 coconuts,
tindukas,11 ajatakas,12 jiras,13 pomegranates, citrus trees,14 jackfruit, breadfruit,15 plantains,16 dates,
tamarinds,17 paravatas,18 kshoudras,19 beautiful nipas,20 bilvas,21 wood-apples,22 roseapples,23 kashmaris,24
badaris, ﬁgs,25 udumbaras,26 ﬁg trees,27 holy ﬁg trees,28 kshirinas,29 marking-nuts,30 myrobalans,31
haritakas,32 bibhitakas,33 ingudas,34 karaviras,35 tindukas36 with a lot of fruit and many other trees that were
on the slopes of Gandhamadana. There was succulent fruit as tasty as amrita. There were many champakas,37
ashokas,38 ketakas,39 bakulas,40 pumnagas,41 saptaparnis,42 karnikaras,43 ketakas, patalas,44 kutajas,45 beautiful coral trees,46 blue lotuses,47, parijatas,48 kovidaras,49 pine-trees,50 shalas,51 palms,52 tamalas,53

priyalas,54 bakulas, silk cotton,55 kimshukas,56 ashokas,57 shimshapas58 and saralas.59 These were full of
chakoras,60 woodpeckers,61 large bees,62 parrots,63 cuckoos, sparrows,64 haritas,65 birds,66 pheasants,67
priyavratas,68 chatakas69 and many other kinds of birds. They warbled beautiful notes that were pleasant to the
ear. They also saw beautiful ponds full of clear water, with white water lilies,70 white lotuses,71 red lotuses,72
blue lotuses,73 white lotuses74 and lotuses75 on all sides. There were geese,76 ruddy geese,77 ospreys, waterfowl,
ducks,78 plavas,79 swans, cranes, cormorants and many other aquatic birds everywhere. There were beautiful
ponds full of lotuses. Excited bumblebees hummed there, intoxicated by the nectar of red lotuses that bloomed during the day. Red pollen fell into the lotus cups. They saw these beautiful sights on the slopes of Gandhamadana.
And in the beautiful clusters of lotuses and groves of creepers that were everywhere, they saw peacocks with their
peahens. They were extremely maddened by the desire that the drumming of the clouds brought. In sweet and
melodious tones, they uttered their calls. The peacocks spread out the coloured plumage of their tails and danced
redolently, as did other playful forest birds. Others roamed happily with their beloved ones in the valleys that were
covered with creepers and lantanas. Where the woods were clear, they saw other birds in the holes of trees, beautiful and with splendid tails spread out like crowns.80
‘They saw graceful sindhuvara trees on the peaks of the mountain. They looked like Manmatha’s81 javelins,
covered with golden blossoms. There were beautiful karnikaras, blossoming like handsome earrings. They saw
kurubakas82 ﬂowering in the forest, like a volley of Kama’s83 arrows, increasing desire among those who are in
love. They saw tilakas,84 like beautiful tilaka marks on the forest. They saw beautiful mango trees that were like
Ananga’s85 arrows, abuzz with bees and clusters of ﬂowers. There were many other trees on the peak of the mountain, like garlands—like gold, with ﬂowers like a forest conﬂagration, red, black like collyrium and like lapis
lazuli. There were shalas, tamalas, patalas and bakulas. Thus, one by one, the brave ones saw these everywhere on
the slopes of Gandhamadana—frequented by masses of elephants and lions and tigers, resounding with the roars of
sharabhas and many other cries, and covered everywhere with fruit and ﬂowers. The forests were yellow-tinged
like the sun. There were no thorns anywhere, or trees without blossoms. The trees on the slope of Gandhamadhana
were tender, and dense with foliage and fruit. On the peaks of the mountain, the Parthas also saw lakes and rivers
that were like clear crystal, populated by birds with white feathers, with the sounds of swans and cranes, with
colourful lotuses and blue lotuses, with fragrant garlands and succulent fruit. The trees on the peak of the mountain
were radiant with blossoms. There were many other groves full of trees there. There were many kinds of creepers,
laden with leaves, ﬂowers and fruit.
‘On seeing those trees on that supreme of mountains, Yudhishthira told Bhimasena in affectionate words, “O
Bhima! Look at this beautiful region all around us, the playground of the gods. We followed a path no human has
followed. O Vrikodara! We have achieved success. O Partha! Creepers, lantanas and blossoms embrace the
supreme of trees and adorn Gandhamadana’s peak. O Bhima! Listen to the sound of the calls of peacocks, together
with peahens, on the peak of this mountain. Chakoras, shatapatras, intoxicated cuckoos and sarikas86 are perching
themselves on these gigantic trees, full of foliage and ﬂowers. O Partha! The birds are scarlet, yellow and red, on
the tops of the trees. Many other jivas and jivakas are glancing at each other. Cranes can be seen on the green and
red spots of grass that are everywhere and near the mountain springs. They are warbling in a beautiful voice,
charming to all beings. There are bees, ruddy geese and birds with backs tinged in red. There are elephants with
four tusks, with the hue of lotuses, and with the she-elephants. This great lake is beautiful, tinged with the hue of
lapis lazuli. Water streams down from many waterfalls. O Bhima! They shine like the sun and are like autumn
clouds. They adorn this giant mountain, with much silver and many minerals. In some places, it is dark like collyrium. In others, it is golden. In some places, the minerals are greenish yellow. In others, they have the complexion of
ingudas. There are mountainous caverns that have the hue of evening clouds. Some are as red as rabbits. Other
minerals are golden red. They are white and black, like clouds with the rays of the rising sun. In their many different forms, they are bringing great radiance to the mountain. O Partha! As Vrishaparva had said, gandharvas can be
seen on the peak of the mountain, together with their wives, and kimpurushas. O Bhima! The sounds of songs,
melodies and hymns can be heard in many ways, charming to all beings. Behold the great, pure and auspicious

Ganga, the river of the gods. It is full of masses of swans and is frequented by rishis and kinnaras. O Kounteya! O
destroyer of enemies! Behold this king of mountains, full of minerals, streams, kinnaras, animals, birds, gandharvas, apsaras, lovely woods, many types of predators and with a hundred different peaks.” Those brave ones, the
scorchers of enemies, were delighted in their minds at having traversed that supreme path and their hearts were not
satisﬁed at looking at this king of the mountains. They then saw the hermitage of rajarshi Arshtishena,87 full of
garlands and trees laden with fruit. They went to the sage Arshtishena, who was learned in dharma and was so severe in his austerities that he was lean and seemed to be made up of veins alone.’
453(156)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having approached the ascetic, who had burnt away all his sins, Yudhishthira announced his
name and happily greeted him, with his head bowed down. After that, Krishna, Bhima and the famous twins lowered their heads before the rajarshi and stood there, surrounding him. In that fashion, Dhoumya, learned in dharma
and the priest of the Pandavas, approached the rishi who was rigid in his vows, in accordance with propriety.
Through his divine sight, the sage who was learned in dharma had already recognized Pandu’s sons, the best of the
Kuru lineage, and greeting them, asked them to be seated. The great ascetic showed honours to the wise bull
among the Kurus.88
‘When he was seated with his brothers, he asked him about his welfare. “Does your mind ever turn towards that
which is not true or do you follow dharma? O Partha! Does your conduct towards your mother and father ever diminish? Are your preceptors, all the elders and those who are learned worshipped by you? O Partha! Does your
mind ever turn towards evil acts? O best of the Kuru lineage! Do you know how to reward a good deed and ignore
an evil deed? Do you treat them according to the law and without any conceit? Do virtuous ones rejoice when such
deserving ones are honoured by you? Though you dwell in the forest, do you follow that which is dharma? O
Partha! Has Dhoumya been tormented by the way you treat him? Do you follow the dharma of donations, austerities, purity, uprightness and forbearance? O Partha! Do you follow the conduct of your fathers and grandfathers? O
Pandava! Do you tread the path followed by the rajarshis? It is said that when a son or a grandson is born in one’s
lineage, the ancestors in the world of the ancestors either sorrow or laugh. ‘What will happen to us if he performs
evil deeds? Or will we prosper because he performs good deeds?’ O Partha! He who honours his father, his mother, the ﬁre, the preceptor and his own soul as the ﬁfth, conquers both the worlds.89 There are rishis who live on
water and on the wind. At the time of parvasandhi,90 they ﬂy through the air and visit this greatest of mountains.
O king! Kimpurushas, lovers with their beloveds, devoted to each other, can be seen on the peaks of this mountain.
O Partha! Many masses of gandharvas and apsaras can be seen. They are attired in spotless garments and in those
made of silk. There are masses of handsome and garlanded vidyadharas and masses of great serpents, giant birds91
and other serpents. At the time of parvasandhi, the sounds of kettledrums, panavas,92 conch shells and drums can
be heard on this mountain. O bull among the Bharata lineage! You can hear all of that from this place. But you
should never act or think so as to venture closer. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Beyond this point, it is impossible to go. That place is the sporting ground of the gods, beyond the access of humans. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! At that spot, all beings hate the ﬁckle deeds of humans and rakshasas chastise them. O Yudhishthira! Beyond the peak of this mountain can be seen the radiant objective of devarshis, those who are supremely successful. O Partha! O destroyer of enemies! If one is ﬁckle enough to continue on the journey beyond this
point, the rakshasas kill him with iron spears and other means. At the time of parvasandhi, Vaishravana Naravahana93 can be seen there in his prosperity, surrounded by apsaras. All the beings then see the lord of the rakshasas
seated on the peak of the mountain, as resplendent as the rising sun. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The
peak of that mountain is the sporting ground of gods, danavas, siddhas and Vaishravana. O son!94 At the time of
parvasandhi, Tumburu95 worships the lord of riches there and the sounds of his songs and hymns can be heard on
Gandhamadana. O son! O Yudhishthira! At the time of parvasandhi, all the many different beings witness this
wonderful sight here. O best of the Pandavas! Dwell here. Live on succulent fruit and other tasty food, until you

see Arjuna. O son! Now that you have reached this place, you should never be ﬁckle. O best of those who wield
weapons! After living here, as you desire, and sporting yourself, you will protect the earth.”’
454(157)

Janamejaya asked, ‘How long did the great-souled sons of Pandu, all of them divine in valour, live on Mount
Gandhamadana? O virtuous one! What did those great-souled ones, valorous in the world, subsist on, while they
lived there? Tell me. Tell me in detail about Bhimasena’s prowess. What did the mighty-armed one accomplish in
those Himalaya mountains? O, supreme among brahmanas! Did he wage war against the yakshas again? Did they
ever meet Vaishravana? Arshtishena did say that the lord of riches visits the place. O one rich in austerities! I wish
to hear all this in great detail. I am never satiated on hearing about their deeds.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘After having heard the instructions of the immensely energetic one,96 good for their welfare, the bulls among the Bharata lineage always abided by them. They lived on the food of hermits, succulent
fruits, the meat of deer shot with pure arrows97 and different kinds of pure honey. The Pandavas, bulls among the
Bharata lineage, dwelt on the slopes of the Himalayas. In this fashion, they lived there for ﬁve years, listening to
the many words spoken by Lomasha. O lord! Ghatotkacha had left earlier with all the other rakshasas, saying that
he would return whenever the occasion demanded. Many months passed while the great-souled ones dwelt in Arshtishena’s hermitage and they witnessed many great marvels. While the Pandavas happily lived there and sported
themselves, many immensely fortunate hermits and charanas, pure in soul and rigid in their vows, came to see the
Pandavas and held conversations with the supreme of the Bharata lineage on celestial matters.
‘After some time, a suparna suddenly carried away a handsome and giant serpent that used to dwell in the giant
lake. The mighty mountain began to tremble and many large trees were torn down. With all beings, the Pandavas
witnessed this extraordinary sight. Then, from that supreme mountain, a wind blew towards the Pandavas and carried many different kinds of beautiful and fragrant ﬂowers. With their well-wishers and with the famous Droupadi,
the Pandavas saw those divine ﬂowers, with ﬁve different colours. At that time, when the mighty-armed Bhimasena was comfortably seated at a secluded spot on the mountain, Krishna told him, “O bull among the Bharata lineage! As a result of the forceful wind generated from the suparna’s great force, ﬁve-coloured blossoms have been
dropped near the river Ashvaratha and all the beings have witnessed this. Your great-souled brother,98 always driven by truth, once restrained gandharvas, serpents, rakshasas and even Vasava himself, in Khandava. After killing
the ones who resort to maya,99 he obtained the bow Gandiva. You also possess enormous energy and great
strength of arms. You are indomitable and irresistible and are the equal of Shatakratu100 in your strength. Let all
the rakshasas be terriﬁed of the force and strength of your arms. O Bhimasena! They will leave this mountain and
ﬂee in the ten directions. Then, devoid of all fear and delusion, let all your well-wishers behold this supreme
mountain, auspicious and adorned with colourful ﬂowers. O Bhima! This thought has been in my mind for a long
time. Protected through the strength of your arms, I wish to see the top of this mountain.” The scorcher of enemies
was maddened by Droupadi’s words. The mighty-armed one could not stand it, like an excellent bull that has been
beaten. His gait was like that of a lion or a bull. He was handsome and noble. His complexion was like that of
gold. He was spirited and strong, powerful and proud. The brave Pandava’s eyes were red and his shoulders were
wide. He was like a maddened elephant in his valour. His teeth were like a lion’s and his shoulders were expansive.
He was as tall as a young shala tree. The great-souled one was beautiful in all his limbs. His neck was like a conch
shell101 and his arms were huge. He grasped his gold-plated bow, his sword and his quivers. Like an insolent lion,
or like a maddened elephant, the strong one rushed towards the mountain, free from fear or delusion.
‘All the beings saw him, wielding his arrows, sword and bow, like a king of the beasts,102 or a maddened elephant. The Pandava was devoid of fear or delusion. To increase Droupadi’s happiness, he grasped a club and penetrated the king of the mountains. Partha, the son of the wind-god, was not bothered by fatigue, fear, lassitude or
envy. He came to a terrible-looking and uneven passage that only one person could pass through at a time.
Through this, the immensely strong one ascended the peak, as tall as many palm trees. Agitating kinnaras, great
serpents, hermits, gandharvas and rakshasas, the immensely strong one ascended the mountain. The bull among the
Bharata lineage saw Vaishravana’s abode there. It was ornamented with golden and crystalline buildings. Gladden-

ing all beings, an extremely pleasant breeze blew there, arising from Gandhamadana, and carrying all the various
fragrances in it. There were many beautiful trees of diverse kinds, extraordinary and colourful and beyond all
thought. The bull among the Bharata lineage then saw the abode of the lord of the rakshasas. It was covered on all
sides by a network of gems. It was pure and was adorned with beautiful ﬂowers. The mighty-armed Bhimasena
stood there, as immobile as a mountain. Prepared to give up his life, he held a club, a sword, a bow and arrows in
his hand. He then blew on his conch shell and this made the body hair of his enemies stand up. He twanged his
bow and slapped his arms and terriﬁed all beings.
‘Their body hair standing up, yakshas, rakshasas and gandharvas rushed towards the sound and approached Pandava. The clubs, maces, swords, spears, lances and battleaxes, taken up by the yakshas and rakshasas in their arms,
began to blaze. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then a war started between them and him. With terrible force
and speed, Bhima used his arrows to slice off the spears, lances and battleaxes hurled at him by those gigantic
ones. The immensely powerful one pierced the bodies of the rakshasas with his arrows and they roared, while
roaming around in the sky and on the ground. A great shower of blood rained down on the immensely strong one,
ﬂowing from the bodies of the rakshasas in every direction. Many heads and bodies of the yakshas and the rakshasas were seen to be sliced off through what Bhima’s mighty arms released. All the beings then saw the handsome Pandava enveloped by the rakshasas, like the sun with masses of clouds. But just as the sun penetrates everything with its rays, the mighty-armed and powerful one, with truth as his valour, penetrated all of them with his arrows. They uttered loud roars and victorious cries. But all the rakshasas could not see any delusion in Bhimasena.
All their limbs were wounded with his arrows and they were oppressed with their fear of Bhimasena. Throwing
away their great weapons, they roared in scared and terrible voices. Discarding their clubs, spears, swords, lances
and battleaxes, they ﬂed in a southern direction,103 scared of the one whose bow was ﬁrm.
‘There remained a mighty-armed and broad-chested rakshasa. His name was Maniman and he held a spear and a
club in his hands. He was Vaishravana’s friend. The mighty-armed one exhibited his authority and his manliness.
On seeing them ﬂee, he smilingly said, “On reaching Vaishravana’s abode, what will you tell the lord of riches,
since several of you have been defeated in battle by a single man?” Having spoken these words, the rakshasa restrained them and dashed towards Pandava, with a lance, a spear and a club in his hands. On seeing him forcefully
approach, like a maddened elephant, Bhimasena pierced his side with three calf-toothed arrows.104 Angered,
Maniman grasped a gigantic club. Having grasped it, he hurled it with great force at Bhimasena. That gigantic club
ﬂashed like lightning in the sky and was extremely terrible. But Bhimasena shot many arrows that had been sharpened on stone. However, all those arrows were blunted on the club and despite their great force, could not restrain
its swift force. But the valorous one knew the art of ﬁghting with a club and the courageous Bhima warded off the
blow. Then the wise rakshasa grasped an extremely terrible javelin with a golden shaft and struck him with it. The
extremely terrible weapon was blazing in ﬂames and uttered a loud roar. It pierced Bhima’s right arm and swiftly
fell down on the ground. Having been severely pierced by the javelin, Kouravya, skilled in ﬁghting with clubs, a
mighty archer and inﬁnite in valour, grasped his club. That club was made entirely out of iron. Brandishing it, Bhima rushed with great speed towards the immensely powerful Maniman. Maniman also grasped a giant and blazing
spear. Uttering a great roar, he ﬂung it at Bhimasena with force. But the one who was skilled in ﬁghting with clubs
splintered the spear with the end of his club and rushed to destroy him, like Garuda against a serpent. With the club
in his hand, the mighty-armed one suddenly jumped up in the sky. He roared in battle and ﬂung it. With the speed
of the wind, like the vajra hurled by Indra, it struck the rakshasa. Having killed him, it fell down on the ground,
like a she-demon.105 All the beings saw how the rakshasa, terrible in strength, was felled by Bhimasena, like a
bull by a lion. On seeing him dead on the ground, the remaining roamers of the night106 uttered terrible cries of
distress and ﬂed in an eastern direction.’
455(158)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing the caves in the mountains resounding with many different kinds of noise and on
not seeing Bhimasena, Kounteya Ajatashatru,107 Madri’s two sons, Dhoumya, Krishna,108 the brahmanas and all
the well-wishers were concerned. Leaving Droupadi in Arshtishena’s care, the brave maharathas ascended up the

mountain, arming themselves with weapons. Having reached the mountain’s summit, the maharathas, mighty
archers, looked around and saw Bhimasena, the destroyer of enemies, and the gigantic rakshasas, dead and
writhing, mighty in strength and extremely terrible, but felled by Bhimasena. The one with the mighty arms carried
a club, a sword and a bow and was as radiant as Maghavan,109 after slaying all the danavas in battle. Having traversed the supreme route, the Parthas stepped over these, embraced Vrikodara and seated themselves. With those
four mighty archers, the mountain’s summit looked as beautiful as heaven with the immensely fortunate lokapalas,
foremost among the gods.110
‘Having seen Kubera’s abode and the felled rakshasas, the brother told his seated brother Pandava.111 “O Bhima! O brave one! Whether you performed this evil act out of bravery or delusion, it is unworthy of you, like falsehood to a hermit. Learned ones well versed in dharma say that one should not perform deeds that are against the
wishes of a king. O Bhimasena! You have offended the thirty gods through your deed. O Partha! If one’s mind is
attracted to evil, disregarding artha and dharma, it is certain that there will be fruits from that evil deed. If you wish
to do that which pleases me, do not ever act like this again.” Kunti’s son Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul and
knowledgeable about the different aspects of artha, spoke thus to his unvanquished brother. Having stopped speaking, the immensely energetic one began to reﬂect on the matter.
‘Meanwhile, the rakshasas who had survived Bhimasena returned towards Kubera’s abode. Travelling at great
speed, they swiftly reached Vaishravana’s abode. They wailed in terrible distress, oppressed by fear of Bhimasena.
They had lost their arms and weapons. They were exhausted. Their garments were besmeared with blood. Their
hair was dishevelled. O king! They told the lord of the yakshas, “O lord of riches! O god! Armed with clubs,
maces, swords, javelins and lances, all the foremost warriors among the rakshasas have been killed. A man has
swiftly penetrated the mountain and has single-handedly killed masses of krodhavashas112 in battle. O lord of
riches! O god! The foremost among chief rakshasas and yakshas have been killed and have lost their senses and
their spirits. He has taken the mountain. We are the only ones who have escaped. Your friend Maniman has also
been killed. This act has been done by a single man. Now do what should be done hereafter.” Having heard this,
the lord of all the masses of yakshas was enraged. His eyes became red with anger and he exclaimed, “How is that
possible!” On hearing of Bhima’s second offence,113 the lord of riches and the lord of the yakshas was angered
and instructed his horses to be yoked. The beautiful chariot was yoked with supreme gandharva horses that possessed all the good qualities. They were clear in the eye and were swift and strong. They were adorned with many
gems. The chariot resembled a cloud and was as high as the peak of a mountain. The beautiful horses were yoked
to the chariot and were ready to ﬂy, like arrows. They were excited and neighed at each other, as if foretelling victory. The illustrious king of the yakshas114 ascended the grand chariot and the immensely radiant one departed,
praised by the gods and the gandharvas. As the great-souled lord of riches left, all the yakshas accompanied him.
Their eyes were red. They were golden in complexion. They were gigantic in form and immensely strong. They
were armed with weapons and had girded their swords. There were one crore115 yakshas. They were brave and
indomitable in spirit. They surrounded their king.
‘The Pandavas saw the lord of riches, great and pleasant to look at, approach and their body hair stood up. On
seeing Pandu’s maharatha sons, great in spirit, with their bows and swords in their hands, Kubera was also delighted. With great speed, they116 alighted on the peak of the mountain like birds and stood around the lord of riches,
who was at the forefront. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that he117 was delighted with the Pandavas, the yakshas and gandharvas, stood around indifferently.118 The great-souled Pandavas, Nakula, Sahadeva
and Dharma’s son, who was always devoted to dharma, bowed down in obeisance before the illustrious lord of
riches. The maharathas knew in their hearts that they had committed a crime. Therefore, all of them surrounded the
lord of riches, hands joined in salutation. The handsome lord of riches was seated on his supreme Pushpaka,119
constructed by Vishvakarma120 and coloured along the sides. Thousands of giant yakshas and rakshasas, swift in
speed and with pointed ears, seated themselves below the seated one. Hundreds of gandharvas and masses of apsaras surrounded and waited on him, like Shatakratu surrounded by the gods. With a beautiful golden garland on

his head and with arrows, sword and bow in his hand, Bhimasena looked at the lord of riches. Despite being
wounded by the rakshasas, Bhima felt no fear or exhaustion. Even in that state, he looked at Kubera.
‘On seeing Bhima standing there, desiring to ﬁght and with sharp arrows, Naravahana told Dharma’s son, “O
Partha! All the beings know that you have the welfare of beings in your heart. Therefore, with your relatives, live
on this mountain without any fear. O Pandava! Nor should you be angry because of Bhimasena’s deed. They121
had already been killed by destiny and your brother was only the instrument. Nor should you be ashamed at this
violent deed of his. The destruction of the yakshas and the rakshasas had been determined by the gods earlier. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! I am not angry with Bhimasena. I am pleased. I have already satisﬁed myself with
this deed of Bhimasena’s.” Having said this to the king,122 he spoke to Bhimasena, “O son!123 O supreme among
the Kuru lineage! This will not prey on your mind. O Bhima! You have embarked on this act of violence for
Krishna’s sake. You have ignored me and the gods. You have destroyed the yakshas and the rakshasas, with the
strength of your own arms. But even then, I am pleased with you. O Vrikodara! You have freed me from a terrible
curse. Earlier, for some reason, I was cursed by the supreme rishi Agastya, because he had been angered. Because
of your deed, I have now been freed from the curse following that transgression. O descendant of the Pandava lineage! O destroyer of enemies! Since I foresaw this grief, no crime attaches to you.”
‘Yudhishthira asked, “O illustrious one! Why were you cursed by the great-souled Agastya? O god! I wish to
hear about the reasons behind the curse. It seems to me extraordinary that the wise one’s anger did not instantly
consume you, with all your armies and your attendants.”
‘Vaishravana replied, “O lord of men! There was a council of the gods in Kushavati. I was going there, surrounded by three hundred mahapadmas124 of terrible-looking yakshas, armed with various weapons. While going
there, I saw the supreme rishi Agastya, practising terrible austerities on the banks of the Yamuna. The place was
full of masses of birds and adorned with blossoming trees. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing him
standing there with his arms raised and facing the sun, a mass of energy and as radiant as a blazing ﬁre that has
been kindled well, my handsome friend Maniman, the lord of the rakshasas, was overcome by stupidity, ignorance,
insolence and delusion. From the sky, he spat on the maharshi’s head. He125 was angered and as though burning
up the directions, said, ‘O lord of riches! Because this evil-minded one has insulted me and because he has injured
me while you have looked on, this friend of yours, with all these armies, will meet their deaths at the hands of a
human. O one with evil intelligence! You will also grieve, together with these armies. But you will be freed from
your sin when you encounter that human. However, this terrible curse will not touch the powerful sons and grandsons of these armies. Go now. They will follow your orders.’ This was the curse that I had earlier received from
the supreme of rishis. O great king! Your brother Bhima has freed me from that.”’
456(159)

‘Vaishravana said, “O Yudhishthira! Perseverance, steadfastness, place, time and valour—these are the ﬁve principles that determine results in this world. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In krita yuga, men persevered and
were skilled in their respective tasks and were well versed in the principles of valour. O best of kshatriyas! A kshatriya who has perseverance, knows the place and the time and the principle of all dharma, rules the earth. O Partha!
O brave one! A man who acts in this fashion in all his deeds, obtains fame in this world and a good end after death.
Shakra, the destroyer of Vritra, together with the Vasus, exhibited his valour at the right place and time and obtained the kingdom of heaven. The one who is evil in his soul and evil in his intelligence pursues evil alone. Not
knowing the results of his actions, he is destroyed now, and after death. The stupid one who does not know the
time and the difference between different types of deeds, is destroyed now, and after death, and his efforts are in
vain. Violent, deceitful and evil-minded ones decide to commit sin, covetous of obtaining everything. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! This Bhimasena is fearless. He does not know dharma. He is prone to violence. He is
childish in intelligence. He is intolerant. Therefore, instruct him.
‘“When you have returned to rajarshi Arshtishena’s hermitage, for the ﬁrst lunar fortnight,126 dwell there without any fear. O Indra among men! O mighty-armed one! The gandharvas, the yakshas, the rakshasas, the inhabitants of Alaka127 and all the denizens of the mountain will protect you, and the supreme among brahmanas, on my

orders. O king! O supreme among those who uphold dharma! This Vrikodara has been committing violent acts on
this mountain. Restrain him. O Indra among kings! From now on, all the inhabitants of the forest will look after
you, serve you and always protect you. O bull among men! My attendants will serve you with a lot of tasty food
and drink. O son!128 O Yudhishthira! Just as Jishnu is under Mahendra’s protection, Vrikodara under Vayu’s, you
under Dharma’s, since you are his own son obtained through yoga, and the twins under the Ashvins, each son being respectively protected, from now on, you will be under my protection too. Phalguna, knowledgeable in all aspects of artha and well versed in all aspects of dharma, immediately younger to Bhimasena, has become skilled in
heaven. O son! Right from his birth, every superior trait, perceived to lead to the attainment of the supreme of
worlds, has been vested in Dhananjaya. Self-control, generosity, strength, intelligence, humility, perseverance and
supreme energy—all of these are present in the great-spirited one, whose energy is inﬁnite. O Pandava! Jishnu
never commits a reprehensible act. Nor do men recount any falsehoods having been uttered by Partha. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! That extender of deeds of the Kuru lineage has been learning the art of weapons in
Shakra’s abode, honoured by the gods, the ancestors and the gandharvas. O Partha! The immensely energetic
Shantanu, your father’s grandfather, who brought all the lords of the earth under his suzerainty through dharma, is
pleased in heaven with Partha Gandivadhanva.129 That immensely valorous and greatly famous king, the upholder
of his lineage, always honoured the ancestors, the gods, the rishis and the brahmanas and performed seven major
sacriﬁces on the banks of the Yamuna. O king! That lord of kings, your great grandfather Shantanu, has attained
heaven and now resides in Shakra’s world. He has asked about your welfare.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Vrikodara, bull among the Bharata lineage, then laid down his spear, his club, his sword
and his bow. He bowed down in obeisance before Kubera. The lord of riches, refuge of those who seek sanctuary,
then told the one who had sought shelter, “May you be the one who destroys the pride of your enemies and increases the joy of your well-wishers. O scorcher of enemies! O bulls among the Bharata lineage! Dwell in these
beautiful residences. The yakshas will procure for you everything that you desire. Having obtained the weapons
and having obtained leave from Maghavan himself, Gudakesha Dhananjaya, bull among men, will return soon.”
Having thus instructed Yudhishthira, whose deeds were virtuous, the lord of the guhyakas, returned to his home in
the supreme of mountains. Thousands of rakshasas and yakshas followed him in their vehicles, covered with decorated cushions and adorned with many different kinds of gems. Those supreme horses neighed as they proceeded
like birds towards Kubera’s abode, following Airavata’s path.130 The steeds of the lord of riches travelled as if
they were splitting the sky, trailing clouds and feeding on the wind. On the instructions of the lord of riches, the
dead bodies of the rakshasas were removed from the summit of the mountain. The wise Agastya had determined
this at the time for the curse. And therefore they, together with Maniman, had been slain in battle. The great-souled
Pandavas happily spent the night in those residences. They were free from anxiety and were honoured by all the
rakshasas.’
457(160)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O destroyer of enemies! When the sun rose, having performed the rituals, Dhoumya came to
the Pandavas with Arshtishena. Having bowed down at the feet of Arshtishena and Dhoumya, they worshipped all
the brahmanas, hands joined in salutation.
‘Then Dhoumya grasped Yudhishthira by the right hand. Looking towards the eastern direction, the maharshi
said, “O great king! Mandara, the king of mountains, grandly covers the earth, right up to the frontiers of the
ocean. O Pandava! This direction, adorned with mountains, forests and groves, is protected by Indra and Vaishravana. O son!131 Learned rishis, knowledgeable in dharma have said that this is the abode of Mahendra and King
Vaishravana. Beings worship the sun because it rises from there, as do rishis learned in dharma, siddhas, sadhyas
and gods. King Yama, with dharma in his soul and the lord of all living beings, presides over the southern direction, the path followed by those who have died. This is sacred Samyamana, extraordinary to behold. Full of great
prosperity, this is the abode of the king of the dead. O king! The learned ones call this king of the mountains
Asta.132 On attaining it, the sun is established in truth. Dwelling on this king of mountains and in the great ocean,
King Varuna protects all beings. O immensely fortunate one! The great and famous Mount Meru is established in

radiance in the northern direction and is the auspicious refuge of those who know the brahman. Brahma’s sacriﬁcial site133 is there and Prajapati,134 the soul of all beings and the creator of everything that is mobile and immobile, resides there. The great and auspicious Meru, free from disease, is also the abode of Brahma’s mental sons,
the seventh being Daksha.135 O son!136 Every day, the seven devarshis, Vasishtha being the foremost, rise and set
there.137 Behold that auspicious region and the auspicious peak of Meru, where the grandfather138 dwells with
the gods, content in their souls. Beyond Brahma’s abode, the supreme region of the supreme lord Narayana is resplendent. He is without beginning and without end. He is said to be the ﬁrst cause of all beings. He is the true origin of all nature. Even the gods cannot see that divine and auspicious region, full of energy, without great endeavour. O king! Because of its own radiance, brighter than the sun and the ﬁre, the region of the great-souled Vishnu is
difﬁcult for the gods and the danavas to see. When they reach there, all the stars no longer shine. The lord whose
soul is never subdued, outshines them through his own brilliance. Through their devotion, combined with supreme
austerities and perfected with pious deeds, accomplished in yoga and devoid of darkness and delusion, greatsouled ascetics go there. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having gone there, they never return to this
world.139 O immensely fortunate Yudhishthira! This region is eternal. It has no deterioration and no decay. This is
the lord’s region. Bow down before it. The illustrious Aditya,140 the dispeller of all darkness, attracts all the stars
and circumambulates it.141 On having reached Asta and passing through evening, the sun traverses a northern
course. O Pandava! Always devoted to the welfare of all beings, the sun circles Meru and reappears in the east. In
a similar way, the illustrious moon divides the months into many parvasandhis and travels with the stars. Thus continuously circling the great Meru, the nourisher of all beings142 returns to Mandara. In a similar way, the sun, the
one who dispels darkness with his rays, follows the same unobstructed route and nourishes the world. When he desires to create the winter season, he takes a southern course143 and winter descends on all beings. Then, returning,
he uses his own energy to sap up the energy of all beings, mobile and immobile. Because of perspiration, tiredness,
lassitude and exhaustion, all men are affected, and so are other beings. They are always inclined towards sleep.
Thus, the sun traverses a path that cannot be determined. The illustrious one creates rains, reviving all beings. O
Partha! Having prospered all beings, mobile and immobile, with pleasant rains, winds and warmth, the immensely
energetic one resumes his course. O Partha! Thus the sun continuously traverses his course, following the wheel of
time and attracting all beings. O Pandava! His course is eternal. He never stands still. Taking energy from beings,
he returns it again. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He measures out the deeds of all beings. The eternal lord
creates night and day, kala and kashtha.”’144
458(161)

Vaishampayana said, ‘They lived on that king of mountains. Those great-souled ones established themselves in
good vows. They found pleasure and amused themselves, waiting to see Arjuna. Those valorous ones were extremely pure in their souls, energetic and devoted to truth and fortitude. Masses of gandharvas and maharshis were
kindly disposed towards them and came to visit them. Having reached that supreme mountain, adorned with blossoming trees, the maharathas were extremely happy in their hearts, like the Maruts are on attaining heaven. They
beheld the peaks and the ridges of that great mountain, resounding with the calls of peacocks and swans and
strewn with many ﬂowers, and felt great joy. Kubera himself tended to them. They saw on that supreme mountain
streams with wooded banks and ponds full of lotuses, kadambas, karandavas and swans. There were beautiful pleasure grounds, coloured and prosperous, adorned along the sides with garlands and studded with gems that please
the mind, like those that are in the possession of the king of riches. The peak of that mountain had many colours
and was fragrant. It had large trees and was covered with masses of clouds. Though they were always devoted to
austerities, when they roamed around, they could not fathom it. O warrior among men! Because of the energy of
that great mountain and the luminescence of its great herbs, no difference could be seen between night and day.
While dwelling there, those brave lions among men saw the rising and the setting of the sun, the inﬁnitely energetic sun who lived there and nourished all beings, mobile and immobile. The brave ones saw how darkness was
dispelled when the sun rose and how it returned when it had set. They saw how all the directions were enveloped

in the nets spread by the rays of the sun. They waited for the arrival of the maharatha who was truthful in his vows.
They studied and always performed the rituals. They followed dharma and were pure in their vows. They were always established in truth. “We will soon ﬁnd joy in this spot, when Dhananjaya returns, having obtained the
weapons.” This is what the Parthas pronounced as a supreme benediction and they devoted themselves to austerities and yoga.
‘They saw many beautiful mountains and forests, but constantly thought about Kiriti.145 Every day and every
night seemed like an entire year to them. From the moment when the great-souled Jishnu had obtained Dhoumya’s
permission and had left with matted hair, from that instant happiness had deserted them. How could they ﬁnd pleasure when their hearts were with him? They had been stricken with grief ever since Jishnu, whose gait was like
that of an elephant, had followed the instructions of his brother Yudhishthira and had left Kamyaka forest. They
thought of the one whose steeds were white.146 He had gone to Vasava in search of weapons. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! In this way, the Bharatas spent a month in that mountain, immersed in melancholy.
‘Then one day, when the maharathas were thinking of Arjuna, they rejoiced when they suddenly saw Mahendra’s chariot approach, like a ﬂash of lightning, and yoked to tawny horses. It suddenly blazed in the ﬁrmament,
like a giant meteor hidden in the clouds or like the ﬂaming crest of a ﬁre that has no smoke. It was driven by
Matali.147 Kiriti could be seen in it, garlanded and adorned in the best of ornaments. Dhananjaya was the equal of
the wielder of the vajra in his power and arrived at the mountain, dazzling in his beauty. When the one with the diadem on his head arrived at the mountain, he descended from Mahendra’s chariot and ﬁrst paid his respect at
Dhoumya’s feet, followed by Ajatashatru next.148 He then bowed down at Vrikodara’s feet and was himself worshipped by Madri’s sons. Then he went to Krishna and comforted her. With humility, he stood below his
brother.149 Those who were there were extremely delighted at being reunited with the one who cannot be measured. The one who had the diadem on his head was also delighted on seeing them and praised the king. With happiness in their hearts, the Parthas approached and circled Indra’s chariot. On this, the slayer of Namuchi had destroyed seven groups of Diti’s sons.150 The princes of the Kuru lineage were extremely happy. They showed honour to Matali, equal to what the king of the gods would have warranted. As was appropriate, they asked him about
the welfare of the gods. In turn, Matali greeted them and instructed them, like a father does his sons. In that chariot
that was unmatched in its splendour, he then returned to the lord of the gods.
‘When the chariot of the supreme god had departed, Shakra’s great-souled son, the destroyer of all enemies, presented all the expensive and beautiful gifts that Shakra had given. The ornaments that he lovingly gave to his
beloved, Sutasoma’s mother,151 glittered like the sun’s rays. Then he seated himself in the midst of the bulls of the
Kuru lineage, resplendent like the sun and the ﬁre. He sat in the midst of the brahmana rishis and recounted everything that had happened. “I have learnt these weapons from Shakra, the wind-god and Shiva themselves. Together
with the gods, Indra was pleased at my conduct and my concentration.” Having brieﬂy told them about his entry
into heaven,152 Kiriti, the performer of pure deeds, happily went to sleep, spending the night with Madri’s sons.’
459(162)

Vaishampayana said, ‘At that time,153 there was a tremendous sound in the sky, created by all the musical instruments of the gods. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There was the sound of chariot wheels and the tolling of
bells. The cries of beasts of prey, animals and all kinds of birds resounded everywhere. The king of the gods, the
destroyer of enemies, arrived, accompanied by gandharvas and apsaras on all sides, all riding vimanas that were
like the sun. Purandara, the king of the gods, blazing in his supreme radiance, went up to the Parthas in a chariot
that roared like the clouds, was adorned with gold and was drawn by tawny horses. Having arrived, the god with
the thousand eyes descended. As soon as he saw that great-souled one, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, together with his
brothers, approached that handsome king of the gods. The one who was generous in his gifts worshipped the one
whose soul was inﬁnite,154 in accordance with the appropriate honours and the decreed rituals. The energetic
Dhananjaya bowed in obeisance before Purandara and before the king of the gods, remained prone like a servant.
The immensely energetic Yudhishthira, Kunti’s son, saw Dhananjaya, his head bowed in humility. The king of the

gods was extremely delighted on seeing Phalguna and inhaled the fragrance of his matted head, cleansed through
austerities. The king155 rejoiced in his heart and was overcome with delight.
‘Purandara, the wise king of the gods, spoke to him. “O king! O Pandava! You will rule the earth. O Kounteya!
Be fortunate. Return again to the hermitage of Kamyaka. O king! Having performed deeds that brought me pleasure, Pandava Dhananjaya has obtained all the weapons from me. No one in the worlds is capable of vanquishing
him now.” Having spoken these words to Kunti’s son Yudhishthira, and having been worshipped by the maharshis,
the one with the thousand eyes happily returned to heaven. The learned and controlled one who observes brahmacharya for a year, restrained and rigid in his vows, and studies this account of the meeting between the Pandavas and Shakra in the abode of the lord of riches, will never face obstructions and will live happily for a hundred
autumns.’
460(163)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When Shakra had departed the way he had come, together with his brothers and Krishna,
Bibhatsu showed homage to Dharma’s son. Having inhaled the fragrance of the head of Pandava Arjuna, who had
bowed down before him, he156 happily told him in a voice that was broken from delight, “O Arjuna! How did you
spend this time in heaven? How did you satisfy the king of the gods and how did you obtain the weapons? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Have you obtained all the weapons completely? Have the king of the gods and
Rudra given you the weapons happily? How did you see Shakra and the illustrious wielder of the pinaka?157 How
did you obtain the weapons and how did you worship them? O destroyer of enemies! Why did the illustrious
Shatakratu say that you had done that which brought him pleasure? What did you do to please him? O immensely
radiant one! I wish to hear all this in detail, how you satisﬁed Mahadeva and the king of the gods. O unblemished
one! O destroyer of enemies! O Dhananjaya! How did you please the wielder of the vajra? Tell me everything.”
‘Arjuna replied, “O great king! Listen to the way in which I beheld the god Shatakratu and the illustrious lord
Shankara. O king! O destroyer of enemies! Having studied as you had asked me to, I retired to the forest according
to your instructions to practise austerities. From Kamyaka, I went to Bhrigutunga and practised austerities there.
When I had spent a night there, I met a brahmana on the road. O Kounteya! He asked me, ‘Where are you going?
Tell me.’ O descendant of the Kuru lineage! I then told him everything. O supreme among kings! O king! On hearing everything from me, the brahmana offered me homage and was pleased at me. He cheerfully told me, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Practise austerities. You will soon behold the lord of the gods.’ Then, following
his instructions, I ascended Mount Shaishira158 and practised austerities. O great king! For one month, I lived on
roots and fruit. O descendant of the Pandava lineage! For the second month, I lived on water alone. And in the
third, I abstained from food. In the fourth month, I stood with my arms upraised. It is extraordinary that I did not
lose my strength. When the fourth had passed and the ﬁrst day arrived,159 a being in the form of a boar appeared
before me. It dug the ground up with its tasks. It scratched it with its hooves. It rubbed it with its belly and continuously rolled over. It was followed by another great being in the form of a kirata.160 He carried a bow, arrows and a
sword and was accompanied by masses of women.
‘“Taking up my bow and the quivers, I pierced that being,161 which made one’s hair stand up, with an arrow. At
the same time, the kirata drew his powerful bow and pierced it even more ﬁrmly, as if making my mind tremble. O
king! He told me, ‘Why have you disregarded the rules of hunting and shot it? It was struck by me ﬁrst. Stand still.
I will destroy your insolence with my sharp arrows. Then that gigantic being rushed at me. While I stood like a
mountain, he covered me with his great arrows. I also covered him with a mighty shower of arrows. I pierced him,
like a mountain pierced by the vajra, with arrows that ﬂamed at the tips and had feathered shafts, with mantras
chanted over them. At that, he multiplied his body a hundred times and a thousand times. I pierced each of these
bodies with my arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At that, all the bodies became one again. O great
king! On seeing this, I pierced it again. He now assumed a very small body with a large head and then a very large
body with a small head. O king! Then assuming a single body, he rushed at me to do battle. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! When I could not vanquish him in combat with arrows, I resorted to my vayavya weapon. But it
was extraordinary that I could not hurt him with this. When that weapon was repulsed, I was struck with great

wonder. O great king! Therefore, I resorted to greater endeavours. In that great battle, I enveloped him with many
mighty weapons. I unleashed a shower of arrows at him—sthunakarna, ayojala, sharavarsha, sharolbana, shailastra and ashmavarsha.162 O unblemished one! But he smilingly gobbled up all the weapons unleashed by me.
When he had paciﬁed all of them, I grasped my brahmastra.163 He was then completely covered with ﬂaming arrows. Thus covered by my great weapon, his body began to expand. Because of the energy unleashed by me, the
world began to burn. In an instant, the directions and the sky began to blaze. But that immensely energetic one
paciﬁed that weapon in a moment. O king! When the brahmastra weapon was conquered, I was overcome by great
fear. I grasped my bow and inexhaustible quivers and struck him with these. But he devoured those weapons too.
With all the weapons repulsed and with all the weapons devoured, that being and I engaged in a wrestling bout. We
dealt blows at each other with our ﬁsts and with the ﬂats of our hands. But that being vanquished me and I fell
down immobile on the ground. Then that being laughed and disappeared at that spot and time, with all the women.
O great king! On seeing this, I thought that it was extraordinary.
‘“O great king! Having done this, the illustrious one discarded the form of a kirata and appeared in another divine form, dressed in a wonderful garment. The illustrious god himself, with the bull on his banner,164 yelloweyed and capable of assuming many forms, the wielder of the pinaka,165 could be seen in his own form, accompanied by Uma. O scorcher of enemies! After the battle, I stood there, and the wielder of the trident166 told me, ‘I
am pleased with you.’ Grasping the bow and the inexhaustible quivers that never run out of arrows, the illustrious
one returned them to me and said, ‘Ask for a boon. O Kounteya! I am satisﬁed with you. Tell me what I can do for
you. O brave one! What is the desire of your heart? Tell me and I will grant whatever is in your heart, as long as it
is not immortality.’ Then, I joined my hands in salutation, with my mind set on obtaining weapons. I bowed to
Sharva167 and spoke these words, ‘If the illustrious one is pleased with me, I ask for this boon. I wish to know
about all the weapons that the gods possess.’ The illustrious Tryambaka168 told me, ‘I will give. O Pandava! My
own weapon, roudra, will always be present before you.’ Satisﬁed, the lord granted me that pashupata
weapon.169 Having given me that eternal weapon, Mahadeva told me, ‘This should never be used against humans.
O Dhananjaya! This powerful weapon should only be used if you are hard-pressed. It can be used to counter all
other weapons.’ Because of Vrishadhvaja’s favours, that divine weapon, capable of countering all other weapons,
the destroyer of all enemies and capable of annihilating the armies of enemies, unassailable and impossible for
gods, danavas and rakshasas to endure, stood personiﬁed by my side. After obtaining his170 permission, I sat
down there. In my very sight, the god disappeared.”’
461(164)

‘Arjuna said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Through the favours of the great-souled Tryambaka, the god
of the gods, I happily spent the night there. When the night had passed and I had completed the morning rituals, I
saw the best of brahmanas whom I had met earlier. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I told him everything that
had happened and my meeting with the illustrious Mahadeva. O Indra among kings! That supreme of brahmanas
then happily told me, ‘You have seen Mahadeva in a way that no one else has. O unblemished one! You will see
Vaivasvata171 and all the other lords of the worlds. You will see Indra of the gods and he will give you weapons.’
O king! Having said this, he embraced me again and again. Then that brahmana, who was like the sun, went where
he desired.
‘“O destroyer of your enemies! In the afternoon of that day, a pure breeze began to blow and it seemed to make
the world new again. Near me, at the foot of Shaishira mountain, divine, fragrant and fresh ﬂowers appeared. The
sound of delightful and divine musical instruments was heard on all sides, together with chants in praise of Indra.
Masses of apsaras and gandharvas began to sing various songs in front of the god of the gods. Masses of
Maruts172 arrived in celestial vehicles, together with Mahendra’s followers and those who live in his abode.
Marutvan, accompanied by Shachi, arrived in ornamented chariots yoked to tawny horses, together with all the
other immortals. O king! At that instant, Naravahana Kubera, supreme in prosperity, appeared before me. I saw
Yama established in the southern direction and Varuna and the king of the gods, each established in one’s respec-

tive place. O great king! That bull among the gods then spoke to me in comforting words. ‘O Savyasachi!173 Look
at all of us lokapalas established here. You have seen Shankara to accomplish a task for the gods. You will receive
weapons from all of us who are around here.’ O lord! I then puriﬁed and prostrated myself before those best of the
gods. In accordance with the prescribed rites, I received those powerful weapons.174 O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! O destroyer of enemies! Having obtained the weapons, I obtained leave of the gods. Then all the gods returned the way they had come.
‘“Maghavan, lord of the gods, ascended his splendid chariot. The illustrious one, the destroyer of the enemies of
the gods, smiled and spoke these words. ‘O Dhananjaya! I had known you even before you arrived here. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! Later, I will reveal myself to you.175 O Pandava! You have earlier bathed in the
tirthas. You have earlier tormented yourself with great austerities. You will therefore go to heaven. You will have
to practise supremely terrible austerities again.’ Then the illustrious one recounted all the austerities that would
have to be performed. ‘On my instructions, Matali will take you to the world of the thirty gods. You are already
well known to the gods and the great-souled sages.’ At this, I told Shakra, ‘O illustrious one! Please show your
favours to me. O lord of the thirty gods! I seek you as my preceptor, so that I may learn about weapons from you.’
Indra replied, ‘O son! O scorcher of enemies! You will perform terrible deeds. The reason for which you wish to
acquire weapons will be satisﬁed.’ Then I said, ‘O slayer of enemies! I will never use those celestial weapons
against humans, except to ward off their weapons. O lord of the gods! Therefore, give me those divine weapons. O
bull among the gods! I will later obtain the worlds that weapons can attain.’ Indra replied, ‘O Dhananjaya! I uttered those words in order to test you. Your words are worthy of someone who is my son. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! O extender of the Kuru lineage! Go to my abode and learn all the weapons there—those of Vayu,
Agni, Varuna, the masses of Maruts, of the Sadhyas, the grandfather,176 the gandharvas, the serpents and the rakshasas, those of Vishnu, the nairritas177 and my own.’ Having spoken those words to me, Shakra disappeared.
‘“O king! I then saw Indra’s chariot arrive. It was yoked to tawny horses. It was divine, magical and sacred and
was driven by Matali. The lokapalas having left, Matali told me, ‘O immensely radiant one! Shakra, the king of the
gods, wishes to see you. O mighty-armed one! First attain perfection. Then perform supreme deeds. Behold the regions earned by those with pure deeds. Go to heaven in your physical body.’ At Matali’s words, I took my leave of
Shaishira mountain. Circumambulating, I ascended that supreme chariot. Matali, expansive in generosity and an
expert about horses, drove those steeds in the proper fashion, with the speed of the mind and the wind. O king! On
seeing me seated steadily though the chariot was swinging, the charioteer was surprised and wonderingly said,
‘Today, this seems to me to be wonderful and extraordinary. You are seated in this divine chariot, but have not
moved even a foot. O bull among the Bharata lineage! When the horses make their ﬁrst movements, I have noticed
that even the king of the gods loses his balance. O extender of the Kuru lineage! But you are seated in this fashion,
though the chariot is swinging. It seems to me that your powers have surpassed those of Shakra.’ O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having said this, Matali soared up into the sky and lovingly showed me Nandana
and many other groves of the gods. I saw Shakra’s abode of Amaravati. It was adorned with divine trees that yielded every object of desire and jewels. The sun did not light it up. No chill or heat was felt there. O king! There was
no fatigue, dust, mud, darkness or old age. No sorrow, misery or pallor could be noticed there. O great king! O oppressor of enemies! There was no weariness among the inhabitants of heaven. O lord of the earth! There was no
anger or greed, nor anything inauspicious. Beings in the abodes of the gods are always satisﬁed and happy. There
are always ﬂowers and fruit in trees that are green with foliage. There are many ponds full of lotuses and sougandhika ﬂowers. The breeze is cool, fragrant, refreshing and pure there. There are many jewels everywhere and the
ground is strewn with ﬂowers. There are many beautiful animals and birds, with sweet voices. Many immortals
can be seen, riding their vimanas. I saw the Vasus, the Rudras, the Sadhyas, the masses of Maruts, the Adityas and
the Ashvins and offered homage to all of them. They gave me their blessings for valour, fame, energy, strength, the
learning of weapons and victory in battle.
‘“I then entered that beautiful city, worshipped by gods and gandharvas. Hands joined in salutation, I stood before the king of the gods, the one with a thousand eyes. Shakra, supreme among generous ones, was delighted and
offered me half of his throne. O one who is generous with gifts! Then Vasava honoured me and touched my body.

O descendant of the Bharata lineage! For the sake of weapons and learning, I began to dwell in heaven, together
with the gods and the gandharvas. O king! Vishvavasu’s178 son Chitrasena became my friend and he taught me
everything that the gandharvas knew. O king! Having obtained the weapons and having been honoured, I lived
there happily in Shakra’s abode, getting everything that I wished for. I heard the sounds of songs and the splendid
sounds of many musical instruments. O scorcher of enemies! I witnessed the dancing of the best of the apsaras. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Without ignoring those, which I learnt properly, I specially devoted my attention to learning about weapons. At that, the thousand-eyed lord was satisﬁed with my wishes. O king! In this way,
the period of my residence in heaven passed.”’
462(165)

‘Arjuna said, “When I was skilled in weapons and had obtained his conﬁdence, Harivahana179 touched my head
with his hands and spoke these words. ‘Today, the masses of gods are incapable of vanquishing you in battle, not
to speak of humans of the world who have not perfected their souls. You are immeasurable and unassailable. You
are also incomparable in battle.’ Then, with his body hair standing up, the god again said, ‘O brave one! There will
be no one who will be your match in ﬁghting with weapons. You are never distracted. You are skilled. You are
truthful and in control of your senses. You are like a brahmana. You are skilled in the usage of weapons. O extender of the Kuru lineage! You have obtained ten weapons and ﬁve.180 O Partha! Know that you have no equal in all
the ﬁve ways. O Dhananjaya! You know how to employ, restrain, return, pacify and counteract them.181 You
know everything about atonement and repulsion. O scorcher of enemies! The time has now come for you to pay
your preceptor’s fees. Promise to pay it and then I will tell you what you have to do.’ O king! At that, I spoke these
words to the king of the gods. ‘If it is in my power to do it, then consider it done.’ O king! Bala and Vritra’s slayer
smiled and told me, ‘There is nothing in the three worlds that is impossible for you. The danavas named nivatakavachas are my enemies. They live in an inaccessible spot, along the shores of the ocean. They are thirty million in number and they are identical in form, strength and radiance. O Kounteya! Destroy them there. That will be
the preceptor’s fee.’ He gave me the immensely radiant and divine chariot, driven by Matali. It was yoked to horses that had hair as beautiful as the feathers of peacocks. He tied an excellent diadem on my head. He gave me ornaments for the body, similar to those he himself wore and this supreme, beautiful and impenetrable armour, pleasant to the touch. I strung Gandiva with this string that does not decay.
‘“I then set out on that resplendent chariot, on which, in earlier times, the lord of the gods vanquished Bali, Virochana’s son. All the gods were alerted by the roar. O lord of the earth! Thinking me to be the king of the gods,
they assembled and having seen me, asked, ‘O Phalguna! What will you do?’ I then told them exactly what had
occurred and said, ‘I will do this in battle. I am departing to kill the nivatakavachas. O immensely fortunate ones!
O unblemished ones! O pure ones! Give me your blessings.’ They were as satisﬁed and pleased with me as the god
Purandara. ‘Ascended on this chariot, Maghavan vanquished in battle Shambara, Namuchi, Bala, Vritra, Prahlada
and Naraka. On this chariot, Maghavan vanquished in battle many thousands, prayutas and arbudas of daityas.182
O Kounteya! You will also vanquish the nivatakavachas in battle and show your prowess, just as the self-controlled Maghavan did earlier. Here is the supreme conch shell with which you will conquer the danavas. Using this,
the great-souled Shakra conquered the worlds.’183 The gods gave me Devadatta,184 obtained from the waters,
and I accepted it. Then, for the sake of victory, the immortals praised me. Desiring to ﬁght, I left for the terrible
abode of the danavas, with the conch shell, armour and arrows, having grasped the bow ﬁrmly.”’
463(166)

‘Arjuna said, “Wherever I went, I was praised by the maharshis. Then I beheld the terrible ocean, the eternal lord
of the waters. Towering waves could be seen there, full of foam, dashing against each other and scattering, like
moving mountains. There were thousands of boats, laden with gems, in every direction. Timingilas,185 tortoises,
whales and crocodiles could be seen, immersed in the water like mountains. Thousands of conch shells could be
seen in every direction, immersed in the water. They looked like stars in the night, covered by thin clouds. Thou-

sands of gems ﬂoated in heaps. A terrible wind whirled over this and it was extraordinary. I crossed over that
supreme and extremely forceful storehouse of waters and drew near to the city of the daityas. I saw it, infested
with danavas. Matali swiftly descended on to the ground. He drove on to the city, ﬁlling it with the roar of the
chariot. On hearing the roar of the chariot, like the sound of thunder in the sky, the danavas took me to be the king
of the gods and were anxious. Their minds trembled. All of them stood there, holding arrows and bows, spears,
swords, battleaxes, clubs and maces in their hands. Their minds trembling with fear, the danavas closed the gates.
They arranged for the protection of the city and nothing could be seen.
‘“I took out the conch shell Devadatta, whose sound is great. Circling around the city of the asuras, I blew gently on it. That sound echoed everywhere and seemed to stupefy the sky. On hearing this, the immensely mighty beings trembled and hid themselves. Then all the nivatakavachas, Diti’s sons, appeared everywhere. They were clad
in different kinds of armour and had many different weapons in their hands. There were gigantic iron lances, clubs,
maces, spears and the wheels of chariots in their hands. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were shataghnis,186 catapults and brilliantly ornamented swords. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Then, thinking about the
route the chariot should take, Matali drove the horses along level ground. Because of the swift speed that he made
the horses adopt, I could see nothing and it seemed to me to be extraordinary. Then the many martial danavas
adopted distorted voices and shapes. That great sound made hundreds and thousands of ﬁshes die, suddenly ﬂoating up in the sky, like mountains. With great force, the danavas rushed towards me. They discharged hundreds and
thousands of sharp arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! For the sake of the death of the nivatakavachas, a
great and terrible ﬁght occurred between them and me. Devarshis, masses of rishis among the danavas, brahmarshis and siddhas assembled to witness that great battle. Hoping for victory, the hermits praised me with eloquent and sweet voices, just as they praised Indra at the time of tarakamaya.”’187
464(167)

‘Arjuna said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Grasping weapons in order to do battle, all the nivatakavachas
rushed towards me. With angry yells, those maharathas obstructed the path of my chariot. They surrounded me
from all directions and enveloped me with a shower of arrows. Other immensely valorous ones grasped lances and
spears in their hands. They used lances and catapults on me. A great shower of lances, clubs and javelins was continuously hurled and descended on my chariot. Other nivatakavachas rushed at me in battle. They were armed with
sharp weapons and missiles. They were terrible and skilled in ﬁghting, like death. I sliced them down in battle with
many swift and straight arrows released from Gandiva and pierced each of them with ten.188 Those arrows used
by me, sharpened on stone, drove all of them back. Those horses were swiftly driven by Matali and as ﬂeet as the
wind, performed many manoeuvres of the chariot. The skilled Matali trampled many of Diti’s sons. Hundreds and
hundreds of tawny horses were yoked to that great chariot. But in Matali’s hands, there seemed to be only a few.
Through the hooves, the terrible noise of the chariot and my bows, hundreds of asuras were slain. Others, grasping
their bows even when they were dead, and with their charioteers killed, were carried away on horses. Those who
were skilled in ﬁghting covered all the directions. With all these weapons, my mind was distressed.
‘“But Matali’s valour seemed supremely extraordinary to me. He guided the swift horses lightly. O king! With
light hands, I cut down hundreds and thousands of asuras in that battle, together with their weapons. O slayer of
enemies! The brave Matali, Shakra’s charioteer, was pleased when I roamed around in these endeavours. Some
were crushed by the horses, others by the chariot. Some died. Others gave up ﬁghting. In that battle, other nivatakavachas challenged me and attacked me from all sides with great showers of arrows. With light arrows that
had been invoked with the brahmastra weapon, I consumed them in hundreds and thousands. Those angry and gigantic asuras were oppressed by me. They oppressed me with a shower of arrows, spears and swords. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I then picked up the beloved weapon of the king of the gods, named madhava. It possessed supreme energy. Through the energy of that weapon, I sliced into a hundred pieces the swords, tridents and
javelins that they hurled at me in their thousands. Having angrily sliced their weapons, I pierced each of them with
ten arrows. The great arrows that were unleashed from Gandiva in that battle were like swarms of bees and Matali
praised them. They also covered me with many arrows, as innumerable as locusts. But I powerfully repulsed them

with my arrows. Being struck, the nivatakavachas again surrounded me from all directions, with a great shower of
arrows. But I repulsed them with thousands of ﬂaming, supreme and swift arrows that were capable of countering
arrows. Like water draining from the peak of a mountain during the rainy season, blood began to ﬂow from their
mangled bodies. Pierced by the swift and straight-travelling arrows, with an impact like that of Indra’s vajra, the
danavas became extremely anxious. Their bodies were cut into a hundred pieces. Their weapons lost their energy.
The nivatakavachas then began to ﬁght me with the powers of maya.”’189
465(168)

‘Arjuna said, “Then a mighty shower of rocks appeared in all the directions. Those terrible rocks, as large as
mountain, oppressed me grievously. But in that battle, with swift arrows that were like the vajra and were discharged from Indra’s weapon, I shattered them into a hundred splinters. When the rocks were shattered, there was
a ﬁre and those splintered rocks fell into it like sparks. When that shower of rocks was dissipated, there was a great
shower of water. It poured down on me in ﬂows that were as large as axles.190 The shower descending from the
sky, in thousands of powerful streams, enveloped the sky and the directions everywhere. Nothing could be seen
because of the downpour of water, the roar of the wind and the roars of the daityas. The water covered everything
between heaven and earth. Descending continuously on earth, that torrent confounded me. At that, I discharged the
terrible, ﬂaming and divine weapon named vishoshana,191 obtained from Indra, and this dried the water up. O one
who is deserving of honour! When the shower of rocks was destroyed by me and the shower of water dried up, the
danavas used maya to unleash wind and ﬁre. I destroyed all the ﬁre with a weapon named salila.192 I countered
the force of the wind through a great weapon named shaila.193 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When that
had been countered, the danavas, indomitable in battle, resorted to many types of maya and yoga. There was a
great shower that made one’s body hair stand up, consisting of terrible weapons, ﬁre, wind and rocks. That shower,
created through maya, oppressed me in battle. A terrible darkness then manifested itself in every direction.
‘“When the world was completely immersed in that terrible and dense darkness, the horses drew back and
Matali tumbled forward. The golden whip fell down from his hand, onto the ground. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He repeatedly cried out, ‘Where are you?’ When he had lost his senses in this way, a terrible fear overcame
me. Trembling and bereft of his senses, he told me, ‘O Partha! O unblemished one! In earlier times, there was a
terrible war between the gods and the demons for the sake of amrita. I witnessed it. There was a terrible and great
battle for the slaying of Shambara194 and I was the charioteer of the king of the gods then too. Like that, I drove
the steeds at the killing of Vritra. I also witnessed the terrible and great battle for Virochana’s son.195 O Pandava!
I have seen those terrible and great battles. But never before have I lost my senses. It must certainly have been determined by the grandfather196 that all beings will be destroyed. But for the destruction of the universe, I can ﬁnd
no other reason for this battle.’ On hearing these words of his, and pacifying myself in my own mind, I got ready
to confound this great strength of maya of the danavas.
‘“I told the terriﬁed Matali, ‘Behold the strength of my arms, the might of my weapons and those of this bow
Gandiva. O charioteer! Do not be scared. Be steady. With the maya of my weapons, I will now counter this terrible
maya and repulse this terrible darkness.’ O lord of men! Having said this, I unleashed the maya of my weapons for
the welfare of the thirty gods, capable of deluding all beings. That maya having been dispelled, the lords of the
asuras, inﬁnitely energetic, again unleashed many different types of maya. It was suddenly light. Suddenly everything was immersed in darkness. The world could sometimes not be seen. Sometimes it was immersed in the water.
When it was light, in that battle which made one’s body hair stand up, Matali drove the chariot, yoked to horses
that were handled well. Then the terrible nivatakavachas rushed towards me. Whenever I saw an opening, I sent
them to Yama’s abode. In that battle, for the destruction of the nivatakavachas, suddenly I could not see any of the
danavas. They had covered themselves with maya.”’
466(169)

‘Arjuna said, “Invisible, the daityas fought me with maya. With the power of invisible weapons, I continued to
ﬁght with them. The shafted arrows from Gandiva, empowered with mantras, sliced off their heads, wherever they
were. At that, thus killed by me in battle, the nivatakavachas suddenly withdrew their maya and retreated into their
city again. The daityas having ﬂed and everything visible again, I saw the dead danavas there, in hundreds and
thousands. There were shattered weapons and ornaments. Heaps of dead bodies and armour could be seen. There
was no room for the horses to move their feet. They197 suddenly rose up and took to the sky. Invisible, the nivatakavachas covered the entire sky and showered down large rocks. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Other
terrible danavas entered the interiors of the earth and restrained the feet of the horses and the wheels of the chariot.
While engaged in the ﬁght, they seized the tawny horses and the chariot and covered me, ascended on the chariot,
in every direction with rocks. Because of the rocks that covered me, and because of the others that kept falling, the
entire region where we were stationed looked like a cave. I was sorely oppressed, being enveloped with rocks. The
horses had been restrained. On noticing that I was scared, Matali said, ‘O Arjuna! O Arjuna! Do not be frightened.
Discharge the vajra weapon.’ O lord of men! On hearing these words of his, I unleashed the vajra weapon, the vajra that is loved by the king of the gods. I resorted to an immobile spot and invoked Gandiva with the mantra. I discharged sharp iron arrows that had the force of the vajra. Having been discharged from the vajra, those arrows became like the vajra themselves. They penetrated all the maya of the nivatakavachas. Struck by the vajras, those
danavas clung to one another and fell down on the ground, like mountains. The arrows hunted out the danavas who
had entered the interiors of the earth and had seized the horses and the chariot, and dispatched them to Yama’s
abode. That place was littered with the corpses of mountainous nivatakavachas, as if strewn with mountains. It was
extraordinary that the horses, the chariot, Matali or I did not suffer any injury.
‘“O king! Matali smiled and told me, ‘O Arjuna! The valour exhibited by you is not seen even among the gods.’
With masses of asuras having been slain, their wives began to lament in the city, like cranes during the autumn.
Accompanied by Matali, I entered the city, terrifying the nivatakavacha women with the roar of the chariot. On
seeing the tens of thousands of horses, like peacocks, and the chariot that blazed like the sun, masses of women began to ﬂee. The sounds that those terriﬁed women made with their ornaments was like that of hail descending on a
mountain. The frightened daitya women entered their houses, made of gold and decorated with many beautiful
gems. On seeing that supreme and wonderful city, superior to the city of the gods, I asked Matali, ‘Why do the
gods not live in this wonderful place? I think that it surpasses Purandara’s city.’ Matali replied, ‘O Partha! This
was earlier the city of the gods. But the gods were expelled from here by the nivatakavachas. They obtained the
grandfather’s favours through great and terrible austerities and obtained the boon that they should live here, free
from all fear of the gods in battle. Then Shakra resorted to the illustrious one who creates himself198 and said, “O
illustrious one! Bearing our welfare in mind, you decide what is appropriate in this case.” The illustrious one told
Vasava what had been destined in this matter. “O slayer of Vritra! You yourself will assume another body and kill
them.”199 Therefore, Shakra gave you weapons for their destruction. Even the gods could not kill the ones you
have now slain. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You arrived here when the time was right for their end and
you have accomplished the task. O Indra among men! Mahendra conferred on you the supreme power of those
supreme weapons for the destruction of the danavas.’ Having killed the danavas and entering their city, I returned
to the abode of the gods, together with Matali.”’
467(170)

‘Arjuna said, “While I was returning, I saw another great city. It was divine, as resplendent as the ﬁre and the sun,
and it could roam as it wished. It had trees that were covered with jewels, with colourful birds that had sweet voices. It was inhabited by Poulamas and Kalakeyas who were always happy.200 It was impregnable, with turrets, entrances and four gates. It was covered with jewels everywhere and was celestial and wonderful to see. There were
trees with ﬂowers and fruit, covered everywhere with divine gems. There were extremely beautiful celestial birds.
It was ﬁlled everywhere with asuras who were always happy, armed with weapons like spears, swords, clubs, bows
and maces in their hands. O king! On seeing this extraordinary city of the daityas, I asked Matali, ‘What is this that
I see here?’

‘“Matali replied, ‘There was once a daitya lady named Puloma and another great asura lady named Kalaka.
They observed supreme austerities for one thousand celestial years. When they had completed the austerities, the
one who created himself201 granted them a boon. O Indra among kings! They chose the boon that their sons
should not suffer much and should be incapable of being killed by the gods, the rakshasas and the serpents. This
beautiful city that roams in the sky is the result of those good deeds. It is full of jewels everywhere and is incapable
of being conquered even by the gods, the yakshas, the masses of gandharvas, the serpents, the asuras and the rakshasas. It contains all the objects of desire and qualities and is devoid of sorrow and disease. O best of the Bharata
lineage! This was created for the Kalakeyas by Brahma. This is the divine city that is roaming around in the sky,
avoided by the immortals. O brave one! It is inhabited by the Poulama and Kalakeya danavas. This great city is
known by the name of Hiranyapura.202 It is protected by the great Kalakeya and Poulama asuras. They are always
happy there and cannot be killed by all the gods. O Indra among kings! They always live here happily, devoid of
anxiety and with nothing left to ask for. It was earlier destined by Brahma that they would die at the hands of a human.’”
‘Arjuna said, “O lord! Having learnt that they could not be slain by the gods and the asuras, I happily told
Matali, ‘Go swiftly to that city. I will use my weapons to destroy those who hate the thirty gods. There are no evil
haters of the gods who do not deserve to be slain by me.’ In that divine chariot, yoked to tawny horses, Matali
swiftly conveyed me to the city of Hiranyapura. On seeing me, Diti’s sons, adorned in colourful garments and ornaments, mounted their chariots and hastened at great speed. The chiefs of the danavas, terrible in valour, angrily
attacked me with darts,203 iron arrows, missiles,204 spears, cudgels and clubs. I warded off this great shower of
weapons. O king! Resorting to the strength of my knowledge, I unleashed a great shower of arrows. In that battle, I
confounded all of them through the course of my chariot. Completely confounded, the danavas fell down on one
another. They were so confounded that they rushed at each other. I sliced off their heads with hundreds of blazing
arrows. Thus slaughtered by me, the daityas resorted to their city again. Using the power of maya that danavas
possess, they rose up into the sky with their city. I restrained them with a great shower of arrows. I blocked the
path of the daityas and restrained their movement. But the daityas were supported by their boon. With ease, that
celestial city, divine in radiance and capable of going anywhere at will, remained suspended in the sky. It would
suddenly plunge into the ground, then be established up in the sky again. It would swiftly adopt a diagonal movement and immerse itself in the waters. O lord of men! That giant city, capable of going anywhere at will, was like
Amaravati. I attacked it with many types of weapons. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Then I subdued the
daityas, together with the city, with a net of arrows invoked with divine weapons. O king! It was wounded through
the straight and iron arrows shot by me. The city of the asuras was destroyed and fell down on the ground. O king!
Pierced by my iron arrows, as swift as the vajra, and driven by destiny, the asuras roamed around. Matali swiftly
descended on the ground in that chariot, as radiant as the sun, as if taking a forward leap. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Wishing to ﬁght with me, those indomitable ones surrounded me with sixty thousand chariots.
But I destroyed them with sharp arrows that had feathers of vultures as plumes. Thus vanquished in battle, they retreated like the waves of the ocean. Thinking that no man was capable of defeating them in battle, I discharged all
my other weapons, one after the other.205 But slowly, my divine weapons, and the thousands of chariots of those
skilled warriors, neutralized each other. The maharathas roamed around, in different manoeuvres of their chariots.
They could be seen in hundreds and thousands. They were adorned in colourful crowns and garlands for the head
and dazzling armour and ﬂags. With many beautiful ornaments, they delighted my mind.
‘“In that battle, with all my showers of arrows, I was not able to oppress them. But they oppressed me. Thus
hard-pressed by many who were accomplished in weapons and were skilled warriors, I felt pain in that great battle.
A great fear took hold of me. In the battle, I bowed down to Rudra, god of the gods. Saying, ‘May there be welfare
to all beings,’ I used the great weapon famous by the name of roudra, capable of destroying all enemies. I then saw
a man with three heads, nine eyes, three faces and six arms, with hair blazing like the sun and the ﬁre.206 O
scorcher of enemies! There were giant serpents with ﬂaming tongues on his head. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On beholding that terrible and eternal roudra weapon, I lost my fear and attached it to Gandiva. I bowed in
obeisance to the three-eyed and inﬁnitely energetic Sharva.207 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I discharged

it, to defeat the lords of the danavas. O lord of the earth! As soon as I discharged it, it assumed thousands of different forms everywhere—deer, lions, tigers, bears, buffaloes, serpents, cattle, elephants, marsh-deer, sharabhas,
bulls, boars, cats, hyenas, ghosts, bhurundas,208 vultures, garudas, sharks,209 pishachas, yakshas, haters of gods,
guhyakas, nairritas, large ﬁsh with mouths like elephants, owls and masses of ﬁsh and tortoises, all brandishing
many kinds of weapons and swords. There were yatudhanas,210 wielding clubs and maces. There were many other
beings in different forms. They ﬁlled up the universe when that weapon was discharged. Those many different
forms—with three heads, four tusks, four faces and four arms—devoured the ﬂesh, fat and marrow of the danavas.
They continuously killed the ones who had gathered there. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In an instant, I
also killed the danavas with arrows that were destructive of enemies, as hard as the vajra and as radiant as lightning, blazing like the sun and the ﬁre.
‘“On seeing them destroyed through weapons shot from Gandiva, deprived of life and hurled down from the
sky, I once again bowed to the god who destroyed Tripura.211 On seeing that they had been destroyed, with all
their celestial ornaments, shattered by the roudra weapon, the charioteer of the gods was extremely delighted. On
seeing that I had performed a task that was impossible even for the gods, Matali, Shakra’s charioteer, worshipped
me. He joined his hands in salutation and said in a happy voice, ‘The task that you have accomplished was impossible for the gods and the asuras. Even the lord of the gods could not have achieved this in battle. This great city
that roamed around in the sky could not have been destroyed by the gods and the asuras. O brave one! You have
vanquished it through the strength of your own valour, weapons and austerities.’ When the city had been destroyed
and the danavas killed, all the lamenting women emerged from the city. They were smitten by grief, their hair was
dishevelled and they were miserable like ospreys. They threw themselves down on the ground, sorrowing over
their sons, fathers and husbands. In miserable tones, they loudly grieved over their dead lords. They beat their
breasts with their hands and the garlands and ornaments were thrown away. The city of the danavas was overcome
with sorrow, misery and distress. It had lost all its splendour and all its lords had been slain. It was no longer radiant. Like a city of the gandharvas, like a pond deserted by elephants and like a forest that is full of dry trees, that
city disappeared.
‘“With a happy mind, Matali quickly took me from the ﬁeld of battle to the abode of the king of the gods. I had
accomplished my task. I had destroyed Hiranyapura and killed the great asuras and the nivatakavachas. I returned
to Shakra. O immensely radiant one! Matali recounted my deeds in detail to the Indra of the gods, completely and
exactly as it had happened—the destruction of Hiranyapura, the use of maya, the way it was repulsed and the slaying of the immensely powerful nivatakavachas in battle. On hearing this, the illustrious Purandara, the one with the
thousand eyes, was delighted. In the midst of the Maruts, he spoke words like, ‘Wonderful’ and ‘Well done’. Together with the other gods, the king of the gods repeatedly congratulated me and spoke these gentle words. ‘In battle, you have accomplished a deed that was impossible for the gods and the asuras. O Partha! By slaying my enemies, you have paid a great preceptor’s fee. O Dhananjaya! You will always remain as steady in battle. You will
know what has to be done and will not be confounded in using these weapons. The gods, the danavas, the rakshasas, the yakshas, the asuras and the gandharvas, together with masses of birds and serpents, will not be able to
withstand you in battle. O Kounteya! Through the strength of your arms, Kunti’s son, Yudhishthira, with dharma in
his soul, will conquer the earth and protect it.’”’
468(171)

‘Arjuna said, “At some point, on seeing that I had recovered from the wounds of the arrows and was comfortable,
the king of the gods told me, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the divine weapons are yours now. There is
no man on earth who is capable of vanquishing you. O son! When you are engaged in the ﬁeld of battle, Bhishma,
Drona, Kripa, Karna and Shakuni, together with all the other kings, are not worth one-sixteenth of you.’212 The
lord Maghavan then gave me this divine and impenetrable armour and a golden garland. He also gave me the
conch shell Devadatta, which emits a great sound. Indra himself ﬁxed this celestial diadem on my head. Shakra
then gave me these divine garments and celestial ornaments, beautiful and many in number. O king! Thus honoured, I lived happily in Indra’s abode, together with the children of the gandharvas. Extremely pleased with me,

Shakra, together with the immortals, told me, ‘O Arjuna! The time for your departure has come. Your brothers are
remembering you.’ O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! Thus did I spend ﬁve years in Indra’s abode, remembering the discord that was brought on us because of the gambling. Then, when you came to Mount Gandhamadana, I saw you on the peak, surrounded by your brothers.”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O Dhananjaya! You have obtained those weapons
through good fortune. It is also through good fortune that you satisﬁed the king and the lord who is the king of the
gods. O scorcher of enemies! O unblemished one! It is through good fortune that you beheld the lord Sthanu himself, together with the goddess, and satisﬁed him in the duel.213 O bull among the Bharata lineage! It is through
good fortune that you managed to meet the lokapalas. It is through good fortune that all of us have prospered and
have set our eyes on you again. I now think that we have conquered the goddess earth, with her garland of cities,
and have vanquished the sons of Dhritarashtra. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But I wish to see those divine
weapons with which you killed the valorous nivatakavachas.”
‘Arjuna said, “When it is dawn tomorrow, you will see all those divine weapons with which I destroyed the terrible nivatakavachas.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having thus recounted the incidents connected with his return, Dhananjaya spent the
night there, together with his brothers.’
469(172)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the night had passed, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira awoke and performed the necessary
rituals, together with his brothers. Then he told Arjuna, the beloved of his brothers. “O Kounteya! Show us the
weapons with which you destroyed the danavas.” O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then the immensely energetic Pandava Dhananjaya showed the celestial weapons that had been given by the gods, in due order, and
after establishing himself in supreme purity. The earth was like his chariot and the radiant Dhananjaya seated himself on that. The trees on the mountain were like its axles and the beautiful bamboos like the spokes. He looked resplendent in his bright armour. He grasped the bow Gandiva and the conch shell Devadatta, born from the waters.
In that radiance, mighty-armed Kounteya prepared to show those divine weapons, one after the other.
‘As he got ready to employ those divine weapons, the earth and all its trees began to tremble under his feet. The
rivers and the great ocean began to tremble. The mountains were rent asunder. The winds stopped blowing. The
one with the thousand rays214 stopped shining. The ﬁres stopped burning. The Vedas were no longer manifest to
those who were twice-born.215 O Janamejaya! The beings that lived in the interiors of the earth were oppressed.
All of them trembled and emerged. Covering their faces, they joined their hands in salutation and surrounded Pandava. Burnt by those weapons, they prayed to Dhananjaya. The brahmarshis, the siddhas, the maharshis and all
mobile beings stood there. So did supreme rajarshis, gods, yakshas, rakshasas, gandharvas and birds. The grandfather216 himself arrived, together with all the lokapalas, and the illustrious Mahadeva, with all his companions. O
great king! Vayu covered Pandava with colourful, fragrant and divine ﬂowers from every side. Instructed by the
gods, the gandharvas sung many songs. O king! Masses of apsaras began to dance there. At that tumultuous time,
instructed by the gods, Narada arrived. O king! He spoke these words, worthy of hearing, to Partha. “O Arjuna! O
Arjuna! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Do not discharge these divine weapons. They should never be used
when there is no target. Even when there is a target, one should not use them unless one is hard-pressed. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Such a use of these weapons is a great sin. O Dhananjaya! If these weapons are properly
preserved, as you have been taught, there is no doubt that they will lead to great happiness. O Pandava! But if they
are not preserved well, they will lead to the destruction of the three worlds. Therefore, never attempt this again. O
Ajatashatru!217 You will behold the weapons when Partha uses them in battle for the destruction of the enemies.”
O bull among men! After having restrained Partha, all the gods, and all the others who had assembled there, departed the way they had come. O Kouravya!218 When they had left, the Pandavas, together with Krishna, began to
live happily in that forest.’

Section Thirty-Six
Ajagara Parva
This parva has 201 shlokas and six chapters.
Chapter 470(173): 22 shlokas
Chapter 471(174): 24 shlokas
Chapter 472(175): 21 shlokas
Chapter 473(176): 51 shlokas
Chapter 474(177): 33 shlokas
Chapter 475(178): 50 shlokas
Ajagara means a boa constrictor, literally something that swallows a goat (aja). The Pandavas retrace their steps to Vrishaparva’s hermitage
and Badari and then go to visit King Subahu. From there, they go to the origins of the Yamuna and Dvaitavana, on the banks of the Sarasvati.
Bhima is then grasped by Nahusha in the form of a boa and this is why this section is called Ajagara Parva. The highlight of this section is a
dialogue between Yudhishthira and Nahusha, in the form of a boa.
470(173)

Janamejaya asked, ‘When that great charioteer, skilled in weapons, returned from the abode of Vritra’s slayer, what
did the Parthas accomplish next, now that they had been rejoined by the brave Dhananjaya?’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Those Indras among men lived in that forest. The brave ones sported there on that beautiful mountain, the lovely pleasure ground of the lord of riches, with Arjuna, equal to Indra himself. On seeing those
unmatched houses and pleasure grounds covered with many trees, Kiriti,1 Indra among men, always immersed in
his weapons and with the bow in his hand, roamed around a lot. Through the favours of King Vaishravana, those
sons of a king had found an abode and no longer desired what beings want.2 That time was a blessing for them.
They were united with Partha and lived for four years there and these years they spent there seemed like a single
night. With the earlier six, it was now ten years that the Pandavas had peacefully dwelt in the forest.
‘Once, Vayu’s intrepid son was seated near the king, together with Jishnu and the twins, the equals of the king of
the gods.3 In private, he gently spoke these beneﬁcial words. “O king of the Kurus! In order to ensure that your
oath remained true and to do that which would make you happy, we followed you into the forest and did not kill
Suyodhana, together with his followers. We have lived here for eleven years. We are deserving of happiness, but
Suyodhana has grasped that happiness. We should now deceive that scoundrel, lacking in intelligence and conduct.
Let us happily resort to a life that will be incognito.4 O king! On your instructions, we lived without anxiety and
spent this time roaming in the forest. He will be deluded because we have lived nearby and will not get to know if
we move to a distant region. Having spent one year in hiding, we will easily uproot that worst of men. O Indra
among kings! On that scoundrel among men, Suyodhana, surrounded by all his followers, we will reap the enmity,
with all its fruits and ﬂowers. O Dharmaraja! Accept the world as your own. O god among men! Kill this grief. We
are capable of roaming this mountain that is like heaven. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Your fragrant deeds
may be destroyed in this world of the mobile and the immobile. But by regaining the kingdom of the bulls among
the Kurus, you are capable of performing great deeds and great rituals. O Indra among men! You are always capable of obtaining whatever you want from Kubera. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Set your heart on the slaying of those who hate you and on punishing them, because they have oppressed you. O king! The wielder of the

vajra is himself incapable of withstanding your terrible energy. O Dharmaraja! Nor will any pain be caused to you
even if you confront all the gods. The one with Suparna on his banner and Shini’s grandson are both engaged in
that which ensures your welfare.5 O god among kings! The foremost among the Shinis, the equal of Krishna in
strength, is engaged likewise.6 Krishna, together with the Yadavas, is engaged in that which will ensure your welfare. O god among men! So are these brave and skilled twins. Our prime objective is an increase in your inﬂuence.
Encountering the enemies, we will pacify them.” On ascertaining what was in their mind, the great-souled son of
Dharma circumambulated Vaishravana’s abode.7
‘The energetic one was knowledgeable about dharma and artha. Dharmaraja bid adieu to the houses, the rivers,
the lakes and all the rakshasas. He glanced down at the path through which he had ascended and looked again at
the mountain and said, “O Indra among mountains! When my deeds are done, when my well-wishers and I have
triumphed over the enemies and have won the kingdom, I will behold you again, for performing austerities with a
restrained soul.” Surrounded by all his brothers and the brahmanas, the lord of the Kurus was again carried along a
similar path, with all the others, by Ghatotkacha—over mountains and waterfalls. On seeing them ready to leave,
the maharshi8 cheerfully instructed them, like a father to his sons. Together with Lomasha, they happily went to
the sacred abode of the dwellers of heaven. Similarly instructed by Arshtishena, the Parthas, foremost among men,
went and saw the beautiful tirthas, hermitages and many other great ponds.’
471(174)

Vaishampayana said, ‘That supreme of mountains had cascading waterfalls and was full of kinnaras, birds and cardinal elephants.9 The bulls among the Bharatas had lived happily there and found no pleasure in leaving it. But
when the bulls among the Bharatas once again beheld Kailasa, Kubera’s beloved mountain that looked like an
ocean of clouds, they found great joy. The brave ones saw passes in the mountains, pens for cattle in the mountains, crevasses in the mountains and many sharp falls, with plains and lowlands here and there. There were other
large forests, inhabited by many animals and deer. Armed with bows and swords, those foremost among men conﬁdently went further. There were beautiful groves, rivers and ponds and caverns and recesses in the mighty mountains. By day and by night, those bulls among men always found places to rest there. After resting in this difﬁcult
terrain and traversing Kailasa, whose form is unthinkable, they reached Vrishaparva’s supreme and beautiful hermitage. On meeting them, King Vrishaparva heartily welcomed them. Overcoming all confusion, they gave Vrishaparva a complete account of their safe stay.10 They happily spent a night in that sacred hermitage, favoured by
gods and maharshis. The brave ones then went to the giant Badari and happily dwelt there again. Then those greatsouled ones, foremost among men, arrived at Narayana’s region. They saw Kubera’s lotus pond, favoured by gods
and siddhas, and became devoid of grief. Pandu’s sons, foremost among all men, saw those lotuses and became devoid of grief. They pleasured there, just as brahmana rishis enjoy themselves when they live in Nandana.
‘Having spent a happy month in Badari, in due course, they went to the land of Subahu, the king of the kiratas,
following the route that other brave ones had traversed earlier. They passed the lands of chinas,11 tukharas,12
daradas,13 darvas14 and kunindas15 full of many jewels. The brave ones crossed the difﬁcult terrain of the Himalaya region and saw Subahu’s city. When he heard that all the sons and grandsons of kings had arrived, King
Subahu was delighted and came out to welcome them. The bulls of the Kuru lineage greeted him in return. They
met Subahu with all the charioteers headed by Vishoka, with Indrasena, with the servants, with the cooks and with
their supervisors.16 They stayed there happily for a night. Retaining all the charioteers and the chariots, they dismissed Ghatotkacha and his followers. They continued towards Yamuna, the king of mountains.17 That mountain
is full of springs. Its red and pale slopes are covered with a mantle of snow. The foremost among men reached the
sacriﬁcial pole Vishakha and lived there.18 The great forest was like Chaitraratha19 and was infested by boars,
many animals and birds. Those foremost among hunters safely spent another year in that forest. In a cavern in that
mountain, Vrikodara came upon an extremely strong serpent. It was oppressed by hunger and had the terrible form
of death itself. Thereupon, his soul was pained through depression and delusion. But Yudhishthira, supreme among

those who uphold dharma and whose energy is inﬁnite, freed Vrikodara in an island there, when all his limbs had
been grasped by the grasper.20 The twelfth year had arrived and the Kurus pleasantly spent the time in the forest.
They lived in the forest that was like Chaitraratha. They were fortunate and radiant in their austerities. Then the
foremost ones among those who are devoted to the knowledge of arms, went to the neighbourhood of the desert.
They went to Sarasvati and found Lake Dvaitavana, wishing to live there. On seeing them come to Dvaitavana and
settling down there, the residents of that region arrived. They were engaged in austerities and restrained, devoted
to rituals and meditation. They came with grass, water, vessels, offerings and stones for grinding. Sarasvati’s banks
were covered with many plakshas,21 akshas,22 rohitakas,23 cane, snuhas,24 badaris,25 khadiras,26 shirishas,27
bilvas,28 ingudas,29 pilus,30 shamis31 and kariras.32 This was a place loved by yakshas, gandharvas and maharshis. It was the sacriﬁcial ground of the gods themselves. Those sons of a god among men lived there happily,
roaming delightedly along the banks of the Sarasvati.’
472(175)

Janemejaya asked, ‘O sage! How can Bhima, whose prowess is terrible and who has the strength of ten thousand
elephants, have been overcome by dreadful fear on account of an ajagara? The insolent one challenged the lord of
riches, of the Pulastya lineage, in battle.33 He encountered and killed the foremost among yakshas and rakshasas
at the lotus pond. You said that the destroyer of enemies was overcome by distress and fear. I am curious and wish
to hear this in detail.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! Having left the hermitage of King Vrishaparva, those foremost among archers
lived in the forest that possessed many wonders. On seeing that beautiful forest, frequented by gods and gandharvas, Vrikodara began to roam around as he wished, bow and sword in his hands. He saw the pure regions on the
Himalaya mountains, visited by masses of apsaras and frequented by gods, rishis and siddhas. It resounded everywhere with the sounds of chakoras, chakravaka birds, jivas,34 jivakas,35 cuckoos and bhringarajas.36 It was covered with trees that were always full of ﬂowers and fruit, tender because of the touch of snow. There was plenty of
shade and it was pleasant to the mind and the eye. He saw mountainous streams tinged with the colour of lapis
lazuli. The water was touched by snow and there were tens of thousands of geese and karandavas.37 There were
forests of devadaru trees38 that seemed to act like a net for the clouds. These were mixed with yellow sandalwood
and tall kaliyakas.39 He went hunting on the ﬂat terrain of the desert. The immensely strong one shot the deer with
arrows that were pure.40
‘Then he saw a gigantic serpent that makes one’s body hair stand up. It had entered a mountainous cavern and
had covered the entire cave with its body. Its coils were piled as high as a mountain. Its colour was yellow like
turmeric and its colourful skin was speckled with circular marks like the sun and the moon. Its mouth was as wide
as a cave and was adorned with four teeth. It constantly licked the corners of its mouth. Its eyes blazed and were
copper-red in hue. Like destiny and like Yama, it struck terror in all beings. Through the moist hissing of its breath,
it seemed to be reprimanding. The hungry boa suddenly grasped Bhimasena and forcefully seized him with both
his arms. Because of the boon it had received, Bhimasena instantly lost his senses as soon as it touched him. The
strength of Bhimasena’s arms might have been more than that of others and his strength might have been able to
withstand ten thousand elephants. But the energetic one was completely overcome by the serpent. Bhima trembled
slowly, but he was completely unable to move. He was equal to ten thousand elephants. He had the shoulders of a
lion. His arms were strong. But grasped, he lost his mettle. He was deluded because of the grant of the boon. For
some time, the brave one tried terribly hard to extricate himself. But he did not succeed at all.’
473(176)

Vaishampayana said, ‘The energetic Bhimasena was thus overcome by the serpent. He began to think about the
great and extraordinary valour of the serpent. He told the great serpent, “O serpent! If you so desire, please tell me.
O best of serpents! Who are you and what will you do with me? I am Pandava Bhimasena, immediately younger to

Dharmaraja. I possess the vigour equal to that of ten thousand elephants. How can I have been brought under your
power? Many lions with manes, tigers, buffaloes and elephants have been encountered and slain by me in battle. O
supreme among serpents! Danavas, pishachas and immensely strong rakshasas have not been able to withstand the
force of my arms. Do you have the strength of knowledge or do you have the gift of a boon? In spite of my endeavours, you have been able to overpower me. O serpent! It is certain in my mind that the valour of men is useless, since you have been able to withstand my great strength.” When the brave Bhima, whose deeds are unsullied,
was speaking in this way, the serpent encircled him in one gigantic coil.
‘Having thus overcome the mighty-armed one, but freeing his thick arms, the serpent said, “O mighty-armed
one! I have been hungry for an extremely long time and it is fortunate that the gods and destiny have sent me my
food. Life is dear to all beings that have bodies. O destroyer of enemies! O virtuous one! But I must certainly tell
you the account now, how it was that I became a serpent. I attained this state because of the anger of the learned
ones. Wishing to overcome the curse, I will tell you the serpent’s account. You must have heard of the rajarshi
named Nahusha. He was your ancestor and that of your forefathers. He was Ayu’s son and the extender of that lineage. I am he. Because of the disrespect shown to brahmanas and because of Agastya’s curse, I have attained this
state.41 Look at what fate has wrought on me. You are my descendant and you are extremely handsome. Therefore, you should not be killed by me. But look at destiny. I will devour you today. O supreme among men! Once I
have grasped a prey on the sixth day, whether it is an elephant or a buffalo, it can never free itself from me. O best
of Kouravas! You have not only been grasped by a serpent that belongs to the inferior species. I have the gift of a
boon. When I was swiftly falling from the vimana on which Shakra is seated, I asked the illustrious supreme
sage42 to free me from the curse. Flooded with compassion, the energetic one replied, ‘O king! You will be freed
after some time has passed.’ Then I fell down on the ground, but did not lose my memory. Therefore, what has
been determined in ancient times is ﬁxed in my mind and memory. The rishi told me, ‘He who replies accurately to
your questions, will free you from your curse. O king! Once grasped by you, even if it is a being that is stronger
and superior to you, it will immediately lose its mettle.’ Affectionate towards me and driven by compassion, those
brahmanas then instantly disappeared.43 O immensely radiant one! I thus assumed the form of a serpent. I live in
this unholy hell, performing evil deeds, waiting for the appointed time.”
‘Then the mighty-armed Bhimasena told the serpent, “O great serpent! I am not angry with you. Nor do I blame
myself. Sometimes a man is capable of bringing happiness or unhappiness. At other times, he is incapable. One’s
mind should not be worried at these comings and goings. How can one’s own exertions rise above destiny? I think
that destiny is supreme and endeavours are meaningless. Behold. Because of adverse destiny, I have lost the
strength of my arms. Without any immediate reason, I have been reduced to this state now. But today, I do not sorrow as much over my own destruction as I do over my brothers, who have been dislodged from their kingdom and
have been exiled to this wilderness. The Himalayas are difﬁcult of access and are infested with yakshas and rakshasas. On seeing me thus, they will be confounded and will fall down. On hearing of my destruction, they will
lose all enterprise. They follow dharma. It was I who drove them, because of my greed for the kingdom. Or perhaps the intelligent Arjuna, who knows all the weapons and is invincible to the gods, the gandharvas and the rakshasas, will be overcome by sorrow. The mighty-armed one, immensely strong, is capable, with his strength, of
dislodging the king of the gods from his seat, not to speak of Dhritarashtra’s sons, deceitful in gambling, hated by
all the worlds and addicted to insolence and avarice. I sorrow over my poor mother, so loving towards her sons.
She always wished that we might attain a greatness superior to that of others. O serpent! At my destruction, she
will be without a protector. All the desires that she had for me will become unsuccessful. The twins, Nakula and
Sahadeva, followed their elder. They were always protected through the strength of my arms and were proud of
their manliness. They will lose their enterprise. They will be dislodged from prowess and valour. At my destruction, they will be without protection. This is what I think.” In this way, Vrikodara lamented a lot. He was coiled by
the serpent and could not move at all.
‘Kounteya Yudhishthira saw all the terrible omens and was disturbed in his mind. He thought about these evil
portents. The sky to the south of the hermitage was ablaze.44 A she-jackal stationed herself there and let out a terrible and dreadful howl. There was a dreadful-looking quail,45 with one wing, one eye and one foot. It was seen to

vomit blood, screeching harshly in the direction of the sun. A hot and rough wind began to blow, attracting gravel.
All the animals and birds wailed towards the south. A black crow cawed from the back, “Go! Go!” His46 right arm
repeatedly trembled. There were tremors in his heart and in his left leg. Foretelling of evil, his left eye began to
throb. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Sensing great danger, the intelligent Dharmaraja asked Droupadi,
“Where is Bhima?” Panchali answered that Vrikodara had been gone for a long time. Accompanied by Dhoumya,
the mighty-armed king then left. He gave instructions to Dhananjaya to protect Droupadi. He instructed Nakula
and Sahadeva to tend to the brahmanas. Then the lord followed Bhima’s footprints from the hermitage and saw the
earth marked with the signs of his passage. As the brave one, with the speed of the wind, had rushed forward on
his hunt, the wind created by his thighs had broken down and strewn trees along the path. Following these signs,
he reached the mountainous cavern and saw his younger brother immobile there, in the grasp of that Indra among
serpents.’
474(177)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On seeing his beloved brother encircled in the coils of the snake, the wise Yudhishthira approached and told the brave one, “O one whose mother is Kunti! How has this misfortune befallen you? Who is
this supreme of serpents, with a body that is equal to a mountain?” On seeing his elder brother Dharmaraja, he47
told his brother everything that had happened and how he had come to be grasped. Yudhishthira said, “O serpent!
Yudhishthira is asking you. Tell the truth. Are you a god, a daitya or a serpent? O serpent! What must be done for
you, or what must be told you, so as to please you? What food must be brought to you? What must be done to set
him free?”
‘The serpent replied, “O unblemished one! I was earlier a king named Nahusha, your ancestor. O lord of men! I
was Ayu’s famous son and ﬁfth in the line from Soma.48 Through sacriﬁces, austerities, studying, self-restraint
and valour, I obtained unrivalled lordship of the three worlds. Having attained that prosperity, insolence overcame
me. Thousands of brahmanas carried my palanquin. Intoxicated with my fortune, I insulted those brahmanas. O
lord of the earth! I have been reduced to this state because of Agastya. O Pandava! O king! But because of the
favours of the great-souled Agastya, I have not lost my wisdom even now. I have obtained your younger brother as
my food at the sixth point in time.49 I will not free him. Nor do I desire any other food. But if you answer the
questions I ask you, I will later free your brother Vrikodara.”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “O serpent! Tell me whatever you like. O serpent! If I can, I will answer and please you.
You are certainly aware of what only a brahmana can know. O king of the serpents! On hearing your words, I will
reply.”
‘The serpent asked, “O king! O Yudhishthira! Who is a brahmana and what should he know? From your words,
I think that you are extremely wise.”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “O Indra among serpents! It is said that a brahmana is one in whom truthfulness, charity,
forgiveness, good conduct, lack of cruelty, self-control and compassion can be seen. O serpent! He obtains knowledge of the supreme brahman, which is beyond happiness and unhappiness, and on attaining which, there is no sorrow. What else will you say?”
‘The serpent asked, “Truthfulness and knowledge of the brahman can be found in all the four varnas. O Yudhishthira! Truthfulness, charity, lack of anger, lack of cruelty, non-violence and compassion can also be found
among shudras. O lord of men! You have said that the object of knowledge is beyond happiness and unhappiness.
But there is nothing that is free from either. I do not think such a thing exists.”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “If these traits, not even found in a brahmana, are seen in a shudra, he is not a shudra. A
brahmana in whom a brahmana’s traits are not found, is a shudra. O serpent! It is said that one in whom these traits
are found is a brahmana. O serpent! One in whom these traits are not found, is marked as a shudra. Then again,
you have said that the object of knowledge does not exist, because there is nothing that is free from both those sentiments.50 O serpent! It is your view that nothing can exist without those two. There is a state between cold and
heat that is neither cold nor heat. Like that, there is something in between that is neither happiness, nor unhappiness. That is my view. O serpent! What do you think?”

‘The serpent said, “O king! O one with a long life! If you assert that a brahmana is known by his conduct, birth
has no meaning, as long as those characteristics can be seen.”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “O great serpent! O immensely wise one! I think that among men, birth is difﬁcult to determine, because of mixed birth among all the varnas. Men always beget children on women from all varnas. All
men are equal in speech, intercourse, birth and death. The proof of this can be found in the words of the learned
rishis, who have said ‘We sacriﬁce’ and so on, basing this entirely on conduct.51 The birth rituals of a man are performed even before the navel chord has been severed. At that time, the mother is Savitri and the father is the preceptor.52 Before initiation into knowledge of the Vedas, everyone is a shudra by conduct. When there is a difference of opinion on this, Svayambhuva Manu53 has categorically stated, ‘The observance of rituals determines varna. If conduct cannot be seen, mixed races overwhelmingly dominate.’ O Indra among serpents! O great serpent!
O supreme among serpents! I have earlier deﬁned as a brahmana one in whom the principles of good conduct are
seen.”
‘The serpent said, “O Yudhishthira! I have listened to your words. You know what should be known. How can I
now devour your brother Vrikodara?”’
475(178)

‘Yudhishthira asked, “In this world, there is no one as knowledgeable as you in the Vedas and the Vedangas.54 Tell
me. Which are the deeds through which one attains the supreme objective?”
‘The serpent replied, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is my view that one goes to heaven by giving to
those who are worthy, speaking the truth and by always resorting to non-violence.”
‘Yudhishthira asked, “O serpent! Between generosity and truthfulness, which is seen to be superior? Between
non-violence and good conduct, which is superior and which is inferior?”
‘The serpent replied, “The superiority or inferiority of generosity versus truthfulness or non-violence vis-à-vis
good conduct is determined by whether the effects of these deeds are more or less important. There are times when
truthfulness is regarded as superior to generosity. O Indra among kings! There are times when generosity is regarded as superior to truthfulness. O mighty archer! O lord of the earth! In that way, there are occasions when non-violence is superior to kind words and other occasions when kind words are superior. O king! In this fashion, the superiority depends on the effects. If there is anything else that you are thinking of, tell me. I will explain.”
‘Yudhishthira asked, “O serpent! What are the deeds through which one can attain heaven? What are seen to be
the certain fruits of the disembodied soul? Explain these things to me.”
‘The serpent replied, “O king! Depending on one’s own deeds, there are seen to be three end goals—human
birth, residence in heaven and rebirth as inferior species. These are the three ends. Through continuous acts of
charity and deeds based on reasons of non-violence, one attains heaven from this world of men. O Indra among
kings! Through the reverse deeds, a man is born as inferior species. O son!55 I will tell you about the speciﬁcs. A
man who is addicted to desire and anger, and overcome by violence and avarice, is dislodged and is reborn as inferior species. It has separately been said that one who is born as inferior species, can be reborn as a human. Thus,
cattle and horses are seen to have attained divine status. O son! Such is the goal of all animals, depending on one’s
deeds. O king! The self should always be established in greatness. From one birth to another, the soul enjoys the
fruits that come from a body, though it is distinct. This is the characteristic of all beings.”
‘Yudhishthira asked, “O serpent! Tell me exactly how the soul is established in a body and experiences sound,
touch, colour, taste and smell. O immensely intelligent one! Do you also not separately experience these senses? O
supreme among serpents! Tell me everything that I have asked.”
‘The serpent replied, “O one with a long life! When the soul has resorted to a physical body and has established
itself in control, it experiences each of those senses, depending on their characteristics. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! Learn from me that knowledge, intelligence and the mind are faculties that determine a soul’s enjoyment
of the senses. O son! Through the mind, the embodied being experiences one after another, from one object to another, the senses that ﬂow out of each of these objects. O tiger among men! The mind is thus the cause of all perceptions among animals. At the same time, it cannot experience multiple objects. O tiger among men! The soul is

established between the eyebrows. It creates the intelligence about different kinds of objects. O tiger among kings!
According to the wise, different kinds of experience ﬂow from this intelligence. These are the ways of an embodied soul.”
‘Yudhishthira asked, “Tell me. What are the speciﬁc characteristics that distinguish the mind and the intelligence? What is said to be the supreme deed for those who wish to know about the soul?”
‘The serpent replied, “O son! Through various distractions, the intelligence is said to follow the soul. Though
consciousness is derived from it,56 it is said to control the soul. Intelligence is not subject to the different qualities.
But the mind has these qualities. O son! Thus have I distinguished between the mind and intelligence. But you
yourself have knowledge about these matters. What do you think?”
‘Yudhishthira said, “O best among those who are endowed with intelligence! Your intelligence is supreme. You
know everything that there is to know. Why are you then asking me this question? You are omniscient. You dwelt
in heaven. You were the performer of extraordinary deeds. I am confronted with great uncertainty. How did delusion overcome you?”
‘The serpent replied, “Even an extremely strong and brave man is deluded by prosperity. It is my view that all
those who are immersed in happiness become confused in intelligence. O Yudhishthira! I became deluded because
of my prosperity. I was intoxicated. Though enlightened, I descended into this state and am enlightening you now.
O great king! O scorcher of enemies! You have performed a service towards me. Because of my conversation with
a virtuous one,57 I have been freed from the grievous curse. In earlier times, I used to roam around heaven in a celestial chariot. Intoxicated with my vanity, I thought of nothing else. Brahmarshis, gods, gandharvas, yakshas, rakshasas, serpents, kinnaras and all the residents of the three worlds had to pay me taxes. O lord of the earth! Such
was the power of my glance, that whatever being my eyes happened to behold, the strength of my sight robbed him
of his energy. Thousands of brahmarshis bore my palanquin. O king! This misconduct brought about my dislodging from prosperity. One day, when the sage Agastya was bearing me, my feet happened to touch him. In anger,
destiny58 then spoke these words, ‘May you be destroyed. Become a serpent.’ At that, I fell down from that
supreme vimana. I lost all my ornaments. While I was falling down, with my face downwards, I saw that I had become a predatory serpent.59 Then I asked that brahmana, ‘Please free me from this curse. O illustrious one! I have
transgressed out of my folly. Please pardon me.’ As I was falling, he was overcome by compassion and told me, ‘O
lord of men! Dharmaraja Yudhishthira will free you from this curse, once the fruits of your insolence and terrible
strength have decayed. O great king! You will then attain supreme fruits.’ On witnessing the strength of his austerities, great wonder was born in me. That is the reason I asked you about the brahman and brahmanas. O king!
Truthfulness, self-control, austerities, non-violence and constant benevolence are the means whereby men attain
salvation, not through birth or lineage. Your immensely strong brother, Bhimasena, is safe and unhurt. O great
king! May you be fortunate. I will return to heaven.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having said this, King Nahusha discarded the body of a boa. Assuming a celestial form,
he returned to the world of the thirty gods. The fortunate, Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul, returned to the
hermitage with his brother Bhima, accompanied by Dhoumya. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira told the assembled brahmanas the details of everything that had happened. O king! On hearing this, the brahmanas, the other three brothers
and the famous Droupadi were astounded. All the best of the brahmanas desired the welfare of the Pandavas. Censuring Bhima’s rashness, they told him not to act in this way. The Pandavas were extremely delighted at seeing the
immensely strong Bhima freed from fear. They happily enjoyed themselves.’

Section Thirty-Seven
Markandeya Samasya Parva
This parva has 1694 shlokas and forty-three chapters.
Chapter 476(179): 18 shlokas
Chapter 477(180): 49 shlokas
Chapter 478(181): 41 shlokas
Chapter 479(182): 21 shlokas
Chapter 480(183): 32 shlokas
Chapter 481(184): 25 shlokas
Chapter 482(185): 54 shlokas
Chapter 483(186): 129 shlokas
Chapter 484(187): 55 shlokas
Chapter 485(188): 83 shlokas
Chapter 486(189): 31 shlokas
Chapter 487(190): 82 shlokas
Chapter 488(191): 28 shlokas
Chapter 489(192): 29 shlokas
Chapter 490(193): 27 shlokas
Chapter 491(194): 30 shlokas
Chapter 492(195): 39 shlokas
Chapter 493(196): 21 shlokas
Chapter 494(197): 44 shlokas
Chapter 495(198): 94 shlokas
Chapter 496(199): 34 shlokas
Chapter 497(200): 54 shlokas
Chapter 498(201): 20 shlokas
Chapter 499(202): 25 shlokas
Chapter 500(203): 51 shlokas
Chapter 501(204): 27 shlokas
Chapter 502(205): 29 shlokas
Chapter 503(206): 34 shlokas
Chapter 504(207): 20 shlokas
Chapter 505(208): 8 shlokas
Chapter 506(209): 25 shlokas
Chapter 507(210): 19 shlokas
Chapter 508(211): 31 shlokas
Chapter 509(212): 30 shlokas
Chapter 510(213): 52 shlokas
Chapter 511(214): 37 shlokas
Chapter 512(215): 23 shlokas
Chapter 513(216): 15 shlokas
Chapter 514(217): 14 shlokas
Chapter 515(218): 49 shlokas
Chapter 516(219): 58 shlokas
Chapter 517(220): 27 shlokas
Chapter 518(221): 80 shlokas
The Pandavas return to Kamyaka and are visited by Krishna and then by the sage Markandeya. The word samasya means the completion or
ﬁlling up of that which is incomplete. This section is so named because of a long conversation between the Pandavas and Markandeya. It has
the stories of Manu, the ﬂood and the ﬁsh, details about the four yugas (eras) and different kinds of ﬁres, the stories of Vamadeva, Indradyumna, Dhundhumara, Koushika, Angiras and Skanda.

476(179)

Vaishampayana said, ‘While they were living there, the rainy season, which brings an end to the summer’s heat
and ensures happiness to all beings, arrived. Clouds heavy with thunder enveloped the sky and all the directions.
Through night and day, it rained down continuously in hundreds and thousands of torrents, ending the heat. The
net of the sun’s rays disappeared and it was radiant with lightning. Grass sprouted from the earth and ﬂies and reptiles were intoxicated. Sprinkled with water, everything was peaceful and the smoke and the dust vanished. When
everything was covered with water, nothing could be discerned, plain and uneven terrain or rivers and land. The
rivers were turbulent with water and made a loud whistling noise, like arrows. At the end of the summer, they
made the groves look beautiful. Many different sounds could be heard in the groves—of boars, animals and birds,
drenched with rain. Stokakas,1 peacocks and male cuckoos were maddened and ﬂuttered around, together with
proud frogs. Thus, while they safely roamed around in the desert regions, the rainy season arrived in many forms
and the roar of the clouds passed.
‘Autumn arrived, with masses of curlews and swans. The forest was covered with new enclosures. The water
that ﬂowed downwards became clear. Everything was peaceful in autumn and the great-souled Pandavas found it
infested with animals and birds. The sky and the stars were clear. They saw that the nights were cooled by clouds,
with the dust paciﬁed, and shining with planets, many stars and the moon. They saw auspicious rivers and ponds,
the bearers of cool water, adorned with white water lilies2 and white lotuses.3 They found great delight in roaming
around the sacred tirtha of Sarasvati. Its banks were as wide as the sky and were covered with nipas4 and wild rice.
The brave ones, the wielders of ﬁrm bows, were extremely happy on seeing the sacred Sarasvati, overﬂowing with
clear water. O Janamejaya! While they dwelt there, the sacred night of parvasandhi in autumn, in the month of
Kartika, arrived.5 All the Pandavas, the best of the Bharata lineage, spent that great and supreme conjunction in
the company of the holy and great-souled ascetics. When the dark fortnight set in, the Pandavas, together with
Dhoumya, the charioteers and the cooks, travelled to Kamyaka.’
477(180)

Vaishampayana said, ‘The Kounteyas, with Yudhishthira at the forefront, arrived in Kamyaka and were welcomed
by the masses of sages. They began to live there with Krishna.6 When Pandu’s sons dwelt safely there, they were
surrounded on all sides by many brahmanas. Then a certain brahmana said, “The mighty-armed Shouri,7 Arjuna’s
beloved friend, self-controlled and endowed with wisdom, will come here. It is known to Hari that the extenders of
the Kuru lineage have arrived here. Hari always wishes to see you and has your welfare in mind. The immensely
ascetic Markandeya has lived for many years, devoting himself to studies and austerities. He will soon arrive to
meet you.” While he was still speaking, Keshava could be seen. That supreme of charioteers was on his chariot,
yoked to Sainya and Sugriva.8 He was with Satyabhama, like Maghavan with Poulami.9 Devaki’s son had arrived
to visit the best of the Kurus.
‘Descending from his chariot, the wise one happily greeted Dharmaraja, as is prescribed, and Bhima, supreme
among strong ones. He worshipped Dhoumya and was himself worshipped by the twins. Then he embraced Gudakesha10 and spoke comforting words to Droupadi. Having seen the beloved warrior Phalguna, who had returned
after a long time, Dasharha,11 the destroyer of enemies, embraced him again and again. Similarly, Satyabhama,
Krishna’s beloved queen, embraced Droupadi, the beloved wife of the Pandavas. Then all the Pandavas, with their
wife and their priest,12 worshipped Pundarikaksha13 and seated themselves around him. The wise Krishna was
reunited with Partha Dhananjaya, the oppressor of asuras. The great-souled lord of beings was as radiant as the illustrious lord, when united with Guha.14 The one with the diadem on his head recounted the details of what had
happened in the forest to Gada’s senior, exactly as they had occurred.15 He then asked him how Subhadra was, together with Abhimanyu. In the prescribed fashion, Madhu’s slayer16 showed honours to Partha,17 Krishna18 and
the priest.

‘When Yudhishthira was seated with them, he praised the king19 and spoke these words. “O Pandava! Dharma
is superior to winning the kingdom. O king! It is said that austerity leads to it. You have lived by your own dharma, with truthfulness and virtue. You have won this world and the next. You ﬁrst studied, and then observed the
vows. You next became skilled in the use of weapons. You obtained riches by practising the dharma of kshatriyas.
You have performed all the ancient sacriﬁces. You are not addicted to the dharma of sexual pleasure and desire. O
Indra among kings! You have never acted out of desire. Nor have you given up dharma out of greed for artha. It is
for these reasons that you are Dharmaraja. O king! O Partha! Though you obtained the kingdom, riches and objects
of pleasure, benevolence, truthfulness, austerities, devotion, conciliation, forbearance and forgiveness always
brought you supreme pleasure. O Pandava! When the assembled inhabitants of Kurujangala20 saw Krishna afraid
and outraged in the assembly hall, an act that was contrary to dharma and good conduct, who but you could have
endured it? There is no doubt that you will soon protect your subjects again and be restored to all the prosperity
that you desire. Once your oath has been fulﬁlled, we will act so as to chastise the Kurus.” Then the lion of the
Dasharhas spoke to Dhoumya, Krishna, Yudhishthira, the twins and Bhima. “It is your good fortune that Kiriti has
happily returned, having obtained the weapons.” The lord of the Dasharhas, together with his well-wishers, then
spoke to Krishna Yajnaseni. “O Krishna! O Yajnaseni! Your young ones are devoted to truthful vows, show good
conduct and wish to become foremost in the knowledge of weapons. They always associate with righteous ones.
Your sons follow the path of meditation. O Krishna! Though your father and your brothers seek to attract them
with the kingdom and the territory, these young ones ﬁnd no attraction in the houses of Yajnasena21 or their maternal uncles. In a desire to become foremost in the knowledge of weapons, they safely travelled in the direction of
Anarta.22 O Krishna! Your sons entered the city of the Vrishnis.23 They do not feel any jealousy towards the
gods.24 Without fail, Subhadra always instructs them in conduct, just as you yourself would have instructed them,
or the arya Kunti. O Krishna! Just as Rukmini’s son is the instructor and guide of Aniruddha, Abhimanyu, Sunitha
and Bhanu, he is just the same to your sons too.25 Prince Abhimanyu is a skilled teacher. He constantly instructs
the brave ones in ﬁghting with clubs, swords, shields and missiles, and in handling chariots and horses. Like an instructor, Rukimini’s son has given them many weapons and has taught them well. He ﬁnds great satisfaction in the
valour of your sons and of Abhimanyu. O Yajnaseni! When your sons go out for sport, each of them is followed by
a retinue of chariots, vehicles and elephants.” Then Krishna again addressed Dharmaraja. “O king! Let the warriors
of Dasharha, Kukura and Andhaka26 always be intent on following your orders. Let them be established wherever
you desire. The army of the Madhus27 has infantry, horses, chariots and elephants. It raises a forceful storm with
its bows and is led by Halayudha.28 O Indra among men! It is ready to accomplish your tasks. O Pandava! Let
Dhritarashtra’s son Suyodhana,29 foremost among the performers of evil deeds, traverse the path followed by
Soubha and Soubha’s lord, together with his relatives and well-wishers.30 O Indra among kings! Live where you
desire, for the time appointed by you in the assembly hall. But after that, when the Dasharha warriors have cut
down the warriors,31 the city of Nagapura32 will await your return. When you have subdued your anger and
cleansed your torment, when you have ﬁnished roaming around as you desire, then, bereft of sorrow, you will return to the prosperous city of Nagapura and regain your kingdom.” On hearing the detailed views of that greatsouled one, supreme among men, Dharmaraja approved of them. He joined his hands in salutation and replied to
Keshava, “O Keshava! There is no doubt that you are the refuge of the Partha Pandavas. When the time has come,
there is no doubt that you will accomplish these deeds. As we have promised, we will spend a complete twelve
years in this wilderness. O Keshava! After spending the stipulated time incognito, the Pandavas will resort to you
again.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! While Varshneya33 and Dharmaraja were conversing in this way, the great ascetic Markandeya, with dharma in his soul, was seen to arrive. He had lived for many
thousands of years and had become aged through his austerities. When the aged rishi, who had lived for many
thousands of years, arrived—all the brahmanas, together with Krishna and the Pandavas, offered him worship.
When the supreme among rishis was comfortably seated, with the approval of the brahmanas and the Pandavas,

Keshava addressed him. “The Pandavas, the assembled brahmanas, Droupadi, Satyabhama and I myself wish to
hear your supreme words. O Markandeya! Therefore, tell us about the sacred accounts of the past, characterized by
eternal and wise good conduct on the part of kings, women and rishis.” While they were seated there, devarshi
Narada, pure in soul, also arrived to see the Pandavas. All those bulls among men honoured the great-souled one.
As has been decreed, they offered the learned one padya and arghya.34 On knowing that they were about to hear
Markandeya’s words, devarshi Narada approved of the proposal. Narada knew everything about time and smilingly told him, “O brahmarshi! Tell the Pandavas whatever you wish to say.” Thus addressed, the great ascetic
Markandeya replied, “Wait for some time. There are many accounts to be told.” Thus addressed, the Pandavas, together with the brahmanas, waited for some time. They looked at the great sage, as radiant as the sun at noon.’
478(181)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On seeing that the great sage was willing to speak, Pandava, the king of the Kurus,35 asked
him to begin his accounts. “You know everything about the eternal exploits of the gods, the daityas, the greatsouled rishis and the rajarshis. We are of the view that you are worthy of our servitude and attendance. We have
wished to meet you for a long time. Devaki’s son has also come here to see us. I see that I have been dislodged
from happiness. I see all the evil sons of Dhritarashtra prospering. Then the thought strikes me that man is the
agent for all his deeds, be they good or evil, and reaps the fruits. How can god then be the agent? O supreme
among those who know about the brahman! Why is there happiness and unhappiness for men? Are those fruits in
this body? Or in another body later? O supreme among brahmanas! How can the good and evil fruits of an embodied being follow him in this body and how are they united with him after death? Do we reap the fruits in this world
or in another world after death? O Bhargava!36 When an animal is dead, where do his deeds remain?”
‘Markandeya replied, “O supreme among eloquent ones! What you have spoken is a question that is worthy of
you. You know everything that there is to be known. But you are asking me so that the theory can be established. I
will now narrate to you how men undergo happiness and unhappiness here, and in the hereafter. Listen with undivided attention. In the beginning, Prajapati37 created pure embodied beings with unblemished bodies. They were
all devoted to dharma. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! These ancient and sacred men were evolved from the
brahman. Their strength and resolution did not waver. They were good in their vows and truthful. As they desired,
they could all soar up to the sky to meet with the gods. Then they all descended again and roamed as they willed.
These men could die when they willed. They lived when they willed. They faced few difﬁculties and had no fear.
They were accomplished in their objectives and free from difﬁculties. They could see the masses of gods and the
great-souled rishis. They could see everything about dharma. They were self-controlled and were devoid of envy.
They lived for thousands of years and had thousands of sons. But over a period of time, they were restricted to
walking on the earth alone. They were overcome by desire and anger. They began to thrive on duplicity and deceit.
These men were overcome by greed and delusion and the gods abandoned them. They performed evil and impure
deeds and were reborn as inferior species, or went to hell. They were repeatedly cooked in this world in different
ways.38 Their desires were in vain. Their resolutions were in vain. Their knowledge was in vain. They lost their
senses. They were afraid of everything. They reaped the fruits of misery. Since they were often distinguished by
their impure deeds, they were born in inferior families. They suffered from many forms of disease. They were evil
in soul and became oppressive. Their lives became short and wicked. They suffered from their terrible deeds. They
became dependent on every kind of desire. They were atheists and destroyed all institutions.
‘“O Kounteya! After death, any animal’s outcome is determined by his own deeds. But you asked about where
learned and evil-minded deeds are stored. How are the fruits of evil and good deeds recovered? Listen to the understanding on this matter. In the original subtle body created by the gods, man accumulates a great store of good
and evil deeds. When his life is over, he gives up the body that is almost destroyed and is immediately reborn in a
different womb, without any gap. In that,39 his good deeds follow him like a shadow. The fruits give birth to happiness or unhappiness. Those who lack the insight of knowledge think that an animal is governed by rules of death
and is not affected by good or evil marks. O Yudhishthira! But this is the fate of those who are without intelligence. Beyond this, listen to the supreme fate of those who are wise. These men have tormented themselves with

austerities. They are devoted to all the sacred texts. They are unwavering in their vows and are established in truth.
They are always engaged in serving their preceptors. They are good in conduct and noble in birth. They are forgiving, self-controlled and extremely energetic. They are often born in pure wombs and are marked with auspicious
signs. They are in control of their senses and have mastered them. Since they are pure, they do not suffer from disease. Because they suffer from few difﬁculties, they are without obstacles. Whether born prematurely, or in time,
or even in the womb, they know everything through the sight of knowledge and about the relationship between
their own souls and the supreme one. After having been born in this world of deeds, they regain heaven. Some
things are due to destiny. Some things are due to chance. And some things are due to one’s own action. O king!
That is how men come by their fate. Do not think otherwise. O supreme among eloquent ones! O Yudhishthira!
Hear an account about what I think to be the supreme good in this world of men. Some ﬁnd greatness here, and not
in the hereafter. Others ﬁnd greatness here, but not in the hereafter. Others ﬁnd it in both and still others ﬁnd it in
neither. Those who have a great deal of riches always adorn their bodies and ﬁnd pleasure. O slayer of enemies!
But since they are addicted to bodily pleasures, they ﬁnd enjoyment in this world, but not in the next. There are
those who are united with yoga and austerities. While their bodies decay, they are addicted to studying. They are in
control of their senses and devoted to the welfare of beings. O destroyer of enemies! They ﬁnd enjoyment in that
world, and not in this. There are those who ﬁrst lead a life of dharma. In course of time, they obtain prosperity
through dharma. They obtain a wife and perform sacriﬁces. They enjoy this world and the next. There are the ignorant ones who ignore learning, austerities and donations and do not have offspring. They do not ﬁnd happiness in
this world, nor in the next. But all of you are extremely valorous and powerful. You are divine in your energy. You
have obtained learning. Your bodies are capable. To accomplish the task of the gods, you have been born in this
world from the one hereafter. O brave ones! Having performed great deeds and having satisﬁed the gods, the rishis
and the masses of ancestors with austerities, rituals and conduct, in due course, later attain heaven, the habitation
of those who perform sacred deeds, through your own deeds. O Indra among Kouravas! Do not suffer from anxiety. Do not trouble your mind because of these difﬁculties. You are deserving of happiness.”’
479(182)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Then Pandu’s sons told the great-souled Markandeya, “Tell us about the greatness of the
foremost of brahmanas. We wish to hear about this.”
‘Thus addressed, the illustrious Markandeya, the great ascetic, extremely energetic and knowledgeable in all the
sacred texts, replied, “There was once a handsome prince who was the king of the Haihayas. He was the pride of
his lineage and the destroyer of enemy cities. He was powerful and handsome and he went out to hunt. When he
was roaming around in that forest, overgrown with grass and bushes, he saw a sage who was clad in a black antelope skin as his upper garment. He mistook him to be a deer and killed him in the forest. He was pained and sorrowful at his deed and lost his senses. O lord of the earth! The lotus-eyed prince went to the kings of the Haihayas,
great in their souls, and told them exactly what had happened. O son!40 On hearing about the violence done to a
sage who lived on roots and fruits, and on seeing it,41 they were distressed in their minds. They asked everywhere
about whose son he was, and followed a road to the hermitage of Tarkshya Arishtanemi.42 They bowed down before the great-souled sage, whose vows were unwavering. They stood there, while the sage honoured them in return. Then they told the great-souled sage, ‘We are not deserving of these honours. Through our evil deeds, we
have killed a brahmana.’ The brahmana rishi replied, ‘How have you killed a brahmana? Where is he? Tell me and
behold the strength of my austerities.’ All of them then told him everything, exactly as it had happened. But when
they returned, they could not see the dead body of the rishi there. They searched everywhere and were ashamed.
They felt as if their senses had been in the midst of a dream. The sage Tarkshya then told them, ‘O destroyers of
the cities of enemies! Is this the brahmana who had been killed by you? O kings! This is my son. He possesses the
power of austerities.’ O lord of the earth! On seeing that rishi,43 they were struck with great wonder and exclaimed, ‘This is extremely wonderful. We have seen him dead. How can a dead person be restored to life? It is
through the power of austerities that he has become alive again? O brahmana rishi! We are desirous of hearing this,
if indeed it can be heard.’ He44 replied, ‘O kings! Death cannot exhibit its powers before us. I will brieﬂy tell you

about the reason for this. We know nothing but the truth. We do not even think of that which is false. Since we are
always established in our own dharma, death holds no fear for us. We always speak about the welfare of brahmanas, and never about their evil deeds. Therefore, we have no fear of death. We serve our guests with food and
drink. We always feed our servants. We live in a region inhabited by energetic ones. Therefore, we have no fear of
death. I have only told you a very little bit. Now all of you return, without any envy. Do not be frightened that you
have sinned.’ O bull among the Bharata lineage! Then they agreed that it would be that way, and worshipped the
great sage. The kings happily returned to their own kingdom.”’
480(183)

‘Markandeya said, “Here more about the greatness of brahmanas. There was a rajarshi by the name of Vainya, who
was instated in a horse sacriﬁce. We have heard that Atri desired to go to him for riches. But determining the nature of his dharma, he gave up this desire. After reﬂecting about this, the immensely energetic one decided to retire
to the forest. He summoned the one who was his wife according to dharma, and his sons, and spoke to them. ‘If we
wish to reap great fruits, free from any hindrances, you should agree that it is best to swiftly retire to the forest.’
Driven by dharma, his wife replied, ‘Go to the great-souled Vainya and ask for a lot of riches from him. The rajarshi is donating gifts and will give you the riches you desire. O brahmana rishi! Having received a lot of riches
and having distributed it among your servants and sons, then go wherever you wish. This is the supreme dharma,
as indicated by those who are learned in dharma.’ Atri replied, ‘O great-souled one! The immensely fortunate
Goutama has told me that Vainya is conversant with dharma and artha and is devoted to the vow of truthfulness.
But he is surrounded by brahmanas who hate him. So Goutama has told me. Therefore, I have decided not to go
there. When I speak words of well-being that are full of dharma, artha and kama, they will contradict them and
render them useless. O immensely wise one! But I like the purport of your words and will go. Vainya will give cattle and a lot of riches.’
‘“Having said this, the immensely ascetic one swiftly went to Vainya’s sacriﬁce. On reaching the sacriﬁcial
grounds, Atri praised the king. ‘O king! O Vainya! You are the foremost among all kings on earth. Masses of sages
praise you and no one other than you knows dharma.’ But the immensely ascetic rishi45 spoke these angry words.
‘O Atri! Do not speak such words again. You have not yet attained wisdom. In this world, Mahendra Prajapati46
occupies the foremost place.’ Atri then replied to Goutama, ‘He47 is as much of a sustainer as Prajapati Indra. You
are the one who is confused. Your wisdom has been clouded by ignorance.’ Goutama said, ‘I know that I am not
confused. You are the one who is suffering from delusion. On having seen him, you are speaking thus so as to satisfy him. You do not know what supreme dharma is, nor do you see any need for it. You are as stupid as a child.
Why have you then grown old?’ They thus argued, in full sight of the sages who had assembled for the sacriﬁce
and they asked, ‘What are these two arguing about? Who permitted them entry into Vainya’s assembly? Why are
they standing here and shouting in this fashion?’ O one knowledgeable in all dharma! Then Kashyapa, with
supreme dharma in his soul, stepped between the disputants and asked them why they were quarreling. Goutama
spoke to the supreme sages who were the assisting priests.48 ‘O bulls among brahmanas! Listen to the question
that has arisen between the two of us. Atri says that Vainya is the sustainer, and I have a great doubt on this score.’
On hearing this, the great-souled sages swiftly went to Sanatkumara to resolve the doubt, because he was learned
in dharma.
‘“Having heard their words, reﬂecting the issue exactly, the great ascetic Sanatkumara replied in words that
were in conformity with dharma and artha. Sanatkumara said, ‘Brahmanas are united with kshatriyas and kshatriyas with brahmanas. The king is foremost in dharma and he is the lord of his subjects. He is like Shakra, Shukra,
the creator and Brihaspati.49 He is Prajapati, Virata,50 emperor, kshatriya, the lord of the earth and the lord of
men. If one is praised with such words, how can he not be worthy of worship? The king has appellations like “the
prime cause”, “the conqueror in battles”, “the one who attacks”, “the contented one”, “the fortunate one”, “the one
who wins heaven”, “the one who is easily victorious”, “the expansive one”, “the one for whom anger comes from
truth”, “the one who triumphs over enemies” and “the one who propagates dharma and truth”. Out of fear for that
which is not dharma, the rishis conferred powers on kshatriyas. Through its energy, the sun removes darkness in

heaven, among the gods. Like that, the king eradicates that which is not dharma from earth. Therefore, the proof of
the sacred texts is that the king is foremost. I am in favour of the side that has spoken for the king.’ The greatsouled king was extremely delighted that his side had won. He happily spoke to Atri, who had praised him earlier.
‘O brahmana rishi! You have earlier described me as the foremost and greatest among men and an equal to all the
gods. Therefore, I will give you a lot of riches, one thousand shyama servant girls51 adorned in excellent garments
and ornaments, ten crores of gold coins and ten bharas of gold.52 O brahmana! I must give you this, because I
think you know everything.’ The energetic and great-minded Atri accepted all this in the proper fashion. The great
ascetic then returned to his home. Happily, the self-controlled one distributed these riches among his sons. For the
sake of performing austerities, he then left for the forest.”’
481(184)

‘Yarkandeya said, “O brave one! O conqueror of enemy cities! Listen to what Sarasvati chanted, when she was
asked by the wise sage Tarkshya about this matter. Tarkshya asked, ‘O fortunate one! What is the best thing for a
man here?53 What should he do so that he does not deviate from his own dharma? O one who is beautiful in all
her limbs! Instruct me. Instructed by you, I will not stray from my own dharma. How should one offer oblations
into the ﬁre? How should one worship and when? How does one ensure dharma is not destroyed? O fortunate one!
Tell me all this, so that I can roam in this world, free from passion.’ She was thus lovingly questioned by the one
who desired to learn. He was supreme in his intelligence.
‘“Sarasvati spoke to brahmana Tarkshya words that were full of dharma, the bringer of welfare. Sarasvati said,
‘He who knows the brahman in every region, is always devoted to studying and is pure and calm, goes to the foremost among the cities of the gods, and ﬁnds bliss with the immortals. There are many beautiful and large lakes
there, bereft of sorrow. They are extremely sacred and full of ﬂowers. They are without mud and full of ﬁsh. There
are golden lotuses. These are excellent tirthas. The performers of sacred deeds ﬁnd glory and happiness on those
banks, served by apsaras, who wear fragrant scents and are adorned with ornaments, their complexions like that of
gold. Those who donate cattle attain the supreme world. By donating bulls, one roams in the world of the sun. By
giving garments, one goes to the world of the moon. By giving gold, one attains the immortals. If one gives away a
good cow that is easily milked and gives birth to ﬁne calves, one that does not stray, one lives for as many years in
heaven, as there are countable body hairs on his person. One who donates a strong, young and skilled bull that has
inﬁnite strength, and is capable of carrying burdens and drawing a plough, obtains the world that is obtained by donating ten cows. O Tarkshya! One who offers oblations into the ﬁre for seven years, is good in vows and righteous
in conduct, through one’s deeds, puriﬁes seven generations of forefathers and descendants.’
‘“Tarkshya asked, ‘O beautiful one! I am asking you. Please tell me. What is the ancient vow of agnihotra? Instructed by you, I will learn about the ancient vow of agnihotra.’ Sarasvati replied, ‘One who is impure, one whose
hands have not been washed, one who does not know about the brahman and one who is not wise, cannot make
such offerings. Even when hungry, the gods desire purity. They do not accept offerings from those who lack devotion. One who is not a shrotriya54 should not be employed to render oblations to the gods. Such others will be like
throwing the oblations away. O Tarkshya! I maintain that no one other than a shrotriya is entitled to offer agnihotra. Those who devotedly offer oblations into the ﬁre, true in their vows, partaking only of leftover food,55 attain
the pure and fragrant world of cows.56 They see the supreme and true god.’ Tarkshya asked, ‘O beautiful one! O
goddess! You are wisdom. You are extremely fortunate. You are immersed in intelligence. You are the fruits of
deeds. You are born in the body, but you are divine in feelings. I am asking you. Who are you?’ Sarasvati replied,
‘I have arisen from the agnihotra, to remove doubts in the minds of the brahmana rishis. I felt happy at having met
you. Therefore, I have explained these things to you exactly and accurately.’ Tarkshya said, ‘There is no one who
is your equal. You shine as radiantly as Shri.57 Your divine form is extremely beautiful. O fortunate one! You are
the goddess of divine wisdom.’ Sarasvati replied, ‘O foremost among bipeds! I thrive on the best of sacriﬁcial offerings that the learned ones offer. I prosper on those oblations. O brahmana! That is how I become beautiful. O
learned one! Whatever objects are rendered in offerings, made of wood or iron or originating in the earth, know
that they help attain celestial beauty and wisdom.’ Tarkshya said, ‘This ensures supreme welfare. That is the rea-

son resolute sages resort to this. Tell me about the supreme bliss that comes from supreme salvation, into which,
the wise ones enter.’ Sarasvati replied, ‘Those who are supremely learned in the Vedas achieve that. It is the
supreme and ancient soul. Through studying, donations, vows and sacred yoga, those who are rich in austerities are
freed, devoid of sorrow. In the midst, there is a cane, holy and fragrant. It has a thousand pure and radiant branches.58 The rivers stream forth from its roots, with waters that are extremely sacred and honeyed. The great rivers
ﬂow from branch to branch like grains of sand, with grain, cakes, meat and herbs, with the mud of payasa.59 The
ﬁre is the mouth and the gods, together with Indra and the Maruts, come to the sacriﬁce and are worshipped. O
sage! That is the supreme spot.’”’
482(185)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Then the Pandava60 again spoke to Markandeya. “Tell me about the account of Vaivasvata
Manu.”
‘Markandeya replied, “O king! O tiger among men! Vivasvat61 had a son. He was a maharshi and was extremely powerful. He had radiance equal to that of Prajapati. Manu surpassed his father and grandfather in vigour, energy, success and speciﬁcally, austerities. This lord of men practised terrible and great austerities, with his arms
raised and standing on one foot, in Vishala Badari.62 His head faced down and he did not blink. Firmly, he tormented himself with these terrible austerities for ten thousand years. Once, he was engaged in these austerities,
clad in wet bark and with matted hair. A ﬁsh came up to him on the banks of the Virini63 and spoke to him. ‘O illustrious one! I am a small ﬁsh and am frightened of the larger ones. You are good in your vows. Therefore, save
me from those ﬁsh, especially because it is the rule among ﬁsh that large ﬁsh prey on smaller ones. This has always been decreed to be our conduct from time immemorial. Therefore, save me from this great sea of terror in
which I am immersed. If you save me, I will return the deed.’ On hearing these words of the ﬁsh, Manu was overcome with compassion. He grasped the ﬁsh in his hands. The ﬁsh had a body that shone like the moon’s rays.
Vaivasvata Manu took it out of the river and placed it in a small water pot. O king! Thus tended to well, the ﬁsh
grew up and Manu speciﬁcally looked after it like a son. After a long period of time, the ﬁsh became so large that
there was no longer any room for it in the water pot. When the ﬁsh saw Manu, it again told him, ‘O illustrious one!
Find a different place for me to live in.’ Then the illustrious Manu took it out of the water pot. Manu took the ﬁsh
to a large pond and threw it in. O destroyer of enemy cities! Thus thrown by Manu, the ﬁsh began to grow, for
many years. The pond was two yojanas long and one yojana wide. O lotus-eyed one! O lord of the earth! O
Kounteya! The ﬁsh could no longer move in that pond. On seeing Manu, the ﬁsh again said, ‘O illustrious one! O
righteous one! O father!64 Please take me to the Ganga, the wife of the ocean. I will live there, or wherever else
you desire.’ On hearing these words of the ﬁsh, Manu, the self-controlled lord, took it to the river Ganga and
placed it there with his own hands.
‘“O chastiser of enemies! The ﬁsh began to grow there for some time. On seeing Manu again, the ﬁsh spoke
these words. ‘O lord! Because of my large size, I cannot move around in the Ganga. O illustrious one! Therefore,
show me your favours and quickly take me to the ocean.’ O Partha! Manu then himself took the ﬁsh out of the waters of the Ganga. He took it to the ocean and placed it there. Despite the ﬁsh’s great size, Manu could carry it easily. Its touch and smell were also pleasant. When the ﬁsh was thrown into the ocean by Manu, it seemed to smile
and uttered these words. ‘O lord! You have always protected me with great care. Now hear from me about the task
you should perform when the time is right. O illustrious one! O immensely fortunate one! The destruction of
everything on this earth, mobile and immobile, is near. The time for purging this world has arrived. Therefore, listen to what will bring your greatest welfare. The fear of destruction is nigh for everything that moves, stands, stirs
and does not stir. That terrible time of destruction has arrived. You must therefore build a strong and sturdy boat
and tether a rope to it. O great sage! You must then ascend it with the saptarshis. Take with you all the seeds that I
have mentioned to you earlier. Ascend on the boat and preserve them separately. O one who is beloved of the
sages! Wait for me on the boat. O ascetic! I will come to you and you will know me from my horn. I will now depart. Act according to my instructions. O lord! Do not be anxious.’ He replied to the ﬁsh in these words, ‘O lord! I
will act accordingly.’ Then they took leave of each other and went where they wished.

‘“O great king! O brave one! O destroyer of enemies! As he had been instructed by the ﬁsh, Manu collected all
the seeds. He built an excellent boat and sailed on the waves of the ocean. O lord of the earth! O destroyer of enemy cities! Manu thought about the ﬁsh. Knowing about his thoughts, the ﬁsh arrived. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! It had a horn. O Indra of Indras among men! When Manu saw the ﬁsh in the waters of the ocean, with
the form of a large mountain, with a horn as it had said, he tied a noose around the rope and fastened it to the ﬁsh’s
head. O tiger among men! O destroyer of enemy cities! Tethered to the noose in the rope, with great speed, the ﬁsh
tugged the boat into the waters of the ocean. O lord of men! The boat was tossed around in the ocean. It danced
around on the roaring waves, like a drunken woman. On that great ocean, the boat was battered around by great
waves. O destroyer of enemy cities! It was whirled around. The earth could not be seen, nor the directions. Everything was enveloped. O bull among men! There was water everywhere, including the sky and heaven. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! The world was covered by this turbulence. Everything was invisible, except for the
seven rishis, Manu and the ﬁsh. O king! In this way, for a large number of years, the ﬁsh unceasingly pulled the
boat on that ﬂood of water. O bull among men! O descendant of the Kuru lineage! The ﬁsh then pulled the boat to
the highest peak of the Himalayas. In a smiling and soft tone, it told the rishis, ‘Immediately tie the boat to this
peak of the Himalayas.’ O bull among the Bharata lineage! On hearing the words of the ﬁsh, they quickly moored
the boat there, to the peak of the Himalayas. O Kounteya! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Know that since that
day, the highest peak of the Himalayas has been known as ‘Nau-bandhana’.65
‘“Then, without any hesitation, it spoke to the rishis who were assembled there. ‘I am Prajapati Brahma. There
is no one superior to me. I have saved you from this fear in the form of a ﬁsh. Manu will create all beings—gods,
asuras and men, all the worlds, everything that moves and everything that does not move. Through terrible austerities and my favours, he will possess these powers of creating classes of beings and will not suffer from delusion.’
Having spoken these words, the ﬁsh instantly disappeared. Vaivasvata Manu himself desired to create all beings. In
the process of creating classes of beings, he was overtaken by delusion and performed great austerities. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! Through these great austerities, Manu was himself able to create all beings, exactly. I
have recounted for you the ancient account known by the name of the ﬁsh. This famous account is the cleanser of
all sins. A man who listens to Manu’s account every day, is happy, is successful in all objectives and goes to the
world of heaven.”’
483(186)

Vaishampayana said, ‘With humility, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira again asked the famous Markandeya, “O great
sage! You have witnessed the end of many thousands of eras. No one is known who has lived for as long as you,
except for the great-souled Brahma Parameshthi.66 O brahmana! You worshipped Brahma at the time of the destruction, when there was no sky in this world and no gods and danavas. O brahmana rishi! When that destruction
is over and the grandfather67 arises again, you are the only one who witnesses the four types of beings68 being exactly created by Parameshthi, after he has ﬁlled the directions with air and has dispersed the waters. O foremost
among brahmanas! You have worshipped the preceptor of the world himself, the grandfather of all the worlds, with
supreme meditation. O brahmana rishi! Therefore, through Parameshthi’s grace, death, the destroyer of everything
and old age, the destroyer of the body, do not overcome you. When there is no sun and ﬁre, no wind and moon,
nothing is left of the sky and the earth, when the world with its mobile and immobile objects becomes one large
ocean, when the masses of gods and asuras are destroyed and the great serpents uprooted, when the one with the
inﬁnite soul is on the lotus and ﬁnds his abode on the lotus,69 you alone are there to worship Brahma, the lord of
all beings. O supreme among brahmanas! Everything that has happened before has been seen by you. Therefore,
we wish to hear the account about the reasons behind everything. O supreme among brahmanas! You have experienced these many times. There is nothing in all the worlds that is not always known to you.”
‘Markandeya replied, “I will recount this. I bow down before the one who creates himself,70 and the ancient and
eternal being without decay, Janardana,71 whose eyes are long and wide and who is attired in yellow. He is the
creator and special creator of all beings that are manifest.72 He cannot be thought of. He is a great wonder. He is
supreme puriﬁcation. He is without beginning and without end. He is the imperishable being that is everywhere in

the universe. He is without decay. He is the creator. But he is not created. He is the reason behind all energy. He is
the being whom even the gods do not know. O tiger among men! In the beginning, after the destruction of the universe, there is krita yuga. It is said that this lasts for four thousand years.73 It is preceded by a sandhya of four
hundred years and succeeded by a sandhya of the same duration. Treta yuga is said to last for three thousand years.
It is preceded by a sandhya and succeeded by another sandhya of three hundred years each. After that, dvapara
yuga has a measure of two thousand years. It is preceded by a sandhya and followed by a sandhya of two hundred
years each. The learned have said that kali yuga lasts for one thousand years. It is preceded by a sandhya and succeeded by a sandhya of one hundred years each. Know that the duration of the preceding sandhya and the succeeding sandhya is the same. When kali yuga has decayed, krita yuga returns again. This total period of twelve thousand years is known as a yuga. One thousand such cycles are known as one of Brahma’s days. O tiger among men!
When the entire universe retreats into Brahma’s abode, the wise ones know this as the destruction of the worlds.
‘“O bull among the Bharata lineage! When there is little time of one thousand years left at the end of a yuga, all
men usually become the speakers of falsehood. O Partha! They perform sacriﬁces through representatives. They
donate through representatives. When such a time arrives, vows are observed through representatives. The brahmanas perform the tasks of shudras. Shudras become the earners of wealth and resort to the dharma of kshatriyas.
This is what occurs when the yuga decays. When kali yuga arrives, brahmanas abstain from sacriﬁces and studying. They discard the offerings of oblations to ancestors. They resort to eating anything. O son!74 Brahmanas no
longer meditate and shudras become addicted to meditation. O lord of men! When the earlier form of the world decays, everything is perverse. There are many mleccha75 kings. They rule on the basis of falsehood and evil. They
resort to false promises. O supreme among men! Andhras, Shakas, Pulindas and Yavanas become kings, and Kambojas, Ournikas, shudras and abhiras.76 Not a single brahmana makes a living from his own dharma then. O lord
of men! Kshatriyas and vaishyas also do what they should not do. Men are limited in life expectancy and feeble in
strength. They are weak in energy and valour. They have little substance and their bodies are weak. They rarely
speak the truth. The country is generally empty and the directions are infested with animals and predators. When
the end of the yuga is at hand, learning about the brahman is futile. The shudras address as ‘bho’ and the brahmanas address as ‘arya’.77 O tiger among men! At the end of the yuga, there are many animals. O lord of the
earth! Everything that is fragrant no longer possesses any smell then. O tiger among men! What is succulent is no
longer ﬁt to be eaten then. There are many children, short in stature, devoid of good conduct. O king! When the
destruction of the yuga is near, women use their mouths as their vaginas. The country is dotted with towers.78 The
crossroads are infested with jackals. O king! At the time of the destruction of a yuga, the women are covered with
hair. O lord of men! The cows then yield very little milk. The trees yield very little of ﬂowers and fruit and are full
of crows. O lord of the earth! Brahmanas accept gifts from kings who are guilty of killing brahmanas and are the
makers of false accusations. The brahmanas are overcome by avarice and delusion. They falsely invoke their own
dharma. O lord of the earth! They roam the land in search of alms. Fearful of the burden of taxation, householders
become robbers. Others assume the disguise of hermits, but earn a living from trade. Men then bear nails and hair
under false pretences.79 O tiger among men! Those practising brahmacharya become greedy for riches. They observe evil conduct in hermitages and are addicted to drinking. They unite with the wives of their preceptors. They
pander to the desires of this world, nourishing their ﬂesh and blood. O tiger among men! When the destruction of
the yuga is near, hermitages are infested with many evil characters, who have the quality of living off the food of
others. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The illustrious chastiser of Paka80 no longer showers rain at the right
time. All the seeds that are sown, no longer sprout. O unblemished one! The fruits of not following dharma become manifold. O protector of the earth! He who is united with dharma only has a short span of life. There is no
dharma left then. O tiger among men! People generally sell goods with false weights. There is a lot of deceit associated with trade. People who are devoted to dharma, decay. The evil ones prosper. Dharma loses its strength and
that which is not dharma becomes powerful. Men who are devoted to dharma have short spans of life and are poor.
At the time of the destruction of the yuga, those who are against dharma have long spans of life and are prosperous. Subjects seek to attain their objectives by resorting to that which is not dharma. Having accumulated only a
little, they become insolent. O king! Having become addicted to deceit, men generally rob riches that have been

placed with them in trust. Predators that live off men, birds and animals roam around in parks and sanctuaries in
cities. O king! Women conceive at ages of seven years and eight. Men who are ten and twelve years of age beget
sons. When they are sixteen years old, men become aged and a man’s lifespan is swiftly over. O great king! At the
end of a yuga, young ones act like the old. The conduct that should be seen in the young is seen in the old. Women
exhibit perverse conduct and deceive their husbands. These lascivious ones pleasure with servants, and even
animals.
‘“O great king! At the end of those one thousand yugas,81 when life decays, there is a drought for many years.
O lord of the earth! Because beings have weak lives and are starving, they die in large numbers on the surface of
the earth. O lord of men! Seven blazing suns appear then. They drink up all the waters from the oceans and the
rivers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Everything is then reduced to ashes, be it of wood or grass, dry or wet. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then the ﬁre of destruction arrives, together with the wind, in a world that has already been dried up by the suns. It penetrates the earth and goes all the
way to the nether regions, generating great terror among the gods, the danavas and the yakshas. It burns down the
world of the nagas and whatever can be found on earth. O protector of the earth! It burns down everything in an
instant. Twenty yojanas at a time, that ﬁre of destruction, helped by the inauspicious wind, consumes everything in
hundreds and thousands, with all the gods, asuras, gandharvas, yakshas, serpents and rakshasas. That blazing lord
burns up the entire universe. Then large clouds, extraordinary to see, arise in the sky. They are like herds of elephants, adorned with garlands of lightning. Some are dark like blue lotuses, others are like white lotuses. Some are
like ﬁlaments. Other clouds are yellow. Still others have the complexion of a raven’s egg. Some have the colour of
lotus leaves. Others have the complexion of vermilion. Some have the shapes of large cities. Others are like herds
of elephants. Some are like collyrium. Others have the shape of crocodiles.82 The dense clouds are adorned with
garlands of lightning. O great king! They are terrible in form and utter a terrible roar. Full of rain, they cover up the
entire sky. O great king! They cover up the earth, with all its mountains, forests and mines. They ﬁll and ﬂood it
with water. O bull among men! Instructed by Parameshthi, those clouds, with a terrible roar, ﬂood everything. The
copious quantities of water ﬁll up the earth. They extinguish the extremely terrible and inauspicious ﬁre. The
clouds generate a ﬂood for twelve years. Instructed by the great-souled one, the rains ﬁll everything. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! The ocean ﬂows over its tideline. The mountains are splintered. In particular, the earth is
also shattered. Then swift winds suddenly whirl the clouds in the sky and that gust tears them up. O lord of men! O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! The self-creating original god83 drinks up these terrible winds and continues to
sleep on his lotus bed. In that terrible ocean, everything is destroyed, mobile and immobile. The gods, the masses
of asuras, the yakshas and the rakshasas are destroyed. O protector of the earth! There are no men, no animals and
no trees. There is no ﬁrmament in this world. I alone wander around anxiously.
‘“O supreme among kings! Once, when I roamed around in this terrible ocean of water, I was ﬁlled with great
afﬂiction at not seeing any being. O lord of men! I had ﬂoated around for a long time in this ﬂood. I was exhausted. But I continued uninterrupted, since I could not ﬁnd a place to rest. O lord of the earth! Then, in that great ﬂood
of water, I saw an extremely tall and wide banyan tree. O lord of men! The branches of that tree were extensive. O
protector of the earth! O great king! There, on a bed adorned with celestial spreads, I saw a seated child. His face
was like a lotus or the moon. His eyes were as large as a blossoming lotus. O protector of the earth! I was struck
with great wonder. How could this child be lying there, when the entire world has been destroyed? O lord of men!
Through the power of austerities, I can reﬂect upon the past, the present and the future. But I could not fathom this
child. He had the complexion of an atasi ﬂower.84 He bore the srivatsa mark.85 This seemed to me to be the
abode of Lakshmi herself. The radiant child, with eyes like a lotus and bearing the srivatsa mark, spoke to me in
words that were pleasant to hear. ‘O son!86 I know that you are exhausted and desire to rest. O Markandeya! O
Bhargava!87 Rest here for as long as you wish. O supreme among sages! Enter my body. Rest here. That is the
place that has been earmarked for you because of my favours.’ O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus addressed by the child, I lost all interest in my long life and human state. Then that child suddenly opened his mouth
wide. Propelled by destiny, I powerlessly entered his mouth. O lord of men! O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
O tiger among men! Thus suddenly entering the inside of his mouth, I saw the entire earth, covered with all its

kingdoms and cities, the rivers Ganga, Shatadru, Sita, Yamuna, Koushiki, Charmanvati, Vetravati, Chandrabhaga,
Sarasvati, Sindhu, Vipasha, Godavari, Vasvokasara, Nalini, Narmada, the rivers Tamra and Vena with pure waters
that bring fortune, Suvena, Krishnavena, Irama, Mahanadi, Shona, Vishalya and Kampuna. O supreme among
men! I saw many other rivers that ﬂow on earth. I wandered around inside that great-souled one. I saw oceans infested with aquatic animals. I saw that supreme abode of the waters, a storehouse of gems. I saw the sky there, illuminated with the moon and the sun. It blazed with energy, like the ﬁre and the sun. O king! I saw the earth, beautifully adorned with its forests. O king! The brahmanas were engaged in many sacriﬁces. The kshatriyas were engaged in ensuring the welfare of all the varnas. O lord of men! The vaishyas were engaged in agriculture. The shudras were always engaged in the servitude of the brahmanas.88 O king! Then, wandering around inside the greatsouled one, I saw the Himalayas and Mount Hemakuta. I saw Nishadha and Shveta, adorned with silver. O protector of the earth! O tiger among men! I saw Mount Gandhamadana and the great mountains Mandara and Nila. O
great king! I saw the golden Mount Meru. I saw Mahendra and Vindhya, supreme among mountains. I saw Malaya
and Mount Pariyatra. I saw many other mountains too. I saw all these inside his stomach, adorned with jewels. O
lord of men! O lord of the earth! I saw lions, tigers, boars and serpents and all the other beings that populate the
earth. I saw all these as I was roaming around there. O tiger among men! Having entered the inside and wandering
around in various directions, I saw the masses of gods headed by Shakra, the gandharvas, the apsaras, the yakshas
and the rishis. O lord of men! There were the daityas, the danavas and collections of kaleyas, the sons of Simhika
and other enemies of the gods. Whatever could be seen in the world, mobile or immobile, everything could be seen
inside the great-souled one. Surviving on fruits, I roamed around in this entire universe inside his body for more
than one hundred years. O lord of the earth! But while I constantly roamed around and thought, nowhere could I
see an end to the body.
‘“O king! Not being able to ﬁnd an end to the great-souled one, following the prescribed rites, I sought refuge,
in both thought and deeds, with this great-souled one, the granter of boons and worthy among gods. O king! O
supreme among men! Then suddenly, a gust of wind expelled me from the mouth of the great-souled one, the
mouth having been opened wide. O lord of the earth! O tiger among men! Then, seated on the branch of the
banyan tree, I saw the one who had swallowed up the universe. He was in the form of a child, with the srivatsa
mark. O tiger among men! I saw the inﬁnitely energetic one seated there. The immensely radiant one blazed in his
yellow attire, bearing the srivatsa mark. He smiled and gently addressed me. ‘O Markandeya! O supreme among
sages! Tell me. Have you rested while you have been residing inside my body?’ Instantly, I seemed to acquire a
new insight. I saw myself with a new consciousness, free from the conﬁnes of the soul. O son!89 The soles of his
well-established feet were coppery red. They were delicate and adorned with soft and red toes. I grasped them,
placed them reverentially on my head, and worshipped him. I had seen the limitless powers of that inﬁnitely energetic one. Humbly, I joined my hands in salutation and carefully approached him. I saw the lotus-eyed god who
was the soul of all beings. Bowing before him with hands joined in salutation, I said, ‘O god! I wish to know about
you and about your supreme maya. O illustrious one! Having entered your body through your mouth, I saw all the
worlds gathered in your stomach. O god! The gods, the danavas, the rakshasas, the yakshas, the gandharvas and
the nagas and all the mobile and immobile objects in the universe were inside your body. O god! Though I ran and
continuously roamed around inside your body, through your favours, my memory never failed me. O Pundarikaksha! O unblemished one! I wish to know why you have established yourself in the form of a child. Why have you
swallowed up the entire universe? You should explain this to me. O unblemished one! O destroyer of enemies! For
what purpose is everything in the universe inside your body? For how long will you be established here? O lord of
the gods! I wish to hear this. It is a brahmana’s desire. O lotus-eyed one! Tell me everything in detail. O lord! What
I have seen is greatly beyond my comprehension.’ Having been thus addressed by me, the handsome god of the
gods, immensely radiant, supreme among eloquent ones, comforted me and spoke these words to me.”’
484(187)

‘“The god said, ‘O brahmana! It is certain that the gods do not know me as I really am. But I am pleased with you
and I will tell you how I create. O brahmana rishi! You are devoted to your ancestors and you have sought refuge
with me. That is the reason you have seen me in person. Your brahmacharya is also great. The waters are known as

nara and I consciously gave them that name. Because the waters are always my abode, I am known by the name of
Narayana.90 O supreme among brahmanas! I am known by the name of Narayana. My powers are eternal and undecaying. I am the creator and the destroyer of all beings. I am Vishnu. I am Brahma. I am Shakra, the lord of the
gods. I am king Vaishravana.91 I am Yama, the lord of the dead. I am Shiva. I am Soma. I am Kashyapa Prajapati.
O supreme among brahmanas! I am the creator and the special creator.92 I am the sacriﬁce. The ﬁre is my mouth.
The earth is my feet. The sun and the moon are my eyes. The directions and the sky are my body. The wind is established in my mind. I have performed many hundreds of sacriﬁces, in which large numbers of gifts have been
given. I am the sacriﬁces performed by those learned in the Vedas. I am present in the sacriﬁces of the gods. On
earth, the lords and kings of the kshatriyas, desirous of attaining heaven, sacriﬁce to me. The vaishyas, desirous of
attaining heaven, also sacriﬁce to me. I become Shesha and hold up this earth full of riches, bounded by the four
seas and adorned by Meru and Mandara.93 In earlier times, in the form of a boar, I used my valour to raise up the
earth, when it was immersed in the water.94 O brahmana! O supreme among brahmanas! As the vadava ﬁre, I
drink up the turbulent waters and disgorge them again.95 Through my valour, in due order, the brahmanas emerged
from my mouth, the kshatriyas from my arms, the vaishyas from my thighs and the shudras from my feet. The Rig
Veda, the Sama Veda, the Yajur Veda and the Atharva Veda issued from me and return to me. Ascetics desire
supreme tranquility. They wish to control their souls. They are free from desire, anger and hatred. They are without
attachment and have overcome sin. They are pure and without pride. They are always learned about matters concerning the soul. These brahmanas always meditate on me. They worship me. I am the light of destruction. I am
Yama, the destroyer. I am the sun of destruction. I am the wind of destruction. O supreme among brahmanas!
Know that the forms that can be seen in the sky in the form of stars are manifestations of me. So are the oceans,
the storehouses of jewels and the four directions. Know them to be my garments, my beds and my abodes. O virtuous one! Desire, anger, happiness, fear and delusion—know them to be different forms of me. O brahmana! So are
whatever is obtained by men through performing good deeds, speaking the truth, performing austerities and observing non-violence towards creatures. It is my rules that determine all beings who live in bodies. They do not act
in accordance with their desires, but their minds are guided by me. There are brahmanas who have properly studied the Vedas. They perform different kinds of sacriﬁces. They pacify their souls and control their anger. They earn
merits. O learned one! These are incapable of being earned by men who perform evil deeds and are overcome by
greed—men who are mean, inferior and not in control of their souls. Know that I am the greatest reward that righteous men strive for. This is the path chosen by those who resort to yoga, but is impossible for ignorant ones to
achieve. O learned one! Whenever dharma goes into a decline and adharma96 raises its head, then I create myself.
Whenever daityas, addicted to violence and incapable of being killed by the supreme among the gods, and terrible
rakshasas are created in this world, then I am born in the houses of those who perform good deeds. I assume a human form and pacify everything.
‘“‘I create gods, humans, gandharvas, serpents, rakshasas and mobile and immobile objects. Then I destroy
them with my maya. When the time arrives for acting, I think again about a body and create myself. Assuming a
human form, I ensure that the boundaries are maintained. My complexion is white in krita yuga, yellow in treta
yuga and red now in dvapara. It is black in kali yuga. At that time, adharma accounts for three-fourths.97 When
that period of destruction arrives, I assume the terrible form of time and myself destroy the three worlds, with their
mobile and immobile objects. I am the one with three strides.98 I am the soul of the universe. I bring happiness to
all the worlds. I am the lord. I go everywhere. I am Hrishikesha, whose stride is expansive. O brahmana! I am the
one who moves the wheel of time. I am without form. I am the one who paciﬁes all beings. I am the endeavour behind the tasks of all the worlds. O supreme among sages! Thus my soul pervades all beings. O Indra among brahmanas! But no one knows me. O brahmana! O unblemished one! Whatever pain you have encountered while inside me, all of that is for your happiness and welfare. O supreme among sages! Whatever you have seen of the
worlds, mobile and immobile, all of those have been ordained by my soul. The grandfather of all the worlds99 is
half of my body. I am the one known as Narayana. I hold the conch shell, the chakra and the mace. O brahmana
rishi! Throughout the cycle of one thousand yugas, I, the soul of the universe and the grandfather of all the worlds,

sleep. O supreme among sages! Throughout that period, I am established here, not a child but in the form of a
child, until Brahma wakes up. O brahmana! It is I who granted you boons in the form of Brahma. You are worshipped by masses of brahmana rishis and I am satisﬁed with you. On seeing everything, mobile and immobile,
ﬂooded in a single ocean, you were afﬂicted. Knowing this, I showed you the universe when you entered my body.
On seeing all the worlds there, you were astounded and did not understand. O brahmana rishi! Therefore, I brought
you out through my mouth and told you everything about myself, incomprehensible to gods and demons. O brahmana rishi! Until the immensely ascetic and illustrious Brahma awakes, comfortably rest and roam here. O
supreme among brahmanas! When the grandfather of all the worlds awakes, as if they are but one, I will create
from my body the sky, the earth, light, wind and water and whatever else exists in the world, mobile and immobile.’”
‘Markandeya said, “O son!100 After he had spoken thus, the extremely wonderful god disappeared. I then saw
the creation of subjects, varied and manifold. O king! O best of the Bharata lineage! O best among all those who
uphold dharma! At the end of the yuga, I witnessed all these wonderful things. O tiger among men! The lotus-eyed
god whom I saw in earlier times, has now become your relative Janardana. O Kounteya! Because of the boon he
bestowed on me, my memory has not failed me. I have a long life and I can die when I wish. He is the lord Krishna
Varshneya, the ancient being. He is the mighty-armed Hari, who cannot be thought of, and who seems to be sporting. He is Satvata,101 the creator and the special creator and the destroyer. He is Govinda with the srivatsa mark,
the universal lord of all Prajapatis. On seeing this tiger of the Vrishni lineage, the original being Vishnu who has
no birth and who is dressed in yellow garb, my memory has returned to me. Madhava is the father and mother of
all beings. O bulls among the Kourava lineage! Seek refuge with the one who grants protection.”’
485(188)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing these words, the Parthas and the twins, bulls among men, together with Krishna
Droupadi, bowed in obeisance before Janardana. O tiger among men! He comforted them in the sweetest of tones.
Having consoled them, he honoured them in the appropriate fashion, since they were worthy of honour. Yudhishthira Kounteya then again questioned the great sage Markandeya about the kingdoms that would ﬂourish on
this earth. “O foremost among eloquent ones! O sage! O Bhargava! We have heard from you about the extraordinary destruction and creation that occurs at the end of a yuga. I am extremely curious to learn about what
happens in kali yuga. If all dharma is confounded then, what will remain? What energy will be left to men? What
will they eat and how will they sport? How long will they live? What garments will they wear at the end of a yuga?
After what period of time, will krita yuga arise again? O sage! Tell these varied accounts in detail.” At these
words, the supreme among sages began to speak again. The great rishi wished to please the tiger among the Vrishnis and the Pandavas.
‘Markandeya said, “O bull among the Bharata lineage! Listen to me. I will tell you about the future of all the
worlds when the time of evil arrives. In the time of krita with its four feet,102 everything was devoid of deceit and
obstructions. In those earlier times, dharma was established among humans, like a bull. In treta, adharma took
away one leg, but it was still established on three feet. In dvapara, it is said that dharma and its opposite are mixed
half and half. But at that time,103 three-quarters of adharma will be established in the world. Only one quarter of
dharma will be established among men. O Pandava! Learn from me that life with valour, intelligence, strength and
power will shrink among men, following the change in yuga. O Yudhishthira! Kings, brahmanas, vaishyas and
shudras will only pretend to practise dharma. Men will be deceitful about dharma. Men in the world will be vain
about their learning and will abbreviate the truth. Because truth will be destroyed, lifespans will be shortened. Because of this shortening in life, it will not be possible to acquire much learning. Uninstructed and lacking in knowledge, ignorance will make them a prey to greed. Men will be addicted to avarice, anger and desire, and will be stupid. They will bear enmity and will wish to kill each other. Brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaishyas will consort with
each other and become the equal of shudras, devoid of austerities and truth. There is no doubt that the lowest will
rise to the middle and the middle will sink to the bottom. At the end of the yuga, this will be the state of the world.
Garments made of hemp will be considered to be the best. Grain eaten by the poor will be considered to be the best

harvest. At the destruction of the yuga, men will consider their wives to be their enemies. They will live on ﬁsh
and will milk goats and sheep. At the destruction of the yuga, men will destroy cows. Men will be against each
other and will commit violence against each other. At the time of the destruction of the yuga, they will not meditate and will be atheists. They will dig up the banks of rivers with spades and sow herbs there. But at the time of
the destruction of the yuga, these will yield little fruit. Men who have always been ﬁrm in their vows at funeral
ceremonies and sacriﬁces to the gods, will become addicted to greed and will thrive on each other. The father will
enjoy what belongs to the son and the son will enjoy what belongs to the father. At the time of the destruction of
the yuga, rules about what should be eaten will be transgressed. Brahmanas will not observe vows and will criticize the Vedas. Deluded by their love for debate, they will not observe worship and sacriﬁces. Men will till lowlands and yoke milch cows. Men will employ calves that are one year old as beasts of burden. Though sons will
kill their fathers and fathers will kill their sons, this will not be regarded as reprehensible. They will be without
anxiety and will take great pride in this. The entire world will be overtaken by mleccha conduct. There will be no
rites and sacriﬁces. There will be unhappiness everywhere and no festivities. Generally, men will rob the possessions of others, even of those who are weak and of their relatives and widows. There will be little valour and
strength. There will be vanity. There will be addiction to avarice and delusion. Men will happily accept gifts given
by the evil. They will accept them, themselves addicted to evil conduct. O Kounteya! Driven by evil intelligence,
kings will hire assassins. The ignorant ones, thinking themselves to be wise, will seek to kill each other. When the
destruction of the yuga is near, the kshatriyas will be the thorns of the world. They will not protect others. They
will be greedy, insolent with pride and vanity. At the time of the destruction of the yuga, they will ﬁnd delight in
only resorting to chastisement. They will attack righteous ones and enjoy their wives and possessions. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They will feel no pity, even when there are cries of grief. No one will ask for a maiden. No one will give a maiden away. When the end of the yuga is near, women will choose themselves. When the
end of the yuga has arrived, kings, discontented with what they possess and deluded in their intelligence, will use
every means possible to steal the property of others. There is no doubt that the entire world will be overtaken by
mleccha ways. When the destruction of the yuga has arrived, one hand will steal from the other. In this world, men
who are vain about their learning, will abbreviate the truth. The old will think like children and the children will
have the intelligence of the old. Cowards will take pride in their bravery and the brave will be depressed as cowards. When the end of the yuga has arrived, they will not trust others. Overcome by greed and delusion, everyone
will eat the same kind of food. Adharma will extend and there will be no dharma. O lord of men! There will be no
brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaishyas left. At the time of destruction of the yuga, the world will have only one varna.
Fathers will not pardon their sons, nor sons their fathers. Wives will not tend to their husbands. When the end of
the yuga has arrived, men will seek out cities and regions where barley and wheat are eaten. O lord of the earth!
Men and women will eat whatever they wish. When the end of the yuga has arrived, they will not tolerate each
other. O Yudhishthira! The entire world will be overtaken by mlecchas. Men will no longer satisfy their ancestors
through funeral ceremonies. No one will listen to another. Nor will anyone be a preceptor. O lord of men! The entire world will be enveloped in terrible darkness. The greatest lifespan will be for sixteen years. At the time of the
destruction of the yuga, this is when the breath of life will be released. Girls who are ﬁve or six years old will give
birth. Boys who are seven or eight years old will beget children. O king! O tiger among kings! At that time, at the
end of the yuga, women will not ﬁnd satisfaction with their husbands, nor men with wives. There will be few possessions. Linga will be in vain.104 There will be violence. At the time of the destruction of the yuga, no one will
give to another. The countryside will be full of towers. The crossroads will be full of jackals. At the time of the destruction of the yuga, women will be full of hair. There will be cruel mleccha conduct everywhere. People will eat
everything. They will be terrible in all their deeds. There is no doubt that men will be like this, when time comes to
an end. At the time of buying and selling, everyone will steal everything from each other. O best of the Bharata lineage! At the end of the yuga, they will be driven by the love for riches. Though ignorant and without knowledge,
they will perform rituals. When the end of the yuga has arrived, they will act as they wish. When the end of the
yuga has arrived, all men will naturally be the performers of cruel deeds and will not trust each other. They will
destroy trees and groves without a thought. There is no doubt that all beings in the world will ﬁnd it difﬁcult to ensure a living. O king! Overcome by avarice, they will roam the earth. They will become brahmanas and will enjoy

the property of brahmanas. Oppressed by shudras,105 brahmanas will be frightened and will lament. They will
wander all over the earth, without anyone to protect them. Men will be cruel and terrible and will kill others. They
will cause violence to beings. When men act in this fashion, the yuga will come to an end. O extender of the Kuru
lineage! O king! Brahmanas, the supreme among brahmanas, will be oppressed by bandits and will swiftly ﬂee in
fear like crows, seeking refuge in rivers, mountains and uneven terrain, oppressed by the burden of taxes. O protector of the earth! At the time of the destruction of the yuga, they will discard all patience. They will perform
deeds that should not be performed and will serve the shudras. The shudras will explain dharma to brahmanas and
their servants and they will listen to these explanations and proofs. Everything in the world will be utterly upside
down. Discarding the gods, collections of bones106 will be worshipped. At the end of the yuga, shudras will no
longer serve brahmanas, in the hermitages of maharshis and in the residences of brahmanas. In places meant for
the gods, in sanctuaries and in the abodes of the serpents, the earth will not be marked by abodes of the gods, but
by collections of bones. When the yuga decays, these are the signs of the destruction of the yuga. Men will always
become terrible, addicted to meat and liquor and weak in dharma. That is the time for the decay of the yuga. O
king! At that time, ﬂowers will be created in ﬂowers and fruit in fruit. O great king! The yuga will decay t that
time. When the rains shower down at the wrong time, the yuga will be over. The rituals of men will not follow the
right order. Shudras107 will quarrel with brahmanas. The earth will soon be infested with mleccha people. Overcome by the burden of taxation, brahmanas will ﬂee in the ten directions. Without distinction, men in all countries
will be oppressed by drought. They will resort to hermitages and live on fruits and roots. When the world is so turbulent, there will be no limits. Disciples will not heed their instructions, but will act in an unpleasant way. O sons!
Preceptors will then have to live without any riches. Friends, kin and relatives will act only out of love for wealth.
When the end of the yuga arrives, all beings will suffer from want. All the directions will blaze. All the constellations will move. All the stars will be adverse, all the winds will be turbulent. There will be many showers of meteors, indicative of great fear. The sun will torment with six others. There will be a thunderous noise and conﬂagrations in all the directions. From rising to setting, the sun will be obscured by the headless torso.108 The illustrious
one with the thousand eyes109 will not rain at the right time. At the time of the end of the yuga, crops will not
grow. Women will be harsh and cruel in speech and will love to cry. Women will not follow the words of their husbands. When the destruction of the yuga arrives, sons will kill their fathers and mothers. Women will kill their husbands and depend on their sons. O great king! Rahu will envelope the sun at the wrong time. When the end of the
yuga arrives, ﬁres will blaze up in all the directions. Travellers will ask for food and drink, but not receive it. They
will not ﬁnd shelter and will be thrown out. They will have to sleep on the road. When the end of the yuga is near,
crows of ill omen, serpents, vultures, animals and birds will screech harshly. When the end of the yuga has arrived,
men will be abandoned by their friends and relatives, kin and followers. When the end of the yuga has arrived,
they will gradually seek refuge in other countries, regions, settlements and cities, with extremely terrible words of
‘Alas, father!’ and ‘Alas, son!’. In extreme afﬂiction, men will roam around. Then, when the terrible time of the
destruction of the yuga is over, beings gradually come into existence, beginning with brahmanas. When that period
is over, the world begins to prosper again. The gods again become favourable, as they desire. When the sun, the
moon, Tishya110 and Jupiter are in conjunction in the same sign of the zodiac, then krita begins again. Rains
shower at the right time and the stars become favourable. The planets revolve in a propitious way. Safety, abundance of food, health and recovery from disease are prevalent. Driven by time, a brahmana named Kalki Vishnuyasha will be born.111 He will have great energy, great intelligence and valour. He will be born in a village
named Sambhala, in an auspicious brahmana household. As soon as he thinks about it, all means of transport,
weapons, warriors, missiles and armour will manifest themselves before him. He will be a king and emperor, triumphing on the basis of dharma. He will restore order in this turbulent world. When arisen, that radiant brahmana,
immensely intelligent, will bring an end to the destruction by destroying everything. He will initiate the yuga.112
Wherever he goes, he will be surrounded by brahmanas. That brahmana will then uproot the mean masses of mlecchas, wherever they may happen to be.”’
486(189)

‘Markandeya said, “After exterminating the rakshasas, he will hand over the earth to the brahmanas at a great
horse sacriﬁce. Having established the sacred limits decreed by the self-creating one,113 the performer of holy and
famous deeds will retire to the forest when he attains old age. The men who live in the world will follow his good
conduct. When thieves and rakshasas have been exterminated by the brahmanas, there will be safety again. When
all the countries have been conquered, that tiger among brahmanas will establish black antelope skins, spears and
tridents and other weapons there.114 He will be praised by the Indras among brahmanas and will honour them in
return. Kalki, supreme among brahmanas will roam around the earth, always engaged in the killing of dasyus.115
When he exterminates dasyus, terrible lamentations of ‘Alas, father!’ and ‘Alas, son!’ will be heard. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! When krita has arrived, adharma will thus be destroyed and dharma will ﬂourish. People
will again follow rituals. There will be groves, sanctuaries, large ponds, temples and many sacriﬁces and rituals on
the arrival of krita yuga. Brahmanas will be righteous and hermits will be ascetics. Hermitages, earlier occupied by
wretches, will have subjects engaged in truth. All the seeds sown will begin to grow. O Indra among kings! Every
crop will grow in every season. Men will be devoted to donations, vows and rites. Brahmanas will happily be engaged in meditation and sacriﬁces and will desire dharma. Kings will govern the earth in accordance with the principles of dharma. In krita yuga, vaishyas will be engaged in trade, brahmanas in their six tasks116 and kshatriyas
in offering protection. Shudras will devote themselves to servitude of the three varnas. This will be the nature of
dharma in krita yuga, treta and dvapara and in the last period of the yuga. I have recounted this to you. O Pandava!
The numbers of the yugas are known to all the worlds. Thus have I told you everything about the past and the future, as I remember it. This is the Purana recounted by Vayu, lauded by the rishis.117 Though I am immortal, I
have witnessed and experienced many courses of life in the world.118 I have told you about them.
‘“O one without decay! Now, with your brothers, listen to these other words of mine. They will free you from
your doubts about dharma. O supreme among those who uphold dharma! Always unite your soul with dharma. O
king! Those who have dharma in their soul enjoy bliss, here and in the hereafter. O unblemished one! Listen to the
auspicious words that I will now tell you. In the course of your acts, you should never oppress a brahmana. If angered, a brahmana can destroy the world through his oath.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having heard Markandeya’s words, the king, supreme among Kurus, replied in these
words to the immensely wise and immensely radiant one. “O sage! If I wish to protect my subjects, what dharma
should I follow? How should I act, so that I do not deviate from my own dharma?”
‘Markandeya replied, “Be compassionate towards all beings and try to ensure their welfare, without hatred. Be
engaged in the protection of your subjects, as if they are your own children. Practise dharma and avoid adharma.
Worship the ancestors and the gods. If you act out of ignorance, neutralize it by offering the right donations. Discard vanity and always be humble. Conquer the entire earth and remain in joy and happiness. This is dharma as it
was, and as it will be. There is nothing in the past or the future that is not known to you. O son!119 Therefore, do
not suffer because of your present misfortune. O mighty-armed one! Destiny is superior to all the gods too. Prodded by destiny, all beings are afﬂicted. O unblemished one! Do not have any doubts about what I have told you. If
you doubt my words, your dharma will be destroyed. O bull among the Bharata lineage! You have been born in the
famous lineage of the Kurus. You should practise everything in deed, thought and speech.”
‘Yudhishthira said, “O best of brahmanas! The words that you have uttered are pleasant to hear. O lord! I will
endeavour to act according to your instructions. O Indra among brahmanas! I have no greed, no fear and no envy.
O lord! I will do everything that you have told me.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! Having heard the words of the great-souled Pandava, all the Pandavas, together
with the wielder of the Sharnga bow, were delighted.120 Having heard the words of the intelligent Markandeya
about the ancient accounts, they were struck with great wonder.’
487(190)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Pandava then spoke to Markandeya. “Tell me about the greatness of brahmanas.”
Markandeya replied.121

‘“There was a king in Ayodhya, from the Ikshvaku lineage. His name was Parikshit and he went out hunting.
Pursuing a deer alone on a horse, he travelled a long distance. On the way, he became exhausted, hungry and
thirsty. In that part of the country, he saw a dark and dense cluster of trees. He entered the cluster of trees and in
the middle, saw an extremely beautiful pond. He and his horse bathed there. He ﬂung some lotus stalks in front of
the horse.122 Then, refreshed, he sat down on the banks of the pond. While he was lying there, he heard the sweet
sound of singing. On hearing this, he began to wonder. ‘I do not see the marks of any humans here. What singing
is this then?’ He then saw an extremely beautiful maiden, worthy of looking at. She was picking ﬂowers and
singing and wandered around to where the king was. The king said, ‘O fortunate one! Whose are you?’ The maiden replied, ‘I am a virgin.’ The king said, ‘I wish that you should be mine.’ The maiden replied, ‘I can only be
yours if you take an oath.’ The king wanted to know what the condition was and the maiden replied, ‘You must
never show me water.’ The king agreed to these words and having agreed, won her and sat down with her. While
the king was thus seated, his soldiers arrived there. They had followed his footsteps. On seeing the king, they established themselves around him. Having fully recovered, the king mounted a palanquin with her and returned to
his city. He pleasured there with her privately, out of sight of anyone.
‘“The prime minister then asked the women who waited on the king. ‘What is happening?’ The women replied,
‘We have seen something that we have not seen before. No water is brought here.’ Having heard this, the minister
constructed a grove. It had beautiful trees, with many roots, ﬂowers and fruit. But it had no water. He went to the
king in private and said, ‘There is a beautiful grove without any water. Pleasure yourself happily there.’ On hearing
these words, the king entered the grove with the queen. One day, he was roaming in that wonderful grove with his
beloved and became exhausted, hungry and thirsty. He saw a wonderful cluster of atimuktas.123 On entering it
with his beloved, the king saw a pond with clear water, covered by the creepers. As soon as he saw it, he sat down
on its banks with his queen. The king told the queen, ‘Let us descend into the water of this pond.’ On hearing these
words, she got down and immersed herself in the pond. But she did not surface again. The king searched for her,
but could not ﬁnd her. He had the water taken out and found a frog seated near the mouth of a hole. The angry king
passed an order. ‘Kill all frogs. Whoever wishes to see me, has to come with a dead frog as a tribute.’ When this
terrible destruction of the frogs continued, all the frightened frogs went to the king of the frogs and told him what
was happening. Then the king of the frogs adopted the disguise of an ascetic and went to the king. Having approached, he said, ‘O king! Do not be overcome by anger. Have mercy and do not destroy the innocent frogs.
There are two shlokas on this. “Do not wish to kill all frogs. O unblemished one! Control your anger. People who
are ignorant, destroy their extensive prosperity. Promise that when you meet them, you will control your wrath.
Why must you continue with this adharma? What purpose will dead frogs serve?”’ But the king’s soul was overcome with grief for his beloved and he told the frog, ‘I cannot forgive. I will kill those evil-souled ones who have
devoured my beloved. The frogs deserve to be killed by me. O learned one! Do not try to obstruct me.’ On hearing
these words, his senses and mind were pained and he replied, ‘O king! Show mercy. I am the king of the frogs and
my name is Ayu. She was my daughter, named Sushobhana. She has this bad character and she has deceived many
kings earlier.’ The king replied, ‘I desire her. Give her to me.’ The father bestowed her on the king, with the words,
‘Serve the king.’ He also told his daughter, ‘Since you have deceived many kings and have committed falsehood,
your sons will be the haters of brahmanas.’ Having obtained her, the king’s heart was set on the pleasures of making love. It was as if he had won the wealth of the three worlds. He prostrated himself before the king of the frogs
and in a voice choking with tears of joy, said, ‘You have favoured me a lot.’ Having bid farewell to his son-in-law,
the king of frogs went away, to where he had come from.
‘“After some time, the king had three sons through her. Their names were Shala, Dala and Bala. After some
time, since his soul was set on austerities, the king instated the eldest Shala on the throne and left for the forest.
One day, Shala went out hunting. He saw a deer and pursued it on his chariot. He told the charioteer, ‘Drive me
faster.’ The charioteer replied to the king, ‘Do not insist on this course of action. You would have been able to
catch the deer only if Vamya horses had been yoked to the chariot.’ The king then told the charioteer, ‘Tell me
about Vamya horses. Otherwise, I will kill you.’ Having been thus addressed by the king, he was frightened of the
king’s anger, as well as of Vamadeva’s curse, and said, ‘Vamya horses are those that belong to Vamadeva. They are
as swift as the mind.’ On hearing this, the king told him, ‘Go to Vamadeva’s hermitage.’ Having gone to Vamade-

va’s hermitage, he told the rishi, ‘O illustrious one! I pierced a deer and it has run away. You should give me a couple of Vamya horses so that I can catch it.’ The rishi replied, ‘I will give you the Vamyas. But when you have ﬁnished, you must return them immediately.’ Having accepted the horses and having taken the rishi’s permission, he
yoked the Vamya horses to his chariot and pursued the deer. But when he was travelling, he told the charioteer,
‘These horses are gems. They do not deserve to be possessed by a brahmana. I am not going to return them to Vamadeva.’ Having thus spoken, he caught the deer. He returned to his city and lodged the horses in the inner quarters of the palace. The rishi thought, ‘This prince is young. Having obtained these excellent horses, he is enjoying
them. He will not return them to me. What a nuisance!’ Having thought this, when a month had passed, he told his
disciple. ‘O Atreya! Go to the king and tell him that if he is through with the horses, he should return the Vamyas
to your preceptor.’ He went and told the king. But the king replied, ‘These horses deserve to be possessed by
kings. Brahmanas do not deserve such gems. What will brahmanas do with horses? Return.’ Returning, he told this
to the preceptor.
‘“On hearing these unpleasant words, Vamadeva was ﬁlled with anger. He himself went to the king and asked
for his horses. But the king refused. Vamadeva said, ‘O king! Return the Vamya horses to me. You have undertaken a deed that others cannot accomplish. Varuna will kill you with his terrible noose. You are trying to create a
split between brahmanas and kshatriyas.’ The king replied, ‘O Vamadeva! These two bulls have been trained well
and are docile. They are the appropriate mount for a brahmana. O maharshi! Take them and go wherever you want.
The chants themselves bear someone like you.’124 Vamadeva said, ‘O king! The chants indeed bear someone like
me, but that is in the next world. O king! In this world, these are my mounts, and for others who are like me.’ The
king replied, ‘Then let four donkeys bear you. They are excellent. Or there are ﬂeet horses. Use those. But these
Vamyas deserve to be possessed by a kshatriya like me. Behold. They cannot belong to you.’ Vamadeva said, ‘It
has been said that a brahmana’s vow is terrible. O king! If I have lived by such vows, then terrible giants with bodies made of iron and holding sharp spears will slice you into four parts.’ The king replied, ‘O Vamadeva! Let those
who bear sharp spears know that you, a brahmana, are willing to kill in speech, thought and deeds. On my instructions, let them kill you, with your disciple.’ Vamadeva said, ‘O king! A brahmana can never be chastised, in
speech, thought and deeds. But one who is learned in the brahman and has practised austerities, can prove superior
to the best in this world.’ O king! When Vamadeva spoke these words, rakshasas arose, terrible in form. With
raised spears, they rushed towards the king, so as to kill him. In a loud voice, he cried out, ‘O brahmana! Even if
all the Ikshvakus, Dala and the vaishyas who are ruled by me tell me, I will not give up the Vamyas. O Vamadeva!
They are not ones who follow dharma.’ While he was still speaking, the yatudhanas125 struck the lord of the earth
and he fell down on the ground.
‘“On learning that the king had been killed, the Ikshvakus instated Dala on the throne. Brahmana Vamadeva
then went to the kingdom and spoke these words to King Dala. ‘O king! It has been said in all dharma that gifts
must be given to brahmanas. O Indra among kings! If you fear to transgress dharma, immediately give the Vamyas
to me.’ Having heard these words of Vamadeva, the king was angered and spoke to his charioteer. ‘Bring me one
of those beautiful and poisonous arrows that have been carefully kept. Pierced by it, Vamadeva will lie down prone
on the ground in pain and dogs will tear him apart.’ Vamadeva said, ‘I know that you have a son who is ten years
old. O Indra among kings! He has been born from your queen Shyenajit. Urged by my words, you will soon kill
that beloved son with your terrible arrows.’ O king! Thus instructed by Vamadeva, that arrow, ﬁery in power,
killed the prince in the inner quarters of the palace, as soon as it had been released by Dala. On hearing this, the
king said, ‘O Ikshvakus! I will perform a pleasant task for you. I will kill this brahmana today. Bring me another of
my ﬁery arrows. O lords of the earth! Witness my valour now.’ Vamadeva replied, ‘O Indra among men! This is a
terrible and poisonous arrow. You have aimed it at me. But you will not be able to aim or shoot.’ The king said, ‘O
Ikshvakus! Behold. I am unable to release the arrow that I have grasped. I will not be able to perform the task of
killing him. Let Vamadeva live and may he have a long life.’ Vamadeva said, ‘Touch the queen with this arrow and
you will be freed from your sin.’ The king did as he had been asked to and the princess spoke to the sage. ‘O Vamadeva! O brahmana! If I have honoured my husband and have lain down with him day after day, let me be able to
serve brahmanas and attain the sacred worlds after death.’ Vamadeva said, ‘O one with the beautiful eyes! You
have saved the king’s lineage. Ask for an unequalled boon and I will give it to you. O princess! O unblemished

one! Rule over your relatives and this extensive kingdom of the Ikshvakus.’ The princess said, ‘O illustrious one! I
ask for the boon that my husband should now be freed from his sin. May you bless him, with his sons and relatives. O foremost among brahmanas! This is the boon that I want.’ On hearing the princess’s words, the sage said
that it would be that way. At that, the king was extremely happy. He bowed in obeisance and returned the
Vamyas.”’
488(191)

Vaishampayana said, ‘The rishis and the Pandavas again asked Markandeya, “Is there anyone who has a longer life
than you?”
‘He told them, “Yes, there is a rajarshi named Indradyumna. When his merits were exhausted, he fell down from
heaven, exclaiming, ‘My deeds have been lost.’126 He came to me and asked me whether I knew him. I told him,
‘We are not chemists.127 We pursue our goals by tormenting our bodies and minds. We do not perform acts for the
sake of wealth. There is an owl in the Himalayas by the name of Prakarakarna. He may know you.’ But the Himalayas where he lives, is a long distance away from here. He became a horse and carried me to the place where
the owl was. Then the rajarshi asked it, ‘Do you know me?’ It reﬂected for some time and then said, ‘No. I do not
know you.’ Hearing these words, rajarshi Indradyumna again spoke to the owl. ‘Is there anyone who has a longer
life than you?’ The owl replied, ‘There is a lake by the name of Indradyumna. A crane named Nadijangha lives
there and he is older than we are.128 Ask him.’ Indradyumna then took me and the owl to the lake where the crane
named Nadijangha lived. We asked it, ‘Do you know the king named Indradyumna?’ It thought for a while and
replied, ‘No. I do not know King Indradyumna.’ We asked it, ‘Is there anyone who has had a longer life than you?’
It replied, ‘There is a tortoise named Akupura who lives in this lake. He is older than I am.’ We replied, ‘Perhaps
he knows about this king. Let us ask Akupura.’ The crane then spoke to the tortoise Akupura. ‘We need to ask you
something. Please be kind enough to come to us.’ Hearing this, the tortoise emerged from the lake and came to
where we were standing, on the banks of the lake. When it came, we asked it, ‘Do you know of this king named
Indradyumna?’ It thought for some time and then its eyes were ﬁlled with tears. Its heart was agitated and it trembled. It almost lost its senses. Then it joined its limbs in salutation and said, ‘How can I not know that king? In earlier times, when kindling the sacriﬁcial ﬁre, he erected sacriﬁcial stakes one thousand times.129 This lake was created from the hooves of cattle he gave away as gifts. I have lived here ever since then.’ As soon as we heard these
words of the tortoise, a celestial chariot descended from the world of the gods and words were heard about Indradyumna. ‘Heaven is ready for you. That is your appropriate place. Your deeds are great. Go there in a cheerful
frame of mind. The words about sacred deeds touch the heaven and the earth. As long as there is sound, so long
does man live. Whenever a being’s evil deeds are recounted on earth, he descends to the inferior worlds as long as
those words are recounted. Therefore, right till the end, any man on earth should be engaged in good deeds. He
should avoid evil conduct and seek refuge in dharma.’ On hearing this, the king replied, ‘Wait until I have returned
these seniors to the places I brought them from.’ He brought me and the owl Prakarakarna to our usual places.
Then he returned in that chariot to the place that was appropriate for him. Though I have a long life, this is what I
have witnessed.” This is what Markandeya told the Pandavas.
‘The Pandavas happily said, “That was proper. You did the right thing in restoring King Indradyumna to heaven
again, when he had fallen from the world of heaven.” He replied, “Devaki’s son Krishna also saved rajarshi Nriga,
when he had descended into hell and was in distress. He returned him again to heaven.”’130
489(192)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O bull among the Bharata lineage! Dharmaraja Yudhishthira again asked Markandeya, without sin, old in his austerities and with a long life. “O one learned in dharma! You know about the gods, the danavas
and the rakshasas, the various lineages of kings and the eternal lineages of the rishis. O supreme among brahmanas! There is nothing in this world that is unknown to you. O sage! You know about the celestial stories of men,
serpents and rakshasas. O brahmana! The famous Kuvalashva was born in the unvanquished lineage of the Iksh-

vakus. I wish to hear the details about why his name was changed to Dhundhumara. O best among the Bhargava
lineage! I wish to learn about this. What was the reason why the wise Kuvalashva’s name was changed?”
‘Markandeya replied, “O King Yudhishthira! I will tell you the story. Listen. The account of Dhundhumara is
full of dharma. O lord of the earth! Listen to it, how King Kuvalashva of the Ikshvaku lineage, lord of the earth,
became Dhundhumara. O son!131 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There was a famous maharshi by the name
of Utanka. O Kourava! He had his beautiful hermitage in the desert regions. O great king! Wishing to worship
Vishnu, the lord Utanka performed difﬁcult austerities for a large number of years. Pleased with him, the illustrious
and worthy one himself appeared before him. As soon as he saw him, the rishi prostrated himself and praised him
with many hymns. ‘O god! All beings, with the gods, the asuras and men, and all mobile and immobile objects,
have been created by you. O immensely radiant one! Brahma, the Vedas and all that is capable of being learnt has
been created by you. O god! The heaven is your head. Your eyes are the moon and the sun. O one without decay!
The wind is your breath. The ﬁre is your energy. All the directions are your arms. The great ocean is your stomach.
O god! The mountains are your thighs. O Madhusudana! The sky is your navel. The goddess earth is your feet. The
herbs are your body hair. Indra, Soma, Agni, Varuna, the gods, the asuras and the great serpents bow down before
you and praise you with many hymns. O lord of the earth! You permeate all beings. The immensely powerful practitioners of yoga and the maharshis praise you. When you are satisﬁed, the universe is at peace. But when you are
angered, there is great fear. O supreme among beings! You alone are the dispeller of all fear. You are the cause of
happiness to gods, humans and all beings. O god! Through three strides, you covered the three worlds. The prosperity of the asuras was destroyed by you. Through your valour, the gods attained supreme bliss. O immensely radiant one! It was your wrath that vanquished the Indras among the daityas. You are the creator and the destroyer of
all beings. Worshipping you, all the gods attain happiness.’
‘“Having been thus praised by the great-souled Utanka, Vishnu Hrishikesha spoke to Utanka. ‘I am pleased with
you. Ask for a boon.’ Utanka replied, ‘It is already enough of a boon that I have seen Hari, the eternal being, the
divine lord who is the creator of the universe.’ Vishnu said, ‘O supreme among brahmanas! I am pleased with your
steadfastness and your devotion. O brahmana! O twice-born one! But you must accept a boon from me.’ O
supreme among the Bharata lineage! Thus instructed by Hari to ask for a boon, Utanka joined his hands in salutation and asked for a boon. ‘O lord! O one with the lotus eyes! O great lord! If you are pleased with me, let my
mind always be ﬁxed on dharma, truth and self-control, eternally, and let me always be devoted to you.’ Visnu
replied, ‘O brahmana! Through my favours, all this will happen. A yoga will manifest itself in you. United with it,
you will accomplish a great task for the dwellers of heaven and the three worlds. A great asura named Dhundhu is
now performing terrible austerities for the destruction of the worlds. Listen. I will tell you who will kill him. There
will be a famous king by the name of Brihadashva. He will have an obedient and sacred son, known by the name
of Kuvalashva. O brahmana rishi! On your instructions, this best of kings will use my powers of yoga and become
Dhundhumara.’132 Having thus spoken to Utanka, Vishnu disappeared.”’
490(193)

‘Markandeya said, “O king! When Ikshvaku died, Shashada became the king of Ayodhya and obtained the earth.
He had the greatest dharma in his soul. Shashada had a valorous son named Kakutstha. Kakutstha’s son was Anenas and Anenas’s was Prithu. Prithu’s son was Vishvagashva and Vishvagashva begot the wise Ardra. His son was
Yuvanashva and his son was Shravasta. King Shravasta built Shravasti.133 Shravasta’s son was the immensely
strong Brihadashva and Kuvalashva is known as Brihadashva’s son. Kuvalashva had twenty-one thousand sons.
All of them were learned, powerful and unassailable. Kuvalashva surpassed his father in all the qualities. O great
king! In due course of time, Brihadashva instated the supremely brave Kuvalashva, who was always immersed in
dharma, in the kingdom. Having handed over the prosperity to his son, the wise king Brihadashva, the destroyer of
his enemies, went to a hermitage to practise austerities. O king! O Yudhishthira! Utanka, supreme among brahmanas, heard that rajarshi Brihadashva had left for the forest. Then the immensely energetic Utanka, limitless in
his soul, went to that supreme among men, foremost among those who were skilled in the use of all weapons. He
tried to restrain him.

‘“Utanka said, ‘O king! It is your duty to protect and you should perform that duty. It is through your favours
that we live without anxiety. O king! Protected by a great-souled one like you, we will be without anxiety. Therefore, you should not depart for the forest. Great dharma can be seen in protecting the subjects. That cannot be seen
in the forest. Therefore, give up such an inclination. O Indra among kings! There is no dharma that can be seen,
which is like protecting the subjects. This is what rajarshis have practised earlier. Protect the subjects, as they
should be protected by the king. O king! Else, I will not be able to perform my austerities without anxiety. There is
a desert region near my hermitage and there is an ocean of sand known by the name of Ujjanaka. It is many yojanas long and many yojanas wide. An extremely valorous, powerful and terrible Indra among the danavas dwells
there. He is the son of Madhu and Kaitabha and this extremely terrible one has the name of Dhundhu.134 O king!
This inﬁnitely valorous one lives under the ground. O great king! Kill him and then go to the forest. He lies there,
engaged in terrible austerities for the sake of destroying the world. O king! He will destroy the thirty gods and the
world. He cannot be killed by the gods, the daityas, the rakshasas, the nagas, the yakshas or any of the gandharvas.
O king! He has obtained such a boon from the grandfather of all the worlds. Destroy him and be fortunate. Do not
have any other resolution. Achieve a great deed and attain eternal and undecaying fame. That cruel one sleeps under the sand. He breathes at the end of the year. At that time, the entire earth, with its mountains, forests and
groves, begins to tremble. His breath raises a great cloud of dust that obstructs the path of the sun. The earth trembles for seven days. There are sparks and ﬂames, mixed with terrible smoke. O king! It is for this reason that I cannot remain in my own hermitage. O Indra among kings! Therefore, destroy him for the welfare of the worlds.
When this asura has been killed, the worlds will be healthy again. I think that you are quite capable of destroying
him. Your energy will be increased by Vishnu’s energy. Earlier, Vishnu gave me a boon for his destruction. Whichever king kills that terrible and great asura, will be united with Vishnu’s own unassailable energy. O Indra among
kings! Accept that energy, which the earth ﬁnds difﬁcult to bear. O protector of the earth! The immensely energetic
Dhundhu cannot be killed by someone who has limited energy, even if he tries for a hundred years.’”’
491(194)

‘Markandeya said, “O best of Kouravas! Having been thus addressed by Utanka, the unvanquished rajarshi joined
his hands in salutation and said, ‘O brahmana! Your arrival will not be in vain. O illustrious one! I have a son,
known by the name of Kuvalashva. He is intelligent and swift to act. His valour is unmatched on earth. There is no
doubt that he will accomplish that which is pleasant for you. He is surrounded by his brave sons, all of whom have
arms like clubs. O brahmana! Please give me permission to leave, since I have discarded all weapons.’ Having
been thus addressed, the inﬁnitely energetic sage agreed. The rajarshi directed his son to the great-souled Utanka.
Having done this, he went to an excellent forest.”
‘Yudhishthira asked, “O illustrious one! O one rich in austerities! Who was this immensely valorous daitya?
Whose son was he and whose grandson? I wish to know all this. O one rich in austerities! I have not heard of this
immensely strong daitya. O illustrious one! O immensely wise one! O one rich in austerities! I wish to know
everything in detail, the way it occurred.”
‘Markandeya said, “O king! O lord of men! Listen to it, exactly the way it happened. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! When the world became one terrible ocean and all mobile and immobile objects and all beings had been
destroyed, the illustrious Vishnu, the eternal and undecaying being, the source of everything in the world, slept
alone on the ocean. He was stretched out on the great serpent Shesha, whose energy is limitless. O illustrious one!
The immensely fortunate Hari, the undecaying one and the creator of the world, slept in the coils of that great serpent, which encircled the expanse of the earth. While the god was thus asleep, a lotus sprouted from his navel and
it was the equal of the sun in its radiance. From that lotus, which was like the sun and the moon in its splendour,
emerged grandfather Brahma himself, the preceptor of the worlds. He is the four Vedas, with four forms and four
faces. He is extremely strong and valorous and is unassailable because of his powers.
‘“Once upon a time, the supremely brave danavas, Madhu and Kaitabha, saw the immensely radiant lord Hari,
asleep on his celestial bed in the coils of the serpent, which was many yojanas long and many yojanas wide. He
wore a diadem and the Koustubha gem.135 He was attired in a yellow garment made of silk. O king! He blazed in
his radiance, energy and beauty, equal to the extraordinary sight of a thousand suns. Madhu and Kaitabha were ex-

tremely surprised to see the lotus-eyed grandfather on the lotus. They tried to terrify the inﬁnitely energetic Brahma. Repeatedly terriﬁed by those two, the immensely famous Brahma shook the stalk of the lotus and Keshava
woke up. Govinda saw those powerful danavas. On seeing them, the god said, ‘O immensely strong ones! You are
welcome. I am pleased with you. Ask for the best of boons.’ O great king! Those two great asuras were extremely
brave and began to laugh at Hrishikesha. They replied to Madhusudana, ‘O supreme among gods! O god! We are
the ones who grant boons. Ask for a boon from us. Without hesitation, ask for a boon and we will grant it to you.’
The lord said, ‘O brave ones! I will accept a boon from you. Grant me the boon that I desire. Both of you are endowed with great valour and there is no man who is your equal. O ones for whom truth is valour! I wish to kill you
for the welfare of the world. Grant me the boon that this desire to kill you is satisﬁed.’ Madhu and Kaitabha
replied, ‘O supreme among beings! We have never uttered a falsehood before, not even in jest. We have always
been steadfast in our devotion to dharma and truth. There is no one who is our equal in strength, beauty, valour,
tranquility, dharma, austerities, generosity, conduct, power and self-control. O Keshava! A great calamity confronts us. But do what you have said. It is impossible to overcome destiny. O god! O lord! O supreme among the
best of the gods! But there is one thing that we wish you to do. You must kill us in a spot that is completely uncovered.136 O one with the beautiful eyes! We will become your sons. O god! O supreme among gods! Know that this
is the boon that we ask for.’ The illustrious one replied, ‘It shall be that way. Everything will happen the way you
have stated.’ Then Govinda thought, but he could not see any spot that was uncovered. When Madhusudana could
not ﬁnd such a spot in heaven and earth, the supreme god glanced at his own uncovered thighs. O king! Madhusudana then sliced off the heads of Madhu and Kaitabha, with the end of his sharp and terrible chakra.”’137
492(195)

‘Markandeya said, “They138 had an immensely energetic and immensely radiant son by the name of Dhundhu. He
had great energy and valour and performed austerities. He stood on one leg and became so thin that he was held
together by his veins. Brahma was pleased with him and gave him the boon that he asked for from that lord. He
asked, ‘I should be incapable of being killed by gods, danavas, yakshas, serpents, gandharvas and rakshasas.’ The
grandfather told him that it would be that way. Having been thus addressed, he touched his139 feet with his head
and departed.
‘“Thus, after obtaining the boon, Dhundhu became immensely valorous and powerful. He remembered the
killing of his fathers and went to Vishnu. The violent Dhundhu defeated all the gods and the gandharvas. He then
began to cruelly oppress all the gods, together with Vishnu. O bull among the Bharata lineage! There is an ocean
of sand known by the name of Ujjanaka. The evil-minded one went to that region. O lord! He oppressed, with all
his strength, Utanka’s hermitage. He entered the interior of the earth and hid in the sand. Dhundhu, Madhu and
Kaitabha’s fearful and powerful son, sought to obtain the strength of austerities, so that he could destroy the world.
Near Utanka’s hermitage, his breath was ﬂames of ﬁre. At this time, King Kuvalashva went to Dhundhu’s residence, with his servants, soldiers and mounts. He was accompanied by his twenty-one thousand sons, the destroyers of enemies, and by Utanka. On Utanka’s request, the illustrious Vishnu injected the lord with his energy, for the
welfare of the worlds. When the invincible one started out, a loud voice was heard from heaven. ‘This handsome
one will become Dhundhumara.’ The gods showered down celestial ﬂowers in all directions. The kettledrums of
the gods began to sound on their own. While the wise one proceeded, a cool wind began to blow. The lord of the
gods showered down, removing dust from the earth. O Yudhishthira! Just above the spot where the great asura
Dhundhu was, the vimanas of the gods appeared in the sky. The gods, together with the gandharvas and the maharshis, assembled, curious to witness the battle between Kuvalashva and Dhundhu.
‘“O Kouravya! Invigorated with Narayana’s energy, the king swiftly advanced in all the directions, together with
his sons. King Kuvalashva had that ocean of sand dug up. When Kuvalashva’s sons dug up that ocean of sand, after seven days, they saw the immensely strong Dhundhu. O bull among the Bharata lineage! His terrible body was
buried in the sand. It blazed like the energy of the sun. O great king! O tiger among kings! Dhundhu was asleep,
covering the western direction with effulgence that was like the ﬁre of destruction. Surrounded by his sons, Kuvalashva assaulted him with sharp arrows, clubs, maces, battleaxes, bludgeons and swords that were sharp and

bright. Having been thus attacked, the immensely strong one was angered and arose. He wrathfully swallowed up
the different types of weapons. He vomited ﬂames from his mouth, like the ﬁre of destruction. He burnt down all
the sons of the king with his energy. O tiger among kings! In an instant, the angry one was about to consume the
worlds with the ﬂames issuing from his mouth, just as the lord Kapila had done earlier, when he had angrily burnt
down the sons of Sagara.140 It was extremely wonderful. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! When they had
been burnt down in this way, the immensely energetic King Kuvalashva approached the great-souled one, who was
like Kumbhakarna awakened.141 O great king! O king! A great ﬂow of water issued from the body of the king and
this water doused the ﬂames. Just as a practitioner of yoga uses yoga, the water paciﬁed the ﬂames. O best of the
Bharata lineage! Then the king burnt down the cruel and powerful daitya with his brahmastra and ensured the welfare of all the worlds. Rajarshi Kuvalashva consumed the great asura with this weapon. That destroyer of enemies
killed the enemy of the gods and became like the lord of the three worlds. From that day, he became known as
Dhundhumara.
‘“Then the thirty gods, together with all the maharshis, were delighted. They wished to grant him a boon. O
king! Extremely delighted, he joined his hands in salutation, prostrated himself and spoke these words. ‘Grant me
the boon that I may donate my riches to the best of the brahmanas and that I may be invincible against my enemies. May I enjoy friendship with Vishnu and may I not exhibit enmity towards any being. May my mind always
be devoted to dharma and may I have an eternal abode in heaven.’ The delighted gods, together with the rishis, the
gandharvas and the intelligent Utanka, told the king that it would be that way. After pronouncing various other
auspicious benedictions on the king, the gods and the maharshis returned to their abodes. O Yudhishthira! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The king had three sons left and their names were Dhridhashva, Kapilashva and
Chandrashva. O king! The great-souled lineage of the Ikshvakus followed from them. O virtuous one! Thus did
Kuvalashva kill the immensely valorous daitya Dhundhu, the son of Madhu and Kaitabha. From that day, King
Kuvalashva has been known as Dhundhumara. Named thus, he became associated with many qualities. I have told
you everything that you asked, famous as the account of Dhundhumara and his exploits. This sacred account is associated with Vishnu’s praise. The man who listens to this, has dharma in his soul and begets sons. By listening to
it on full moon days or days of the new moon,142 one obtains a long life, becomes persevering, has no fear of disease and is devoid of afﬂictions.”’
493(196)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O best of the Bharata lineage! Then King Yudhishthira asked the immensely radiant
Markandeya an extremely difﬁcult question about dharma.
‘“O illustrious one!143 O brahmana! I wish to hear about the supreme greatness of women. Tell me the details
about the subtleties of dharma. O brahmana rishi! O foremost one! The sun, the moon, the wind, the earth and the
ﬁre seem to be gods to me. O illustrious one! O great one! O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! So are the father,
the mother, the cow and whatever else has been ordained. All of these have to be revered as preceptors and I look
upon devoted wives in the same way. It seems to me that devotion to husbands and serving them must be very difﬁcult. O lord! If you so wish, please tell me about the greatness of devotion to husbands. O unblemished one! Restraining the senses and controlling the mind, it must be very difﬁcult to continuously think of husbands as gods. O
illustrious one! O lord! This seems to me to be extremely difﬁcult. O brahmana! The serving of the father, the
mother and the husband by women and the dharma of womanhood seem to be extremely terrible and difﬁcult to
me. O brahmana! Faithful women are always devoted in their conduct. But this must be difﬁcult, as are acts towards the father and the mother. There are women who are devoted to one single person and speak the truth. They
bear an embryo in the womb for a full ten months. What can be more wonderful than that? They bear great difﬁculties and immense pain. O lord! They give birth to sons after great pain. O supreme among brahmanas! Then
they rear them with great affection. I also think that those who perform cruel deeds and are abhorred for that, but
always continue to perform them, must ﬁnd it very difﬁcult. O brahmana! Tell me in detail about the dharma of
kshatriyas. O brahmana! Dharma must be difﬁcult for a cruel and evil-minded one. O illustrious one! You are

supreme among those who know the answers to questions. O best among those of the Bhrigu lineage! O one who
maintains good vows! I wish to hear the answer to my question.”
‘Markandeya replied, “O best among the Bharata lineage! Yes, I will tell you everything about this extremely
difﬁcult question of yours. Pay attention to my words. O son!144 Some hold the mother to be superior, others the
father.145 However, the mother performs the most difﬁcult task, she propagates the species. Through austerities,
worshipping the gods, endurance and resorting to magical spells, fathers desire sons. O brave one! After undergoing such great difﬁculties, one obtains a son, difﬁcult to obtain, and one wonders about what this son will end up
doing. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A father and a mother wish for fame, deeds, wealth, prosperity, offspring and dharma for the son, a son who will make their desires successful and be devoted to dharma, one who
will bring satisfaction to the father and the mother and will attain eternal fame and dharma in this world and the
next. O Indra among kings! But a woman does not need sacriﬁces, funeral ceremonies or fasting. When she serves
her husband, she obtains heaven. O king! O Yudhishthira! On this, listen attentively to the dharma of those who are
devoted to their husbands.”’
494(197)

‘Markandeya said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There was a foremost among brahmanas by the name of
Koushika. He studied the Vedas and was rich in austerities. He was an ascetic and followed dharma in his conduct.
That supreme among brahmanas studied the Vedas, together with the Angas and the Upanishads.146 One day, he
was under a tree and was reciting the Vedas. A female crane was perched on the tree. At that time, it dropped some
excrement on the brahmana. The brahmana was angered. Overcome by anger, he directed a terrible stare at the
crane and injured by the brahmana, it fell down on the ground. On seeing that the crane had fallen down, bereft of
its senses, the brahmana was overcome by compassion and regret. ‘Overcome by the force of passion and hatred, I
have done that which I should not have.’ Having uttered these words several times, the learned one went to a village to beg for alms.
‘“O bull among the Bharata lineage! He wandered around the pure households that were in the village. He ﬁnally entered a household that he had visited before. He asked, ‘Please give.’ And the lady replied, ‘Wait.’ O king!
While the housewife was cleaning the vessel for giving alms, her husband suddenly returned home, extremely hungry. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! On seeing her husband, the devoted lady neglected the brahmana. She
gave her husband water for washing the feet and the mouth and a seat. Then the dark-eyed one waited on her husband. She gave him tasty food to eat and spoke sweetly to him. O Yudhishthira! She always ate the food that had
been left over by her husband. Always following her husband’s thoughts, she thought her husband to be a god. In
deeds, thoughts or any other way, she did not act in contrary fashion. Her sentiments were always devoted towards
serving her husband. She was faithful, pure and skilled. She strove for the welfare of the household. She always
followed that which would ensure her husband’s welfare. She attended to gods, guests, servants, the father-in-law
and the mother-in-law. She was always devoted to serving and was always in control of her senses. While the one
with the beautiful eyes was thus tending to her husband, she noticed that the brahmana was standing there, wishing
for alms. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The faithful one was ashamed.
‘“The famous one emerged to give alms to the brahmana. The brahmana said, ‘O one with the beautiful limbs!
What is the meaning of this? You asked me to wait. You requested me to wait and did not dispose of me ﬁrst.’ O
Indra among men! On seeing that the brahmana was burning in anger and ﬂaming in his energy, the faithful one
paciﬁed him and spoke these words. ‘O brahmana! Please pardon me. My husband is my greatest god. He had returned hungry and exhausted and I had served him ﬁrst.’ The brahmana said, ‘Brahmanas are not superior and you
make your husband to be superior. Though following the dharma of householders, you are insulting a brahmana.
Even Indra bows down to such a one, not to speak of men on earth. O impudent one! Do you not know and have
you not heard from the elders? Like a ﬁre, a brahmana can burn down the entire earth.’
‘“The lady replied, ‘I am not insulting brahmanas. They are powerful and are the equals of the gods. O brahmana! O unblemished one! Please pardon my transgression. I know the energy of immensely fortunate and wise
brahmanas. Through their anger, they made the waters of the ocean salty and undrinkable.147 I know of sages who

are blazing ascetics and in control of their souls. The ﬁre of their anger has still not been paciﬁed in Dandaka.148
Because he oppressed brahmanas, the evil-minded cruel and great asura Vatapi was digested by the rishi
Agastya.149 I have heard a lot about the inﬂuence of those who know the brahman. O brahmana! Their anger is
extremely great. But so are the favours of those great-souled ones. O brahmana! O unblemished one! You should
pardon this transgression of mine. O brahmana! The dharma that I must serve my husband is a pleasant one for me.
Among all the gods, my husband is the supreme god. O supreme among brahmanas! I must particularly serve that
dharma. O brahmana! Observe the fruits of my serving my husband. It is known to me that you burnt down a crane
through your anger. O supreme among brahmanas! But anger is the enemy that resides in the bodies of men. The
gods know him to be a brahmana who has discarded the delusion of anger, and he who speaks the truth and satisﬁes his preceptor. The gods know him to be a brahmana, who does not harm even when he has been harmed. The
gods know him to be a brahmana, who is in control of his senses, is devoted to dharma, is always engaged in
studying, is pure and is in control of desire and anger. He who looks upon the world as his own self is intelligent
and is learned in dharma. The gods know him to be a brahmana, who is devoted to all forms of dharma, who studies and teaches, who sacriﬁces and is a priest at the sacriﬁces of others. The gods know him to be a brahmana, who
donates according to his capacity. The supreme among brahmanas who studies the Vedas is known as a brahmachari. He who studies without being distracted is known by the gods to be a brahmana. What ensures the welfare of brahmanas has been recounted—always speaking the truth and mentally not rejoicing in falsehood. O
supreme among brahmanas! The eternal wealth of brahmanas is in studying, control of passions and restraint of the
senses. Those who know dharma say that truth and uprightness are the supreme dharma. While eternal dharma is
difﬁcult to fathom, it is based on truth. The injunctions of the elders are that the proof of dharma is in the
shrutis.150 O supreme among brahmanas! It is evident that dharma can be seen in many ways and that it is subtle.
You are learned in dharma. You are devoted to studying and are pure. O illustrious one! In my view you do not
know the true meaning of dharma. There is a hunter who lives in Mithila. He serves his father and his mother, he is
truthful and is in control of his senses. He will tell you about dharma. O fortunate one! O supreme among brahmanas! If you desire, go there. O unblemished one! Please pardon everything that I may have spoken in excess. All
the ones who are learned in dharma say that women must not be injured.’
‘“The brahmana replied, ‘O fortunate one! O beautiful one! I am pleased with you and my anger has gone. The
reprimands uttered by you have been extremely beneﬁcial for me. O beautiful one! May you live in peace. I am
leaving to improve myself.’”
‘Markandeya said, “O supreme among men! Having obtained her permission, the brahmana Koushika censured
himself and left for his own dwelling.”’
495(198)

‘Markandeya said, “The brahmana thought about the extraordinary matter the woman had speciﬁcally told him. He
censured himself and his appearance became that of a guilty one. Then, thinking about the subtle course of dharma, he said, ‘I must have devotion. I must go to Mithila. She said that a hunter who knew dharma, one who had
perfected his soul, dwelt there. I should go there today, and ask the one who is rich in austerities about dharma.’
Thus thinking in his mind, he showed faith in the lady’s words, made certain by the pure one’s words about dharma and her knowledge about the death of the crane. Filled with curiosity, he left for Mithila. He passed through
many forests, villages and cities and arrived in Mithila, protected well by Janaka.151 It was a holy city, rich in sacriﬁces and festivals. It was full of religious institutions.152 It was adorned with turrets, palaces, houses and walls.
It also had many chariots. He entered the beautiful city. There were many large roads, laid out well, lined with
many wares. It was crowded with great numbers of horses, chariots, elephants and carts. The masses of people
were happy and well fed and it was always full of festivities. As he passed, the brahmana saw many other things
there. He asked about the virtuous hunter and was told about him by brahmanas. He went there and saw the ascetic
seated in the midst of a slaughterhouse. He was selling the meat of deer and buffaloes. It was crowded with a large
number of buyers and the brahmana waited.

‘“On getting to know that a brahmana had arrived, he153 suddenly arose and went to where the brahmana was
standing alone. The hunter said, ‘O illustrious one! O supreme among brahmanas! I salute you. Welcome. O fortunate one! I am only a hunter. Tell me what I can do for you. I know everything about the devoted wife telling you
to go to Mithila. I know why you have come here.’ On hearing his words, the brahmana was extremely surprised.
The brahmana thought that this was the second wonder. The hunter told the brahmana, ‘O illustrious one! O unblemished one! This is not an appropriate place for you. If it pleases you, let us go home.’ The brahmana was extremely happy at these words. Making the brahmana precede him, he went to his house. On entering the house, he
gave him a beautiful seat. The supreme among brahmanas accepted the water offered for washing the feet and the
mouth. Once he was comfortably seated, he spoke these words to the hunter. ‘It seems to me that a task like this is
not appropriate for you. O son!154 I am extremely sorry that you have to perform this terrible task.’
‘“The hunter replied, ‘This is the occupation of my family and it has come down to me from my father and my
grandfather. O brahmana! Do not be angry that I am engaged in this dharma. The creator has earlier decided that
this should be my task and I am performing it. O supreme among brahmanas! I take care of my superiors and I
serve my elders. I speak the truth. I do not envy. I donate according to my capacity. I live on what is left after offering to the gods, the guests and the servants. I do not speak ill of anything. Nor am I contemptuous of someone
more powerful. O supreme among brahmanas! The deeds performed earlier, always follow the actor. In this world,
the means of livelihood are agriculture, animal husbandry and trade. Governance and the three forms of knowledge
are also in this world.155 It has been said that servitude is for shudras, agriculture for vaishyas and ﬁghting for
kshatriyas. Brahmanas must always be engaged in brahmacharya, austerities, incantations and truth. A king must
govern, in accordance with dharma, subjects who are engaged in their own tasks. He must redeploy those who are
engaged in the wrong tasks into their own tasks. The king is the lord and he must always be feared by the subjects.
Like deer restrained with arrows, he must kill those who are engaged in the wrong tasks. O brahmana rishi! O
supreme among brahmanas! Under Janaka, there is no one who performs the wrong task. All the four varnas are
engaged in their own tasks. King Janaka is such that even if his son were to be evil, he would chastise him with
punishment. But he does not cause suffering to those who are righteous. Using spies well, the king sees that there
is dharma everywhere. O supreme among brahmanas! Prosperity, the kingdom and punishment belong to the kshatriyas. Through observing their own dharma, kings can wish for great prosperity. O brahmana! I sell boars and buffaloes that have been killed by others. O brahmana rishi! I do not kill them myself, but sell them afterwards. I do
not eat meat. I lie with my wife in her season. O brahmana! I fast during the day and eat at night. A person who is
born with ill conduct may become one with good conduct. Even if he is born as a killer of animals, he may turn out
to be a follower of dharma. The deviations of kings can cause great decay in dharma. Then adharma increases and
subjects decay. Those who are stunted, dwarfs, hunchbacked ones, those with large heads, eunuchs, blind and deaf
ones and those with elongated nipples are born then. Because of the adharma practised by kings, subjects always
endure hardships. But King Janaka is one who looks at subjects with the eyes of dharma. He favours the subjects
who are always devoted to their own dharma. As for me, whether men praise me or whether they censure me, I always satisfy them with tasks that are well performed. Kings who live their lives and ﬁnd satisfaction in their own
dharma and do not depend on others for a livelihood, are skilled and always ascend. Always donating food according to one’s ability, forbearance, eternal devotion to dharma, reverence towards those who deserve it, constant
compassion towards all beings and detachment are qualities that distinguish a man on earth. One should give up
falsehood and perform good deeds, even if they are not solicited. One should not discard dharma out of desire,
rashness or hatred. One should not rejoice excessively in good fortune, or be miserable in calamities. One should
not be overpowered with difﬁculties and give up dharma. If one commits a reprehensible act, one should not commit it again. One should engage one’s soul in what ensures welfare. Evil should not be countered with evil, one
should always act out of virtue. The evil one who wishes to commit an evil act kills himself. Deceitful and wicked
acts are not righteous. Those who think there is dharma in this, those who laugh at purity and those who are disrespectful towards dharma, there is no doubt that they will be destroyed. An evil one is swollen, like a bag full of air.
But like the sun shows up forms, his soul shows him up. The fool may praise himself, but cannot ﬂourish in this
world. But even if he is not clean, a learned one’s radiance shines. He does not speak ill of others. Nor does he
praise himself. Those who have qualities don’t obviously shine in this world. One who is tormented by his evil acts

is freed from those sins. If he avers that he will not commit it again, he is freed from the second sin. O foremost
among supreme brahmanas! One can also be freed from the sin through deeds. O brahmana! This is what can be
seen in the shrutis about dharma. One who has ignorantly committed a sin earlier, can later destroy it by devotion
to dharma. O brahmana! Even if sins have been committed out of ignorance, dharma can absolve men. After committing a sin, one should think that one wasn’t the man who committed it. He should be faithful and do what is
proper. He should be devoted and without hatred. This is how righteous ones cover the holes in their garments. After committing a sin, a man can still achieve that which is good. He can be freed from all sins, like the moon from
the clouds. Like the sun rises and dispels the earlier darkness, establishment in that which is good ensures freedom
from all sin. O supreme among brahmanas! Know that avarice is the root of all sin. Men who are not too wise, are
goaded by greed and resort to sin. Just as wells are covered by grass, evil ones cloak themselves under dharma.
Those who have self-control, those whose speech is pure, those who resort to dharma and those who exhibit good
conduct, it is known that all of these are difﬁcult to ﬁnd.’”
‘Markandeya said, “Then the immensely wise brahmana asked the virtuous hunter, ‘O best of men! How will I
know righteous conduct? O immensely intelligent hunter! Tell me this exactly.’
‘“The hunter replied, ‘O best among brahmanas! Sacriﬁces, donations, austerities, study of the Vedas and truthfulness—these are the ﬁve sacred things that always characterize good conduct. Having controlled desire and
anger, having discarded arrogance, greed and deceit, those who are satisﬁed with dharma are righteous and are
praised by the righteous. Those who perform sacriﬁces and are engaged in studying will never lack a means of
livelihood. They observe good conduct and this is the second characteristic of those who are righteous. O brahmana! Serving seniors, truthfulness, lack of anger and generosity—these four are always present in those who are
righteous. One can always obtain success by ﬁxing one’s mind on good conduct. This can be obtained by practising these, and not through any other means. The Vedas are established in truth. Truth is established in self-control.
Self-control is established in detachment. These always constitute righteous conduct. Men with deluded intelligence hate dharma. They follow a path that should not be traversed and descend into misery. Those who are good,
well controlled, devoted to the shrutis and detachment, climb the path of dharma and are always devoted to truth
and dharma. They control the supreme intelligence. These are people who follow virtuous conduct. They are obedient to their preceptors. They are knowledgeable and are established in the objective of dharma. Avoid atheists.
They transgress limits. They are cruel and are established in evil intelligence. Seek knowledge and worship those
who follow dharma. Using the boat of steadfastness, one can cross the river that has the ﬁve senses as its waters
and is infested with the crocodiles of desire and avarice, and overcome birth. Dharma is gradually accumulated,
through practising the great intelligence of yoga. It adorns righteous conduct, like a good colour on a white garment. Non-violence and truthfulness in speech ensure the greatest welfare for all beings. Non-violence is supreme
dharma and it is established in truth. Deeds ﬂourish when inclinations are established in truth. Truth is supreme
and is cherished by those who have righteous conduct. Dharma is the conduct of the righteous and the righteous
are characterized by their conduct. Every being is bound by its own nature, whatever it might be. The evil-minded
one has no control over himself and has the sins of anger, desire and so on. It has been said that dharma is that
which has been begun with justice. The virtuous have instructed that evil conduct constitutes sin. Those who are
not prone to anger, those who do not hate, those who are not vain, those who are not selﬁsh and those who are simple and serene are characterized by good conduct. Those who have grown old with the three Vedas are pure and
intelligent and have conduct. Those who serve their preceptors and have self-control possess good conduct. It is a
difﬁcult task to achieve the deeds of those great ones. Through their own good deeds, they destroy any evil that
they may have done. That good conduct is extraordinary, ancient, eternal and ﬁxed. This is dharma. Learned ones
who see dharma in this way, go to heaven. They are theists. They are humble. They are people who honour brahmanas. They conduct themselves in accordance with the rituals of the shrutis and go to heaven. The dharma stated
in the Vedas is supreme. The Dharmashastras are the second.156 Virtuous conduct of righteous ones is another.
These are the three notions of dharma. The characteristics of good conduct are accomplishing knowledge, bathing
in tirthas, forbearance, truthfulness, simplicity and purity. Those who are compassionate towards all beings and always practise non-violence and never utter harsh words are loved by the brahmanas. Those who are familiar with
the fruits of good and evil deeds are good and are honoured by those who are good. They are just, have all the

qualities and desire the welfare of all the worlds. These virtuous ones attain sacred heaven. They are ﬁrmly established in the path of the righteous. Those who give, those who share and those who are compassionate towards the
distressed are righteous and are honoured by the righteous. They are worshipped by everyone. They have the
knowledge of the shrutis. They are ascetics. Those who show virtue in giving obtain happiness in this world and
prosperity in the next. Even if their wives and servants suffer, righteous ones give in excess, when virtuous ones
arrive. While their eyes are on their livelihood, they have dharma in their souls. Such virtuous ones prosper for an
eternal period. Non-violence, truthfulness in speech, mildness, sincerity, the absence of enmity, humility, modesty,
forbearance, self-control, serenity, wisdom, fortitude, compassion towards all beings and the absence of desire and
hatred characterize the righteous, and they are honoured by the world. It is said that three things single out the
supreme vows of the righteous—non-injury, generosity and truthfulness in every speech. The virtuous are those
who are compassionate towards everything. They feel pity. They obtain the greatest satisfaction and traverse the
supreme path of dharma. Those great-souled ones have good conduct and have ﬁrmly established themselves in
dharma. They have no envy. They pardon. They are serene. They are satisﬁed. They speak pleasantly. They have
discarded desire and anger. They follow the conduct of the righteous. Their deeds are in accordance with the
shrutis. They follow the supreme path of the virtuous. They follow good conduct and are always devoted to dharma, never wavering. They ascend to the palace of wisdom and see the great masses who are deluded. O supreme
among brahmanas! They observe the world in all its different pursuits, the extremely good deeds, as well as the
evil ones. O foremost among the best of brahmanas! This is the entire account, as I have learnt it and as I have
heard it, about the foremost qualities and conduct of the righteous. O brahmana! O bull among brahmanas!’”’

496(199)

‘Markandeya said, “O Yudhishthira! Thus did the hunter who knew about dharma speak to the brahmana.157
‘“‘There is no doubt that the deeds that I perform are terrible. O brahmana! But destiny is powerful. And it is
impossible to overcome deeds committed earlier. The sins committed earlier are the taints of karma.158 O brahmana! I have endeavoured to kill this sin. When destiny has already killed something earlier, the killer is only the
instrument. O supreme among brahmanas! We are only instruments of our karma. O brahmana! When they are
killed and their meat sold, it is only their dharma that they should be used and eaten, so as to serve the gods, the
guests, the servants and the ancestors. According to the shrutis, herbs, creepers, animals, deer and birds are the decreed food for all beings. O supreme among brahmanas! The compassionate King Shibi Ushinara obtained a heaven that is difﬁcult to attain by offering his own ﬂesh.159 O brahmana! Earlier, in King Rantideva’s great kitchen,
two thousand animals were slaughtered every day.160 Rantideva gave food with meat every day. O supreme
among brahmanas! His fame is unmatched. He always killed animals at chaturmasya.161 It has been said in the
shrutis that the ﬁre desires meat. O brahmana! A brahmana always kills animals at sacriﬁces. They are puriﬁed
through mantras and we have heard that they go to heaven. O brahmana! O supreme among brahmanas! If the ﬁre
had not desired meat earlier, who would have eaten it now? Even now, sages have articulated rules on the eating of
meat. “He who always eats after offering to the gods and the ancestors, in accordance with the rules and with faith,
no sin attaches to him from the act of eating.” It has been said in the shrutis that such a person is the equal of one
who does not eat meat. A brahmana who has intercourse with his wife during her season is the equal of a brahmachari. The rules that differentiate truth from falsehood are recited even now. O brahmana! In earlier times, King
Soudasa ate men.162 He had been overtaken by a terrible curse. What do you think of that? O supreme among
brahmanas! I cannot give up my own dharma. Knowing that this is due to my earlier deeds, I perform this task for
my livelihood. O brahmana! It is considered to be adharma to give up one’s own dharma. It is certainly dharma to
adhere to one’s own dharma. Deeds committed earlier never leave a being. The creator’s ordinances foresaw the
determination of these different forms of karma. It is seen that a being who is engaged in a cruel task has to think
of performing good deeds so that he can be freed from its inﬂuence. There are different ways of freeing oneself
from terrible karma—such as donations, truthfulness in speech, the service of superiors and the worship of brahmanas. I have always devoted myself to this dharma. O supreme among brahmanas! I should refrain from pride
and from speaking too much. Agriculture is known to be a virtuous occupation. But it has been said that there is
great violence in this. Ploughing kills many beings that lie inside the ground and many other hundreds of beings.
What is your view on this? O supreme among brahmanas! Vrihi163 and other seeds of rice are all living organisms.
What is your view on this? O brahmana! Man hunts, kills and eats animals. They also cut trees and herbs. O brahmana! There are many living beings in trees and fruit. There are many in water too. What is your view on this? O
brahmana! Everything is full of life and living beings. Fish eat ﬁsh. What is your view on this? O supreme among
brahmanas! Beings live on other beings. What is your view on this? O brahmana! Through the mere act of walking, men trample with their feet many beings that resort to the ground. What is your view on this? Even wise and
learned ones kill many beings when they are seated or asleep. What is your view on this? The entire earth and the
sky are full of living beings. One causes injury to them unknowingly. What is your view on this? Those men of
earlier times wondered and spoke about non-violence. O supreme among brahmanas! But in this world, who does
not injure living beings? After reﬂecting a lot on this, there is no one who does not cause violence. O supreme
among brahmanas! Even ascetics who are devoted to non-violence cause violence, though their efforts make it
less. It can be seen that there are men who have great qualities and who are born in noble lineages. They may perform extremely terrible deeds. But they are not ashamed. Well-wishers do not praise well-wishers. Evil-wishers do
not praise evil-wishers. Men who are righteous do not praise other righteous ones. Relatives do not praise relatives,
even if they are prosperous. Foolish ones, thinking themselves to be learned, criticize preceptors. O supreme
among brahmanas! There are many things in this world that can be seen to be contrary. Is this dharma or is it adharma? What is your view on this? Many things can be said about the dharma or adharma of our deeds. But he
who adheres to his own dharma attains great fame.’”’

497(200)

‘Markandeya said, “O Yudhishthira! The skilled hunter, devoted to dharma, then again spoke to the brahmana
rishi, supreme among those who uphold all forms of dharma.164
‘“‘The course of dharma is subtle. It has many branches and is inﬁnite. And the old ones have instructed that the
proof is what is stated in the shrutis. When life is at risk or at the time of marriage, speaking a falsehood is permitted. Sometimes, falsehood becomes truth and truth becomes falsehood. Whatever ensures the welfare of beings is
held to be the truth. Acting in a contrary way ensures adharma. Behold the subtlety of dharma. O excellent one!
Whether a man performs good deeds or evil ones, there is no doubt that he certainly reaps the fruits. One who has
no learning is ignorant of the sins of his acts. On confronting a calamity, he blames the gods gravely. O supreme
among brahmanas! Foolish, deceitful and ﬁckle ones do not possess the wisdom, the good conduct or the manliness to save themselves when their happiness or unhappiness happens to be reversed. One will obtain whatever
one desires, as long as the fruits of one’s deeds are not dependent on anything else. Controlled, skilled and intelligent men can be seen to be obstructed and unsuccessful in all their efforts. But those who are always ready to injure other beings and are ready to deceive the world, always lead a life of happiness. There are those who attain
prosperity without even trying. There are those who endeavour a lot and obtain nothing. Wretched ones worship
the gods and perform austerities to obtain a son. They remain in the womb for ten months and are born, but turn
out to be a stain on the lineage. Others enjoy the riches, grain and objects of pleasure accumulated in immense
quantities by their fathers and obtained through auspicious means. There is no doubt that human disease is the result of earlier deeds, men are like small animals tied up by the hunter. O brahmana! Just as hunters hunt deer, competent physicians who have skilfully collected medicines can treat them. Those who can have good food are then
afﬂicted by evils of indigestion. O supreme among those who uphold dharma! Behold, one is not able to eat. O
supreme among brahmanas! There are many others with strong arms who suffer because they can ﬁnd food with
great difﬁculty. Thus the world is ﬂooded with weeping, delusion and sorrow, helplessness, tossed and repeatedly
washed away through powerful currents. If everything depended on a person, no one would live in misery and all
objects of desire would be attained. No unpleasantness would be seen. Everyone wants to surpass others and endeavours as much as one can. But it doesn’t happen that way. There are many who are seen to be born under the
same stars and signs, but a great divergence is seen in the fruits of their deeds. O excellent one! O brahmana! No
one can himself determine his fate. The deeds performed earlier are seen to lead to results here. O brahmana! It has
been said in the shrutis that the soul is certainly eternal, but the bodies of all living beings perish in this world.
Therefore, when the body dies, only the body is destroyed. Fettered by the bonds of deeds, the soul goes
elsewhere.’
‘“The brahmana asked, ‘O supreme among those who uphold dharma! O supreme among those who are eloquent! In what way is the soul eternal? I wish to learn this in detail.’
‘“The hunter said, ‘The soul does not die when the body perishes. Only the foolish ones aver that it perishes.
The soul moves on to another body. When the body dies, the form changes. No one except the actor obtains the
fruits of deeds and shares in the happiness or unhappiness. Whatever deeds one may have done, those fruits remain
and are not destroyed. Those who were unholy in conduct can become pure. The best of men can become sinners.
A man is always pursued by his deeds. Determined by these, he is born again.’
‘“The brahmana asked, ‘O excellent one! How is he formed in the womb? How does he become good or evil?
How are the good born good? How does that movement occur?’
‘“The hunter replied, ‘It is seen that the act of conception is linked to karma. O supreme among brahmanas! I
will describe it to you swiftly and brieﬂy. One is born again with the past accumulation, the good in good wombs
and the evil in evil wombs. Through good deeds one becomes a god. And through mixed ones, a human. Through
evil deeds, one descends below.165 It is because of the sins performed by him earlier that a man is cooked in this
life and is always afﬂicted by birth, old age and death. Tied by the bonds of earlier karma, a being wanders through
thousands of inferior births and even goes to hell. Through the karma of one’s own deeds, a being dies and suffers.
To counteract that earlier misery, it is born in an unholy womb. Then it again accumulates a large amount of new
karma. It is cooked again, like a diseased person who has eaten unwholesome food. Although it suffers many difﬁculties, it considers that unhappiness to be tinged with happiness. Therefore, the bonds are not loosened and a new

karma arises again. Encircled by many miseries, it circles around the world. By casting off those bonds of deeds
and by performing pure deeds, one can obtain the worlds of righteous ones and go to where there is no sorrow. The
sinful one who performs evil deeds never goes to where there is an end to sin. Therefore, one should perform good
deeds and abhor those that are evil. A man who is grateful and does not suffer from malice and does that which ensures welfare, obtains happiness, dharma, artha and heaven. Those who are clean, self-controlled, restrained, collected and wise, enjoy an unmatched existence in this world and the next. One must always follow dharma. One
must always act in accordance with what is good. O brahmana! One must adopt a conduct that does not cause difﬁculties to others. There are those who are learned in the sacred texts. They are virtuous and knowledgeable about
the sacred texts. In this world, one must follow one’s own dharma. Without getting mixed up, that is the task one
should perform. One who is wise ﬁnds pleasure in dharma. He lives his life on the basis of dharma. O supreme
among brahmanas! When he is rich in dharma, he appreciates its qualities and waters the roots. The one with dharma in his soul acts thus and his mind becomes serene. He is satisﬁed with his friends. He ﬁnds happiness here, and
in the hereafter. O excellent one! He obtains sound, touch, form and fragrance, as he wishes. He attains lordship.
These are known to be the fruits of dharma. O great brahmana! But having obtained the fruits of dharma, one may
not be satisﬁed. One who is dissatisﬁed looks at this dissatisfaction with the insight of knowledge. With the insight
of wisdom, a man does not see any sin in this. If he so desires, without discarding dharma, he frees himself. Observing that the world is naturally subject to decay, he renounces everything and strives for salvation, using the
right means and not the wrong ones. He thus avoids all evil deeds and accepts the detachment. He is devoted to
dharma and obtains supreme salvation. Austerities are the best course for beings and its root is tranquility and selfcontrol. Through this, one can obtain everything that the mind desires. O supreme among brahmanas! Through restraining the senses, truthfulness and self-control, one obtains the supreme abode of the brahman.’
‘“The brahmana asked, ‘O one who is rigid in his vows! What are these faculties that are called the senses? How
can they be controlled and what are the fruits of this control? O foremost among those who uphold dharma! What
are the fruits obtained from this? O best among those who follow dharma! I wish to know these details about dharma.’”’
498(201)

‘Markandeya said, “O Yudhishthira! O lord of men! At these words of the brahmana, the hunter who knew about
dharma replied to the brahmana. Listen.”
‘“The hunter said, ‘O supreme among brahmanas! The mind ﬁrst operates in men and leads to perception. Because of this, they serve desire and anger. For that purpose, they undertake great endeavours. They form the habit
of serving the desires of beauty and smell. Then comes attachment and from this follows hatred. Avarice comes
after that, followed by delusion. When they are overcome by avarice and battered by attachment and hatred, dharma is not generated in the intelligence. Instead, there is pretence about following dharma. Dharma is practised in
deceit. One ﬁnds pleasure in acquiring artha through deceit. O supreme among brahmanas! One becomes successful in obtaining riches through deceit. The mind ﬁnds pleasure in this and evil becomes attractive. O supreme
among brahmanas! Well-wishers and learned ones urge for restraint. But one is ready with replies from the shrutis
and speaks of what is sanctioned by the shrutis. However, because of attachment, three sins of adharma are committed. There is sin in thought, speech and deed. Addicted to adharma, all the good qualities are destroyed. Only
those who are similar in conduct remain friends with such an evil-acting one. As a consequence, unhappiness is
reaped in this world and there is destruction in the next. All evil-souled ones are like this. Now hear about the
gains from dharma. Through one’s wisdom, one can foresee the sins. One is skilful in differentiating happiness
from unhappiness and consorts with righteous ones. By practising virtuous deeds, one’s intelligence turns to
dharma.’
‘“The brahmana said, ‘You have truthfully described dharma. There is no one else who can speak about it in this
way. It is my view that you are an extremely great rishi and your power is divine.’
‘“The hunter replied, ‘The immensely fortunate brahmanas are always rendered offerings ﬁrst, together with the
ancestors. In this world, with all one’s soul, a learned one does that which is pleasing to them. O supreme among
brahmanas! I will tell you what brings pleasure to them. After bowing in obeisance to brahmanas, I will tell you

about the knowledge of brahmanas. Listen to me. O brahmana! This entire universe, everything in this universe
and everything that cannot be vanquished and the great elements have the brahman in the soul. There is nothing
beyond that. The great elements are the sky, the wind, the ﬁre, the water and the earth. Sound, touch, shape, taste
and smell are their properties. These properties have all the sub-properties, related to one another. In due order, all
the properties have a hierarchy consisting of the three qualities. It is said that the sixth property is consciousness,
also called the mind. The seventh is intelligence and pride follows that. There are ﬁve senses. There is sattva, rajas
and tamas.166 These are the seventeen that constitute what is not manifest.167 The manifest and the unmanifest
are concealed well within the organs of sense. Including the manifest and the unmanifest, there are twenty-four
traits.168 I have told you everything. What else do you wish to hear?’”’
499(202)

‘Markandeya said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is what the hunter who knew about dharma said and
after hearing this, the brahmana again asked about things that are pleasant to the mind. ‘O supreme among those
who uphold dharma! It is said that there are ﬁve great elements. Please tell me about the exact qualities of these
ﬁve.’
‘“The hunter answered, ‘The earth, the air, the ﬁre, the water and the sky have separate qualities and I will tell
you everything about their qualities. O brahmana! The earth has ﬁve qualities, the water has four qualities, the ﬁre
has three qualities and the air and the sky together have three qualities. Sound, touch, form, taste and smell—these
are the ﬁve qualities of the earth, which has more qualities than the others. O supreme among brahmanas! O brahmana! O one who is rigid in his vows! Sound, touch, form and taste have been said to be the qualities of the water.
Sound, touch and form are the three qualities of the ﬁre. Sound and touch are the two properties of the air. The sky
only has sound. O brahmana! Together, these ﬁfteen qualities exist in the ﬁve elements and they are in all the beings on whom the worlds are established. O brahmana! They do not stand in opposition to one another, they exist
as a combination. But when mobile and immobile objects become unbalanced, then, over a period of time, the soul
moves from one body to another. In due order, they are destroyed. They are created again, in sequence. The ﬁve
elements can be seen in everything, mobile and immobile, that this entire universe is encompassed by. Whatever is
created by the senses is known as the manifest. Whatever cannot be grasped by the senses bears the mark of the
unmanifest. Sound and the others grasp an embodied body and make him subjugate to the senses. But if he can
transcend this, he can see the world extended in his soul and his soul extended in the world. He is then capable of
seeing the higher and the lower, and though still attached, can see all beings. He always sees all the elements in all
their states. He is united with the brahman and is never attached to that which is unholy. Delusion that is enveloped
in difﬁculties is overcome and the root of this is knowledge of the soul. The world is illuminated with intelligence
and the road of knowledge can be seen. The intelligent ones have said that the illustrious one is without a beginning and without an end. He creates himself and does not decay. He is without compare and without manifestation.
O brahmana! Everything that you have asked me has its base in austerities. Everything about heaven and hell is
based on our senses. When restrained, they lead to heaven. When uncontrolled, they lead to hell. This subjugation
of the senses is the key to yoga. This is the root of austerities. It is also the root of hell. By indulging in the senses,
there is no doubt that one reaps sin. But by bringing them under control, one can attain salvation. If one can control
these six169 in one’s soul, one never suffers a decline and one is not visited by sin or calamity. One has then conquered one’s senses. It has been seen that a man’s body is like a chariot. The senses are like horses and the soul
controls them. When these good horses are skilfully controlled, one is self-controlled and happy, like a steady
charioteer. When the six senses are always controlled in the soul, one is like a supreme and steady charioteer,
wielding the reins in one’s hand. When the senses are uncontrolled like horses on a road, the charioteer must
steadily rein them in and it is certain that victory will be achieved. But if the mind is overpowered by these senses
running wild, one loses one’s intelligence, like a boat tossed on water by the wind. O brahmana! But one who perseveres steadily on these six and is not deluded about outcomes and fruit, concentrating on the insight of learning,
reaps the fruits that are the outcome of his meditation.’”’
500(203)

‘Markandeya said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The hunter who knew about dharma explained these subtle matters. Extremely attentively, the brahmana again asked him about a subtle matter. The brahmana said, ‘Now
tell me exactly about the qualities of sattva, rajas and tamas. I am asking you, tell me exactly about their
characteristics.’
‘“The hunter replied, ‘Yes, I will tell you what you have asked me. Because you have asked, I will tell you exactly about the characteristics of these qualities. Tamas is characterized by ignorance, while rajas motivates to action. It is said that sattva is the greatest because of its immense powers of illumination. One who is extremely ignorant, foolish, prone to dreaming, insensible, ugly, dark, prone to anger and lazy, is under the inﬂuence of tamas. O
brahmana rishi! An excellent man who is ready in action and speech, affectionate, without enmity, industrious,
steady and proud is under the inﬂuence of rajas. A man with illumination, persevering, without attachment and
without enmity, without anger, wise and self-controlled, is under the inﬂuence of sattva. When one with the illumination of sattva suffers from the difﬁculties of the world, when one has learnt everything that has to be learnt, one
hates the ways of the world. Then a form of detachment makes itself felt. Pride becomes milder and uprightness
becomes stronger. Then all the conﬂicts170 are paciﬁed. Any restraint in anything then becomes unnecessary. O
brahmana! One may be born as a shudra. But if he is established in his good qualities, he will become a vaishya,
and even a kshatriya. Similarly, one who follows worthy conduct171 can become a brahmana. Thus, I have told
you everything about the qualities. What else do you wish to hear?’
‘“The brahmana asked, ‘What happens to the ﬁre in the body when it is combined with the elements of the
earth? Depending on where it is, how does the wind motivate?’”
‘Markandeya said, “O Yudhishthira! When the brahmana addressed this question to the hunter, the hunter
replied to the great-souled brahmana.
‘“The hunter answered, ‘The ﬁre resides in the head and protects the body. The ﬁre is in the head and in
prana172 and motivates all action. Everything in the past, the present and the future is based on prana. It is the
best that exists in beings and we worship this radiance of the brahman. It is the life force of all beings. It is the
eternal being. It is the mind. It is intelligence. It is the ego. It is the seat of all beings. While residing in this way,
everything is protected through prana. Later it goes in different directions, supported by samana. There is a ﬁre in
the bladder and the anus and this is known as apana. It bears the excrement and urine. Learned ones who know
about the soul say that the three elements of endeavour, action and power are controlled by udana. It has been said
that the breath that exists in every human joint is known as vyana. The ﬁre that is there in the elements of the body
is distributed by these winds. It triggers the juices, the elements and the humours and makes them circulate.
Through the combination of the pranas, a ﬁre is created. This is the digestive ﬁre, which enables beings to digest
food. Prana and vyana are placed between apana and udana and the ﬁre resulting from this leads to the digestion. It
extends itself up to the anus and bears the urine and the excrement. It has the three elements of endeavour, action
and power and ones who are knowledgeable about the body know this by the name of udana. When the ﬁre is
present in all the joints of the human body, it is known by the name of vyana. The internal heat is distributed and
supported by these different winds and they transform the juices, the constituents and the humours. Through the
combination of prana and the other winds, a reaction is created. This gives rise to an internal heat in the body and
facilitates digestion. Prana and vyana are established between apana and udana. The ﬁre generated from this mingling facilitates digestion.173 This extends up to the anus and is near the anus. The streams created from this are
all the pranas in a body. Through the force of the ﬁre, prana strikes at the root of the anus and recoiling, the ﬁre ascends upwards again. The area above the navel is the region of undigested food. All the pranas are located at the
centre of the navel in the body. Ten arteries radiate from the heart, upwards, downwards and sideways, and driven
by the pranas, bear the essence of food. This is the path that practitioners of yoga traverse for the supreme objective. They are seated, having conquered difﬁculties. They are patient and their souls reside in their heads. In this
way, prana and apana are established in all beings. The different components of a body go through eleven transformations.174 Know that though a being is always embodied, it is subject to its earlier deeds. Know that the ﬁre that
is always inside is like the ﬁre puriﬁed in a pan and is the atman.175 It is always subject to yoga. Know that the
god is inside it, like a drop inside a lotus. Know that he is always the kshetrajna and can be known through

yoga.176 Know that sattva, rajas and tamas are the attributes of life. Know that these qualities are an attribute of
life and that the atman is in the paramatman. It is said that consciousness is the quality of life. It is the actor, and
action marks everything. Those who know about the kshetra say that the supreme one created the seven worlds.177
In this way, the eternal being is not manifest in all beings. It can be seen by those who are learned and possess the
subtle knowledge of insight. One can purify one’s heart and destroy the fruits of good and evil deeds. Through establishing one’s soul in serenity, one can attain inﬁnite bliss. The signs of serenity are that one sleeps happily and
contentedly, like the radiance of a lamp that has been trimmed by one who is skilled in handling lamps. One should
control one’s mind, late in the evening and at night. After eating lightly, with a puriﬁed soul, one sees the supreme
soul in one’s own self. This is like seeing the light of a lamp with the lamp of one’s mind. One who sees the
supreme soul, beyond the human soul, such a person is liberated. Avarice and anger must be controlled through all
means. This is the purifying ritual for austerities and is the means of crossing over. One must always protect austerities from anger. One must protect one’s riches from envy, one’s learning from vanity and insults and one’s soul
from distraction. Mildness is the greatest dharma. Forgiveness is the greatest strength. Knowledge of the self is the
supreme knowledge. Truthfulness is the supreme vow. True speech is superior. The knowledge of truth ensures
welfare. But the welfare of all beings is known as the supreme truth. One whose acts are always performed without
being tied down by self-interest, one who has sacriﬁced everything, is wise and is one who has renounced. This is
yoga with the brahman, something that cannot be taught or disturbed by a preceptor. This renunciation is known as
yoga. There must not be violence to any being. One must traverse the path of friendliness. In this present life, one
must never practise enmity. Self-negation, extreme satisfaction, selﬂessness and steadfastness lead to the supreme
knowledge. The knowledge of the self is the supreme learning. One should give up one’s possessions. One should
use one’s intelligence to be steady in one’s vows. One then attains a ﬁrm place that is without sorrow, in this world
and the next. The self-controlled sage who has restrained his mind, and is always engaged in austerities, will be
unvanquished if he gives up the desire to win and becomes detached from attachments. Those that are regarded as
qualities are no longer qualities in him. He then continuously embarks on a single task. O brahmana! He is only
engaged in the task of achieving supreme bliss. Such a man renounces both happiness and unhappiness. He transcends all attachment and achieves the brahman. O supreme among brahmanas! I have brieﬂy told you everything
that I have heard, exactly as I have heard it. What else do you desire to hear?’”’
501(204)

‘Markandeya said, “O Yudhishthira! When all this about the dharma of salvation had been told to the brahmana, he
was extremely pleased. He spoke to the hunter who knew about dharma. ‘You have told me everything, with all the
arguments. It seems that there is nothing about dharma that you do not know.’
‘“The hunter replied, ‘O supreme among brahmanas! With your own eyes, behold my dharma. O bull among
brahmanas! It is through this that I have achieved success. O illustrious one! Arise and swiftly enter my house. O
one learned in dharma! You should see my mother and my father.’”
‘Markandeya said, “At these words, he178 entered and saw an extremely beautiful house. It was lovely and
whitewashed and was divided into four parts. It was like a house of the gods and was worshipped by the gods. It
had excellent seats and beds and was fragrant with perfumes. After having eaten, his adored parents were comfortably seated on excellent seats. They were dressed in white. On seeing them, the hunter who knew about dharma
prostrated himself, with his head at their feet. The old ones said, ‘O one who is learned about dharma! Arise. Arise.
May dharma always protect you. We are extremely pleased with your purity. May you have a long life. O son! You
have always been a good son. You have worshipped us for a long time. You have not acknowledged a god even
among the gods themselves. Through self-control, you have attained the self-control of the brahmanas. O son!
Your fathers, grandfathers and great grandfathers have always been satisﬁed with you, because of your self-control
and your worshipping of us. In thought, deed and words, you have never deviated from servitude. It seems to us
that you have no other thought in your mind. O son! Like Jamadagni’s son Rama,179 you have done everything to
serve your aged parents. Indeed, you have done more.’ Then the hunter who knew about dharma introduced the
brahmana to them and they welcomed the brahmana with honours.

‘“The brahmana accepted the honours and asked them, ‘Is everything well in your household, with your sons
and your servants? Are you physically well, without any disease?’ The old couple replied, ‘O brahmana! Everything is well at home and the servants are ﬁne too. O illustrious one! Did you confront any impediments in coming
here?’ The brahmana happily said that he hadn’t faced any problems. The hunter who knew about dharma then
spoke these words of great import to the brahmana. ‘O illustrious one! These two, my father and my mother, are
the supreme gods for me and I do for them what is undertaken for the gods. There are thirty-three gods, with
Shakra at the forefront. Just as they are worshipped by all the worlds, so do I tend to my aged parents. Just as brahmanas collect offerings for the gods, so do I unceasingly act for these two. O brahmana! My father and my mother
are my supreme gods. O brahmana! I continuously satisfy them with ﬂowers, fruits and gems. They are like the
ﬁres the learned ones speak about. O brahmana! They are everything to me, like sacriﬁces and the four Vedas. My
life, my wife, my sons and my well-wishers are for them. With my sons and my wife, I always serve them. I bathe
them myself and wash their feet. O supreme among brahmanas! I give them food myself. I only speak pleasant
things to them, avoiding the unpleasant. So as to bring pleasure to them, I even do that which is adharma. O
supreme among brahmanas! O brahmana! Knowing dharma to be my preceptor, I tirelessly serve them. O brahmana! It has been said that a man prospers through ﬁve gurus—the father, the mother, the ﬁre, he himself and the
preceptor. O supreme among brahmanas! If they are served properly, they always remain for him, like well-tended
ﬁres. That is the eternal dharma for those who are in the householder stage.’”’
502(205)

‘Markandeya said, “Having introduced his parents to the brahmana as his greatest gurus, the hunter with dharma in
his soul again spoke to the brahmana. ‘Behold. I have obtained insight through the power of my austerities. It is for
this reason that the devoted, self-controlled and truthful wife told you to go to Mithila, where a hunter who lives
there would tell you about dharma.’ The brahmana replied, ‘O one who is learned about dharma! O one who is
good in his vows! I remember the words of that devoted, truthful and virtuous wife. I know that you have good
qualities.’ The hunter said, ‘O foremost among brahmanas! O illustrious one! There is no doubt that what you have
said about me was completely foreseen by that faithful wife. O brahmana! It is to exhibit favours towards you that
I showed you these things. O son!180 O brahmana! Now listen to the words that I am going to speak to you. O
supreme among brahmanas! You have slighted your mother and father. O unblemished one! You left the house
without their permission, for the sake of studying the meaning and the chanting of the Vedas. Your deeds caused
great grief to your aged, ascetic and blind parents. Go and seek their favours, else great dharma will forsake you.
You are an ascetic. You are great-souled. You are always devoted to dharma. But all of this has been futile. O brahmana! Therefore, listen to my words and do not act contrary to them. Return swiftly and show them your devotion.
O brahmana rishi! I am telling you this for your own welfare.’
‘“The brahmana answered, ‘O fortunate one! O one who has the qualities and conduct of dharma. There is no
doubt that everything that you have said is true. I am pleased with you.’ The hunter said, ‘You are the equal of the
gods and you are always devoted to dharma that is ancient, eternal and divine, difﬁcult of access to those who have
not perfected their souls. Go swiftly to your mother and your father and worship them unceasingly. Beyond that,
there is no other supreme dharma that I can see for you.’ The brahmana replied, ‘It is through good fortune that I
came here. It is through good fortune that I met you. Men like you, exponents of dharma, are difﬁcult to ﬁnd in this
world. Among one thousand men, one may ﬁnd someone who is learned in dharma, or one may not. O fortunate
one! O supreme among men! I am pleased with your truthfulness. I was descending into hell and you have saved
me. O unblemished one! It had been destined and that is the reason I met you. O tiger among men! King Yayati fell
and was rescued by his daughter’s virtuous sons.181 Like that, I have now been saved by you. As you have said, I
will serve my mother and my father. One who has not perfected his soul does not know how to differentiate between dharma and adharma. The eternal dharma is incomprehensible to one who has been born in the womb of a
shudra. I do not regard you as a shudra. There must be some reason. Perhaps you obtained the status of a shudra
because of your speciﬁc deeds. O immensely intelligent one! I wish to know the details about this. O one who has
controlled his soul! If you so desire, please tell me everything accurately.’

‘“The hunter replied, ‘O supreme among brahmanas! No brahmana should be crossed. O unblemished one!
Therefore, hear everything that had happened to me in an earlier body. O son of foremost among brahmanas! I was
a brahmana earlier. I studied the Vedas well and was skilled in the Vedangas. But it is because of my own sins that
I have been reduced to my present state. There was a king who was my friend and he was skilled in the use of
arms. O brahmana! Because of my association with him, I also became supreme in wielding the bow. Once upon a
time, the king went out hunting. He was surrounded by his advisers and was with his foremost warriors. Near a
hermitage, he killed many deer. O supreme among brahmanas! I also shot a swift and terrible arrow, with a plume
that was bent downwards. It hurt a rishi. The brahmana fell down on the ground and shouted, “I am innocent. Who
has performed this evil deed?” Still thinking him to be a deer, I rushed towards him and suddenly saw the sage. I
saw that the rishi had been pierced by my arrow, with a plume that was bent downwards. My mind was troubled to
see that I had performed an act that should not be performed. I then told the extremely ascetic brahmana, who was
dying on the ground. “I performed this act out of ignorance. Please pardon me. O brahmana! I should be forgiven.”
Thus did I speak to the sage. But the rishi was overcome with anger and replied in these words. “O cruel one! O
brahmana! You will be born as a hunter and will be born from a shudra womb.”’”’
503(206)

‘“The hunter said, ‘O supreme among foremost of brahmanas! When I had thus been cursed by the rishi, I spoke to
the one who was eloquent with words. “O rishi! Please show me your favours. O sage! I performed this act out of
ignorance today. O illustrious one! Please pardon me. Please show me your favours.” The rishi replied, “There is
no doubt that the curse that I have pronounced cannot be negated. But because of my mildness, I will now show
you a favour. Even when you are born in the womb of a shudra, you will be learned about dharma. There is no
doubt that you will serve your mother and your father. Through serving them, you will achieve great success. You
will remember your earlier birth and you will go to heaven. When the curse has run its course, you will again become a brahmana.” In this way, I was cursed by that terribly ascetic rishi in earlier times. O supreme among men!
But he showed me his favours too. O supreme among brahmanas! I took the arrow out of his body. I carried him to
the hermitage and he did not lose his life. These are the details of everything that befell me earlier. O supreme
among brahmanas! I will go to heaven in the hereafter.’
‘“The brahmana replied, ‘O greatly intelligent one! All men are subject to unhappiness and happiness in this
way. You should therefore not grieve over this. O son!182 You have performed a difﬁcult task, you have learnt
about your earlier life. O learned one! The taint of your evil deeds is because of the lineage you have been born
into. After some time has passed, you will become a brahmana again. There is no doubt that I think you to be a
brahmana even now. A brahmana who performs evil deeds is certain to meet with downfall. One who is vain and
the performer of evil deeds is almost equal to a shudra. A shudra who is controlled, truthful and devoted to dharma, always rises. I think him to be a brahmana who becomes a brahmana because of his conduct. Through the
taints of evil karma, one attains a terrible end. O supreme among men! I think that all of your sins have been destroyed. You should not be anxious on this account. You should not sorrow and you should not hesitate. You know
about the ways of conduct in the world. You are always devoted to dharma.’
‘“The hunter said, ‘Like physical pain is destroyed with medicines, mental pain is destroyed with wisdom. This
capacity for knowledge does not come equally to those who are fools. Men of limited intelligence are overcome by
mental distress when they are confronted with calamities and are separated from that which is pleasant. All beings
have some good qualities and some bad ones. Everyone is subject to this and there is no reason for grief. When one
sees something unpleasant, one should swiftly withdraw. One should take countermeasures if one sees it coming.
Nothing happens to the one who sorrows. He can only lament. Men who give up both happiness and unhappiness
are learned ones who are satisﬁed with knowledge. They are really happy. The ignorant are always dissatisﬁed.
The learned are always satisﬁed. There is no end to dissatisfaction. Satisfaction is supreme happiness. Those who
do not sorrow have gone along that path. They can see the supreme objective. One should not immerse one’s mind
in grief. Grief is a terrible poison. Like an angry serpent, it kills those who are foolish and have not attained wisdom. One who is overcome by sorrow when difﬁculties surface, his energy is destroyed and he has no manliness.
There is no doubt that the fruits of our deeds can be seen. One who falls prey to despair does not obtain that which

is good. Instead, one should look for means to free oneself from misery. One should not sorrow, but be united with
the good. If one thinks about the nature of all beings, one obtains supreme intelligence. One should not sorrow.
One should obtain wisdom. One should look towards the supreme objective. O learned one! I do not sorrow. I am
waiting for the time to pass. O brahmana! O excellent one! It is for this reason that I am not constrained.’
‘“The brahmana replied, ‘You have attained wisdom. You are learned. You have great intelligence. You are content in knowledge. You are devoted to dharma. You have nothing that I can sorrow about. I wish to take my leave.
May you be in peace. May dharma protect you. O supreme among those who uphold dharma! May you not deviate
in your duty towards dharma.’”
‘Markandeya said, “Joining his hands in salutation, the hunter granted leave. The supreme among brahmanas
circumambulated him and departed. When he returned, the brahmana began to always assiduously serve his mother, his father and the elders, in accordance with the prescribed rules. O Yudhishthira! O son!183 O foremost among
those who uphold dharma! I have thus told you everything that you asked me about—the greatness of a faithful
wife, the excellence of brahmanas and servitude towards the mother and the father by the hunter, recounted as
dharma.”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “O brahmana! This supreme account of dharma is extraordinary. O supreme among those
who know all forms of dharma! O supreme sage! Your account is the best. O learned one! Listening to you, to
these pleasant accounts, it seemed to be but an instant. O illustrious one! But I am still not satisﬁed about listening
to supreme dharma.”’
504(207)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When Dharmaraja had heard these holy accounts, full of dharma, he again asked rishi
Markandeya. “In ancient times, why did Agni leave for the forest? In Agni’s absence, how did the great rishi Angiras become ﬁre and carry the oblations? Agni is one. But his acts are seen to be many. O illustrious one! I wish to
know everything about this. How was Kumara184 born? How did he come to be known as Agni’s son? How did
Rudra beget him on Ganga and the Krittikas?185 O descendant of the Bhargava lineage! I wish to hear about all
this exactly. O great sage! I am full of curiosity.”
‘Markandeya said, “Ancient history is recounted about this. The bearer of oblations186 was angered and went to
the forest to perform austerities. The illustrious Angiras then transformed himself into Agni. Through his powers,
he destroyed distress and darkness. In his hermitage, the immensely fortunate one surpassed Agni. Having become
that, he then illuminated the world. Agni was then performing austerities and was tormented by this energy. The
energetic one was extremely distressed, but did not know what to do. The illustrious Agni then thought, ‘This other
Agni has been unleashed in the world by Brahma. While I was engaged in austerities, my services as Agni have
been dispensed with. How can I become Agni again?’ While he was thus reﬂecting, Agni saw the great sage, providing heat to the world. He approached slowly and fearfully and Angiras told him, ‘Swiftly become Agni and
bring prosperity to the worlds again. You are known to the three worlds and all objects, mobile and immobile. O
Agni! You were the ﬁrst to be created by Brahma, so that darkness could be dispelled. O destroyer of darkness!
Swiftly regain your own position.’ Agni replied, ‘My deeds have been destroyed in this world and you have become Agni. You have become Agni. You are known as Agni and people do not know me. I have thrown away my
role as Agni. You remain as the primary Agni. I will be the second, known as Prajapatyaka.’187 Angiras said,
‘Perform the auspicious deeds that take beings to heaven. Be Agni, the dispeller of darkness. O god! O Agni! Perform the act of obtaining your ﬁrst son through me.’ O king! On hearing these words of Angiras, Jataveda188 did
as he had been asked to. Angiras had a son by the name of Brihaspati. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On
knowing that Angiras’s son was Agni’s ﬁrst son, the gods arrived and asked about the reason for this. Having been
thus asked by the gods, Angiras told them the reason for this and the gods accepted the explanation. I will now tell
you about the different immensely radiant ﬁres used for rites. They are known to the brahmanas by their many
tasks and names.”’
505(208)

‘Markandeya said, “O extender of the Kuru lineage! Brahma’s third son had Apava’s daughter as a wife.189 O
king! Listen to the account of his offspring—Brihajjyoti, Brihatkirti, Brihadbrahma, Brihanmana, Brihanmantra,
Brihadbhasa and Brihaspati. The ﬁrst daughter of Angiras was the goddess Bhanumati. Among all his offspring,
she was unmatched in beauty. Angiras’s second daughter was named Raga. She was loved by all beings and that
was the reason she was known as Raga.190 Angiras’s third daughter was Sinivali. Her form was thin and her body
was sometimes seen and sometimes not seen. So it was said that she was like Kapardin’s daughter.191 Then
Archismati was seen with her radiance and Havismati with her oblations. Angiras’s sixth sacred daughter was
named Mahishmati. The seventh of Angiras’s daughters was Mahamati. She was radiant and was honoured at great
sacriﬁces. This seventh daughter, Mahamati, was renowned. On seeing another immensely fortunate daughter, people wonderingly exclaimed that she was one and could not be divided. She was given the name of Kuhu.”’192
506(209)

‘Markandeya said, “Brihaspati’s wife was the famous Chandramasi. She gave birth to six sacred ﬁres and a daughter. The ﬁre at which oblations of clariﬁed butter are offered is named Shamyu, Brihaspati’s immensely radiant
son. Oblations are ﬁrst offered to him at chaturmasya and the foremost animal at horse sacriﬁces. This energetic
ﬁre is one that is characterized by many-hued ﬂames. Shamyu’s unmatched wife was Satya. Satya was born from
Dharma. He193 had the blazing Agni as his son, and three daughters who were good in their vows. The ﬁre that is
worshipped with the ﬁrst share of offerings is Bharadvaja, said to be Agni’s ﬁrst son. The ﬁre that is Shamyu’s second son is known by the name of Bharata. At the time of full moon sacriﬁces, all the oblations are offered to it
with ladles. There were three daughters who had Bharata as a husband. He had a son named Bharata and a daughter named Bhavati.194 The ﬁre named Bharata was the son of the ﬁre named Prajapati Bharata. O foremost among
the Bharata lineage! He was greatly honoured and his appellation was ‘Great’. Bharadvaja’s wife was Vira and she
gave birth to Vira.195 It is said by the brahmanas that he is slowly offered the same oblations as Soma. There is a
ﬁre that is offered the second round of oblations with Soma and this is known as Rathaprabhu, Rathadhvana and
Kumbhareta. On his wife Sarayu, he begot Siddhi and surpassed the sun in his splendour. He is the one who
brought agneya196 and he is always mentioned in invocations. The ﬁre Nishchyavana always praises the earth. It
never declines197 in fame, energy or prosperity. The ﬁre Vipapa is his son. He is without sin198 and without taint
and has pure and blazing ﬂames. He is truthful and is the one who ensures deeds on time. The ﬁre named
Nishkriti199 frees beings from lamentations. When worshipped well, he brings good fortune. His son is the ﬁre
named Svana, the creator of suffering. He inﬂicts severe suffering on people and makes them lament. Those who
know about the soul, address a ﬁre by the name of Vishvajit. He strides through the intelligence of all beings in the
universe. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is a ﬁre that is known as the internal ﬁre. It digests food inside the bodies of all beings and is known by the name of Vishvabhuj. He is a brahmachari and self-controlled. He
is always extensive in his vows. The brahmanas worship this ﬁre with oblations of cooked food. He is famous as
Gopati and a river was his beloved. Those who observe rites use this ﬁre in all their rites. There is an extremely
terrible ﬁre by the name of Vadava. He drinks up water and has a tendency to rise. He has the name of
Urdhvabhaj200 and the wise know that he is established in prana. There is a ﬁre to whom oblations are always offered in a household in a northward direction. This supreme one is known by the name of Svishtakrit. His daughter
is named Manyati and she is the ﬁre of anger that is incited in calm beings. She is the essence of anger and is thus
named.201 This terrible and cruel one is established in all beings by the name of Svaha. There is a ﬁre that has
been named Kama by the gods. There is no one among the thirty gods with his beauty and because his form is unequalled, he is so named.202 The ﬁre named Amogha destroys enemies in battle.203 He wields a bow and is seated erect on a chariot, adorned with garlands. He restrains his anger. O immensely fortunate one! There is another
known as Uktha, praised by the three ukthas. He is the creator of great speech and is therefore known as Sakamashva.”’204

507(210)

‘Markandeya said, “Kashyapa, Vasishtha, Prana’s son Prana, Agni Angiras and Chyavana Trishuvarchaka performed terrible austerities for many years, so as to obtain a son. ‘May we obtain a famous son who follows dharma. May he be Brahma’s equal.’ They uttered the ﬁve great vyahritis.205 Then an immensely energetic and powerful ﬁre with ﬁve colours was created. His head consisted of the ﬁre made out of kindling. His arms were like the
sun. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! His complexion was golden and his feet were black. Through their great
austerities, these ﬁve gave him those ﬁve colours. The Vedas therefore know him as Panchajanya and he became
the origin of the ﬁve lineages.206 He performed great austerities for ten thousand years. He created beings and he
created the terrible ﬁre of the ancestors. He created brihat and rathantara, those stealers of vigour, from his head
and his mouth.207 He created Shiva from his navel, Indra from his strength, Vayu and Agni from his breath of life,
the two accents208 from his two arms, the universe and all the beings. Having created these, he created the ﬁve
sons of the ancestors—Pranidhi, the son of Brihadurjas; Brihattara, the son of Kashyapa; Bhanu, the brave son of
Angiras; Soubhara, the son of Varcha; and Anudatta, the son of Prana. These are known as those who created ﬁve
lineages. Austerities created the ﬁfteen gods who are the obstructers of sacriﬁces—the sacriﬁce, the dawn, Abhima, Atibhima and Bhimabalabala. Austerities created the ﬁve gods for sacriﬁces—Sumitra, Mitravat, Mitrajna,
Mitravardhana and Mitradharma. Austerities also produced these ﬁve gods—Surapravira, Vira, Sukesha, Suvarcha
and Surahanta. These three classes of ﬁve each are separately established. Placed here on earth, they obstruct those
who wish to perform sacriﬁces in heaven. They cause obstructions and steal large quantities of oblations. They insolently create obstructions and steal, though oblations are carried by the ﬁre. But if the ﬁre has been skilfully
placed, they cannot approach the oblations on the sacriﬁcial altar. They cannot go near the ﬁre. On both sides, the
ﬁre then carries the sacriﬁcial offerings. If paciﬁed through mantras, they do not steal the sacriﬁcial offerings. Brihaduktha, another son of austerities, lives on earth. He is worshipped on earth by those who observe agnihotra
properly. Rathantara is another ﬁre that is the son of austerities. Learned adhvaryus know that his offerings are
meant for Mitravinda.209 He210 was thus extremely satisﬁed with his immensely famous sons.”’
508(211)

‘Markandeya said, “The ﬁre named Bharata is subject to severe restrictions. The ﬁre named Pushtimati provides
prosperity when it is satisﬁed. It is because it sustains all beings that it is known as Bharata.211 The ﬁre named
Shiva is always engaged in the worship of Shakti. Since he alleviates the sufferings of everyone and brings puriﬁcation, he is known as Shiva.212 When Tapas213 witnessed the great fruits from austerities, an extremely wise son
named Purandara was born to him, with a desire to pass on these fruits. Another son named Ushma was born and
this ﬁre can be seen in all beings. A ﬁre named Manu was also born and he ofﬁciates as Prajapati. The brahmanas
who are learned in the Vedas speak of a ﬁre named Shambhu. The brahmanas also speak of an extremely radiant
ﬁre named Avasathya. Thus Tapas created ﬁve sons from his sacriﬁce—Urjaskara and Havyavahana, they were
like gold in their radiance.214 O immensely fortunate one! When exhausted and paciﬁed, the lord of the cows gave
birth to terrible asuras and various other beings on earth.215 Angiras created Tapas’s son Manu, and Bhanu too.
However, brahmanas who know the Vedas refer to him as Brihadbhanu. Bhanu’s wife was Supraja, and so were
Brihadbhasa and Somaja. They gave birth to six sons. Listen to the offspring. The ﬁre that provides strength to all
beings is Bhanu’s ﬁrst son and is known as Balada. The ﬁre that is seen as terrible wrath in calm beings is Bhanu’s
second son and is known as Manyumat. The ﬁre in whose honour oblations are offered at the time of the new
moon or the full moon is known by the name of Vishnu, also named Dhritiman Angiras. There is a ﬁre to whom
the ﬁrst offerings of oblations are made, together with Indra. He is Bhanu’s son and is named Agrayana. In addition to these four,216 there is a son named Niragraha who always takes oblations at chaturmasya sacriﬁces. He is
Bhanu’s son. Nisha was Manu’s wife. She gave birth to a daughter, the two Agnishomas and ﬁve other ﬁres. The
radiant ﬁre, who receives the ﬁrst offerings at chaturmasya sacriﬁces, together with Parjanya,217 is known as
Vaishvanara. The ﬁre that is said to be the lord of all beings is Manu’s second son and has the name of Vishvapati.

Svishtakrit218 is regarded as the supreme, because there is great merit in offering oblations to him. The maiden
named Rohini was Hiranyakashipu’s daughter. Because of her deeds, she became the wife of a ﬁre who was a Prajapati. There is another ﬁre that resides in the bodies of all living beings in their breath of life. This is named Samnihita and leads to sound and form. There is a god whose path is marked in black and white.219 He is the ﬁre who
bears oblations. He is the lord of all that leads to taints in untainted ones and is based in anger. The ﬁre named
Kapila is the expounder of sankhya yoga. Ascetics refer to him as the supreme rishi Kapila.220 In various rites,
there is a ﬁre through which the ﬁrst share of oblations is rendered to those who are deceased. This is known as
Agrani. Thus, he221 created different famous ﬁres on earth. When there are seen to be defects in agnihotra sacriﬁces, they correct these. If the action of the wind makes the ﬁres interact with each other, eight different rites must
be performed to the ﬁre Shuchi. If the ﬁre to the south is mixed with the other two ﬁres, eight different rites must
be performed to the ﬁre named Viti. If the sacriﬁcial ﬁre is mixed with the ﬁre of a conﬂagration, eight different
rites must be performed to the ﬁre Shuchi. If the ﬁre of agnihotra is touched by a woman who is in her season,
eight different rites must be performed to the ﬁre Dasyumat. If one hears that a living being has died, or if an animal dies, eight different rites must be performed to the ﬁre Abhimat. A brahmana who has not rendered offerings
into the ﬁre for three nights, must perform eight different rites to the northern ﬁre. He who still awaits the observance of new moon and full moon rituals, must perform eight different rites to the ﬁre Pathikrit. If the ﬁre of one
who is expecting touches the agnihotra ﬁre, eight different rites must be performed to the Agnimat ﬁre.”’
509(212)

‘Markandeya said, “Mudita was the beloved wife of Saha Apa. The lord of bhuh and bhuvah begot an excellent
ﬁre. This is known as the ﬁre that is the lord of all beings. The brahmanas say that this ﬁre is the lord of the earth
and is in the souls of all beings. This great ﬁre is the lord of all beings. This immensely energetic and illustrious
ﬁre always circulates. This ﬁre is always worshipped at sacriﬁces by the name of garhapatya.222 This ﬁre bears
the oblations that are made in this world. Saha’s extremely extraordinary and immensely fortunate son is known as
Apamgarbha. He is known as the lord of bhuh, bhuvah and mahah. His son, Bharata, consumes the dead bodies of
all beings. At agnishtoma sacriﬁces, the Niyata is the best rite for sustenance.223
‘“On seeing Niyata arrive, he224 was frightened and hid in the ocean. The gods sought him along every road
and every direction, but could not ﬁnd him. On seeing Atharva,225 Agni said, ‘O brave one! I am extremely weak.
Please carry the oblations to the gods. O Atharva! Become one with sweetness in your eyes and perform this task
for my pleasure.’ Having thus spoken to Atharva, he went somewhere else. But the ﬁsh revealed where he was
concealed, and angered, Agni told them, ‘In your different forms, you will be the food of beings.’226 Then the
bearer of oblations spoke to Atharva again. Though the gods beseeched them, he paid no heed to their words and
refused to bear the oblations. He gave up his entire body. Having discarded his body, he entered the earth. Having
touched the earth, he created different types of minerals separately. From his mouth, he created fragrances and energy; from his bones, devadarus; from his phlegm, crystal; from his bile, emeralds; and from his liver, black iron.
All beings blaze with these three substances.227 His nails became mica and his arteries became coral. O king! Various other minerals were produced from his body. Having discarded his body, he remained established in supreme
austerities. He was roused through the austerities of Bhrigu, Angiras and the others. Gratiﬁed through the power of
austerities, the crested ﬁre blazed forth in great resplendence. But on seeing the rishis, he was frightened and hid in
the great ocean. The universe was scared and sought refuge with Atharva. The asuras, gods and rishis worshipped
Atharva. On seeing Agni, Atharva himself created the worlds. While all the beings looked on, he churned the great
ocean and the illustrious Atharva restored Agni to the earlier position that he had lost. Since then, he has always
borne the oblations of all beings. While he roamed and travelled in many different countries, he228 created the
many different sacriﬁcial hearths that are mentioned in the Vedas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The ﬁve
rivers other than the Sindhu,229 Devika, Sarasvati, Ganga, Shatakumba, Sarayu, Gandaki, Charmanvati, Mahi,
Medhya, Medhatithi, the three rivers Tamravati, Vetravati and Koushiki, Tamasa, Narmada, Godavari, Venna,

Praveni, Bhima, Medratha, Bharati, Suprayoga, Kaveri, Murmura, Krishna, Krishnavenna, Kapila and Shona—
these rivers are famous as the mothers of the sacriﬁcial hearths.
‘“Adbhuta had a wife named Priya and her son was Viduratha. There are as many soma rites as the number of
ﬁres that have been mentioned. All these were born in Atri’s lineage, but were Brahma’s offspring through his
mental powers. Desiring offspring, Atri created them in his own body. However, all these ﬁres originated from
Brahma’s body. The account of the great-souled ﬁres, and their origin, has thus been told by me. They are immeasurable and beautiful and are the dispellers of darkness. Know that they have the greatness of the ﬁre Adbhuta230
recounted in the Vedas. All these ﬁres are really the same. There is only one illustrious ﬁre that is to be known. It
issued ﬁrst from Angiras’s body, in many different forms, like the jyotishtoma sacriﬁce.231 Thus, the extremely
great lineage of Agni has been recounted by me. When puriﬁed with different mantras, it bears the oblations of
embodied beings.”’
510(213)

‘Markandeya said, “O unblemished one! Thus, the genealogy of the different ﬁres has been recounted by me. O
Kouravya! Now hear about the birth of the intelligent Kartikeya. I will tell you about Adbhuta’s extraordinary and
inﬁnitely energetic son, whose deeds were extensive. He was born from the wives of the seven brahmana rishis. In
ancient times, the gods and the asuras were always engaged in destroying each other. The danavas, terrible in form,
were always able to vanquish the gods. On witnessing that his armies had been destroyed by them several times,
Purandara232 was greatly anxious about ﬁnding a general for his army. He thought, ‘I must ﬁnd an extremely
powerful person who, on seeing the army of the gods destroyed, will have the valour to protect it.’ On reﬂecting
about this, he went to Mount Manasa and heard terrible lamentations that were voiced by a woman. ‘Let someone
come to me. Let a man come and protect me. Let him show me a husband. Or let him become my husband himself.’ Purandara told her, ‘Do not be afraid. You have no reason to be scared.’ When he said this, he saw Keshi233
standing before him. He wore a crown on his head and held a club in his hand. He looked like a mountain, rich in
minerals.
‘“Grasping the maiden by the hand, Vasava234 told him, ‘Why are you acting towards this maiden like someone
who is not an arya? Know me to be the wielder of the vajra and refrain from causing her any violence.’ Keshi
replied, ‘O Shakra! Let her be. I desire her. O chastiser of Paka!235 Return to your city with your life.’ Having
said this, Keshi ﬂung his club at Indra, so as to kill him. But as it descended, Vasava sliced it into two with his vajra. Enraged, Keshi then ﬂung the peak of a mountain. O king! On seeing that mountain peak descend,
Shatakratu236 splintered it with his vajra and it fell down on the ground. As it fell, the peak hurt Keshi. Having
been thus hurt, he let go of the immensely fortunate maiden and ﬂed. When the asura had left, Vasava spoke to the
maiden. ‘O one with the beautiful face! Who are you? Whose are you? What are you doing here?’ The maiden answered, ‘I am Prajapati’s daughter, famous by the name of Devasena. My sister Daityasena has already been abducted by Keshi.237 When Prajapati gave us permission, we sisters always used to come to Manasa to sport, together with our friends. The great asura Keshi always craved for our favours. O chastiser of Paka! Daityasena desired him, but I did not. O illustrious one! She was then abducted, but I have been freed through your strength. O
lord of the gods! I desire that an invincible one like you should be my husband.’ Indra replied, ‘My mother is Dakshayani.238 You are the daughter of my mother’s sister. I desire that you should tell me about your own strength.’
The maiden said, ‘O mighty-armed one! I am weak, but my husband will be strong. Through my father’s boon, he
will be worshipped by the gods and the asuras.’ Indra replied, ‘O goddess! O unblemished one! What kind of
strength will your husband possess? I wish to hear this from you.’ The maiden said, ‘He will be immensely valorous and immensely strong. He will vanquish the gods, the danavas, the yakshas, the kinnaras, the serpents and the
rakshasas. He will be seen to vanquish all the evil ones. Together with you, he will vanquish all the beings. Such
will my husband be. He will have the traits of a brahmana. He will be extensive in his deeds.’ On hearing her
words, Indra was unhappy and began to think, because there was no one who could be the husband the goddess
had spoken of.

‘“Then the one, whose radiance was like the sun,239 saw the sun rise on Udaya.240 He also saw the immensely
fortunate moon enter the sun. The new moon had set in and it was a terrible instant. He saw the gods and the asuras
ﬁghting on Mount Udaya. Shatakratu saw that the dawn was tinged with red clouds. The illustrious one also saw
that Varuna’s abode241 was red. He saw Agni enter the sun, bearing oblations offered with mantras by Bhrigu, Angiras and the others. He also saw the twenty-four parvas surrounding the sun.242 It was a terrible instant. The
moon, traversing the path of dharma, was united with the sun. On seeing the union of the sun and the moon, and on
witnessing that terrible instant, Shakra began to think. ‘This great conjunction is terrible and is united with energy.
This conjunction of Agni, the sun and the moon is extraordinary. If the moon begets a son now, he may be the husband of the goddess. Agni has all the qualities too and Agni is also a god. If he begets a son, he may be the husband of the goddess too.’ Having thought in this way, the illustrious one went to Brahma’s world, taking Devasena
with him. Worshipping the grandfather, he said, ‘Please grant a brave husband for this goddess.’ Brahma replied,
‘O destroyer of danavas! It will be done as you have thought. There will be an embryo with great strength and valour. O Shatakratu! Together with you, he will be your army’s general. That valorous one will be the husband of
this goddess.’ Hearing these words, the lord of the gods bowed in obeisance. Together with the maiden, he went to
the abode of the devarshis. With Vasishtha at the forefront, those chief among the foremost of the brahmanas were
extremely great in their vows. With Shatakratu leading them, the gods went to the sacriﬁce, thirsting for a share of
the soma that had been obtained through austerities. Having performed the sacriﬁce in accordance with the prescribed rites, the great-souled ones243 offered oblations to all the gods into the well-kindled ﬁre. The Adbhuta ﬁre,
the bearer of oblations, was summoned from the sun’s circle. According to the prescribed rules, the lord Agni
emerged. He restrained his speech, and entered the sacriﬁcial ﬁre, into which, oblations had been offered with
mantras. Various oblations had been rendered by the rishis and Agni accepted these. O best of the Bharata lineage!
Having accepted them, he carried them to the residents of heaven.
‘“When he emerged, he saw the wives of those great-souled ones.244 They were seated in their hermitages and
were happily bathing. Their complexions were as golden as sacriﬁcial altars. They were as unblemished as a digit
of the moon.245 Their limbs glowed with the radiance of the ﬁre. They were as extraordinary as the stars. On seeing the wives of those foremost among brahmanas, Agni became overcome with desire and his mind and his senses
were stirred. But he thought, ‘It is not proper for me to be excited. These are the wives of the foremost among
brahmanas. They are beyond the reach of desire and I am desiring them. I cannot look at them, or touch them,
without justiﬁed reason. I will therefore enter the household ﬁre, and thereby, satisfy myself by always looking at
them.’ He entered the household ﬁre and happily looked at them. He touched all of them with his ﬂames, golden in
complexion. Overcome by those beautiful ones, Agni lived there, his heart attracted by love for them. However, he
was not able to obtain the wives of the brahmanas. And since his heart was tormented by desire, Agni decided that
he would give up his body. He went to the forest. But Daksha’s daughter, Svaha, had desired Agni earlier. For a
long time, the beautiful one had been watching out for a weakness. However, the unblemished one did not ﬁnd one
in the god who was never distracted. But on learning that Agni had left for the forest, the beautiful one, who was
tormented by desire, began to think. ‘I will assume the forms of the wives of the saptarshis and seek out Agni. He
is overcome with desire. I will seduce and desire him in those forms. On doing this, he will be delighted and my
desire will be satisﬁed.’”’
511(214)

‘Markandeya said, “Shiva246 was the wife of Angiras. She was endowed with conduct, beauty and qualities. O
lord of men! The goddess assumed her form ﬁrst. The beautiful lady went to Agni and said, ‘O Agni! I am tormented by desire and you should satisfy my desire. O god! If you do not do this, know that I will kill myself. O
Agni! I am the wife of Angiras and my name is Shiva. I have decided to come here after consulting my
friends.’247 Agni asked, ‘How did you know that I was suffering from desire? How did all the others, the beloved
wives of the saptarshis, come to know this?’ Shiva said, ‘You have always been our beloved. But we were afraid of
you. Now that we have got to know about your desire through signs, they have sent me to you. O Agni! I have

come here to have intercourse with you. Now quickly satisfy the desire we feel. The mothers248 are waiting for
my return.’ Extremely happy, Agni then lived with Shiva.
‘“The goddess was pleased with this union and caught the semen in her hand. She thought, ‘If people see this
form in the forest, they will speak about the misdeeds of the wives of the brahmanas with Agni. Therefore, to prevent this, I will become a Garudi and will easily escape from this forest.’249 She then became a Suparni and left
the great forest. She saw Mount Shveta, covered extremely well with reeds. The mountain was guarded by extraordinary seven-hooded serpents, with poison in their eyes. It was populated by rakshasas, pishachas, masses of
terrible demons, female rakshasas and many animals and birds. She quickly went to the mountain peak that was
difﬁcult of access. She then hurriedly hurled the semen into a golden well. Then the goddess assumed the forms of
the other wives of the great-souled saptarshis and united with Agni. But she was not able to assume the celestial
form of Arundhati,250 because of her faithfulness towards her husband and because of the power of her austerities.
O supreme among the Kuru lineage! Driven by desire, Svaha hurled Agni’s semen into the well six times.
‘“On the ﬁrst day of the lunar fortnight, the energy of the semen that had fallen down gave birth to a son. He
was worshipped by the rishis and because the semen had fallen down, he became Skanda.251 He had six heads and
twice that many ears. He had twelve eyes and twelve arms. But Kumara had one neck and one torso. The child assumed form on the second lunar day and became a child on the third lunar day. Guha’s limbs were developed on
the fourth lunar day. He was surrounded by a great mass of red clouds, with lightning in them, and looked like the
sun rising on a gigantic red cloud. He held a giant bow in his hands, which made the body hair stand up. For the
destruction of the enemies of the gods, it was placed there by the slayer of Tripura.252 Seizing that supreme bow,
he roared with a great strength, and this terriﬁed the three worlds, with all their mobile and immobile objects. The
roar was like that of masses of giant clouds and on hearing this, the great nagas Chitra and Airavata jumped up. On
seeing them fall, Agni’s son, with radiance like that of the morning sun, grabbed them with two of his hands. He
held a spear in another hand. The one with the gigantic form, supreme among strong ones, grasped a cock in one
hand.253 Having grasped the cock, the immensely strong one roared terribly and sported. The strong one grasped a
supreme conch shell in two of his arms and blew on it, striking fear even among powerful beings. As he played repeatedly, he pounded the sky with two of his other hands. It seemed as if Mahasena was about to drink up the three
worlds with his mouths. On the mountain peak, the one whose soul was inﬁnite, looked like the sun’s rays at the
time of sunrise. The one whose valour was extraordinary sat on the mountain peak. The one whose soul was inﬁnite looked at the directions with his many faces. He saw the different types of beings and roared again. On hearing
those roars, many beings fell down. They were terriﬁed and anxious and sought refuge with him. All the beings of
different varnas sought refuge with the god whom the brahmanas dub the greatest of all great companions. Arising,
the mighty-armed one comforted all beings. He then drew his bow and shot arrows at the great Mount Shveta.
With those arrows, Mount Krouncha, the son of the Himalayas, was rent asunder. Through that breach, swans and
vultures travel to Mount Meru. On being shattered, the mountain fell down, uttering terrible lamentations. On seeing it fall, other mountains also screamed miserably. The supremely strong one heard those piteous lamentations.
But he was not moved. The one whose soul is inﬁnite, raised his spear and roared. The great-souled one then
hurled his great spear and swiftly cleft the terrible peak of Mount Shveta. Having been thus shattered, Mount
Shveta was miserable. Frightened of the great-souled one, it left the earth and arose, with the other mountains. This
pained the earth and it trembled on all sides. In distress, it sought refuge with Skanda and was made strong again.
The mountains also worshipped him and returned to earth. The worlds now worship Skanda on the ﬁfth day of
shuklapaksha.”’
512(215)

‘Markandeya said, “However, the rishis were concerned about ensuring the welfare of the worlds. On seeing these
extremely terrible portents of different kinds, they became anxious and performed tasks to pacify the worlds. The
people who lived in Chitraratha forest averred, ‘These great calamities have descended on us because Agni had intercourse with the wives of the saptarshis.’ Others, who had seen the goddess leave in the form of Garudi, said,
‘You are responsible for this disaster.’ No one knew that this deed had been done by Svaha. Having heard that

Skanda was her son, Suparni slowly went to him and said, ‘I am your mother.’ On learning that an immensely energetic son had been born, the saptarshis abandoned their six wives, with the exception of the divine Arundhati. All
the residents of the forest referred to him as the son of the six. O king! But Svaha repeatedly told the saptarshis, ‘I
know that he is my son. What is being said is not true.’ After performing sacriﬁces for the saptarshis, the great
sage Vishvamitra had followed Agni without being seen, when he had been tormented by desire. He knew everything, exactly as it had happened. Vishvamitra was the ﬁrst to seek refuge with Kumara. He composed a celestial
hymn of praise to Mahasena. The great sage performed all the thirteen birth and other rituals for Kumara.254 He
spoke about the greatness of the six-faced one, the virtues of the cock and the worship of the goddess Shakti and
her companions. Vishvamitra performed rituals for the welfare of the world. Thus, the rishi Vishvamitra came to
be loved by Kumara. The great sage came to know about Svaha’s transformation of form and told all the sages that
the women had not committed any crimes. But though they heard those details, all of them abandoned their wives.
‘“On hearing about Skanda, the gods went and told Vasava, ‘O Shakra! Skanda’s strength cannot be tolerated.
Kill him swiftly and without any delay. If you do not kill him now, he will become Indra. O Shakra! With his great
strength, he will oppress the three worlds, us and you.’ He replied to the ones who were miserable, ‘This child is
immensely strong. With his valour, he can destroy the creator of the worlds in battle. Let the mothers of the world
now go to Skanda.255 They have the power and the will to destroy him.’ They256 agreed to these words and went.
But on seeing that his strength was unmatched, their faces became miserable. They thought that he was invincible
and sought refuge with him. They told him, ‘You are our son. We hold up the universe. Welcome all of us. We are
overcome with affection for you. Our milk is ﬂowing.’ Mahasena worshipped them and complied with their wishes. Then the strongest of the strong saw his father Agni approach and together with the group of mothers, he257
received his worship. He remained there with Mahasena, so as to protect him steadily. There was a lady among the
mothers who had been created out of anger. She nursed Skanda like her own son, with a spear in her hand. She was
the daughter of an ocean of blood and lived on blood. She embraced Mahasena and protected him like a son. Agni
transformed himself into goat-faced Naigameya with many offspring.258 He sported himself on the mountain with
the child, as if with toys.”’
513(216)

‘Markandeya said, “The planets, the minor planets, the rishis and the mothers, all radiant and led by Agni, with
masses of attendants and many other terrible residents of heaven, established themselves around Mahasena, together with the groups of mothers. The lord of the gods wished for victory, but was unsure about victory.259 He ascended Airavata’s shoulders260 and departed, together with the gods. Desiring victory over Mahasena, Indra travelled swiftly. The army of the gods was immensely radiant. It was terrible and extremely fast. It was adorned with
colourful ﬂags and decorations and had many vehicles and bows. It was dressed in beautiful garments and was
adorned and served by prosperity. When Kumara saw Shakra advance, with the desire of killing him, he advanced.
The immensely strong Shakra roared and advanced swiftly. This delighted the army of the gods, who wished to kill
Agni’s son. Worshipped by the thirty gods and the supreme rishis, Vasava approached near Kartikeya. Together
with the gods, the lord of the gods roared like a lion. On hearing this sound, Guha roared like the ocean. On hearing this great sound, the splendid army of the gods lost its senses. It was agitated, like the ocean by a storm.
‘“Having seen that the gods had approached with the desire of killing him, Agni’s son was angered. He belched
forth large ﬂames of ﬁre from his mouth. They burnt the army of the gods and made them writhe on the ground.
The heads and the bodies were in ﬂames and the arms and the mounts were ablaze. They looked like radiant clusters of stars that had suddenly been dislodged. Having been burnt, the gods abandoned the wielder of the vajra and
sought refuge with Agni’s son, thus obtaining peace. Having been deserted by the gods, Shakra hurled his vajra at
Skanda. O great king! This split open Skanda’s right side. When the side of the great-souled Skanda was split from
the force of the vajra, another being was born. He was a youth, decorated in gold. He was clad in celestial earrings
and wielded a spear. Since he was created from the entering of the vajra, he was known as Vishakha.261 On seeing
another one arise, like the ﬁre of destruction, Indra was frightened. He joined his hands in salutation and sought

refuge with Skanda. O excellent one! Skanda granted him safety, together with his army. The thirty gods were delighted and played on their musical instruments.”’
514(217)

‘Markandeya said, “Now hear about Skanda’s companions. They were terrible and extraordinary. They were born
when Skanda was struck by the vajra and are the minor Kumaras. These terrible ones steal children, whether they
have been born or whether they are in the womb. From the force of the vajra, immensely strong daughters were
also born from him. The Kumaras thought of Vishakha as their father. The illustrious one protects in battle, with
the face of a goat. He is surrounded by the masses of daughters and all his own sons. While the mothers look on,
Bhadrashakha262 provides succour. So people on earth call Skanda the father of sons. In different regions, those
who wish sons or have sons, always worship Rudra, Agni and the extremely strong Uma as Svaha.
‘“The maidens who the ﬁre named Tapas had begotten, went to Skanda and he asked, ‘What will I do?’ The
mothers replied, ‘Grant us this favour. May we be the supreme mothers of all the worlds. May we be worshipped.
Do this for our pleasure.’ He replied that it would be this way. Then that great-souled one again said, ‘You will be
of different kinds, auspicious and inauspicious.’ Thus, having fulﬁlled the resolution of making Skanda their son,
the group of mothers went away. Kaki, Halima, Rudra, Brihali, Arya, Palala and Mitra became the seven mothers
of children who have just been born. Through Skanda’s favours, each of them had a terrible son, named
Shishu,263 full of valour and red in the eye. Those who were born from Skanda’s group of mothers are known as
the eight brave ones.264 Together with the one who has the face of a goat,265 they are referred to as the nine. O
king! Know that the sixth of Skanda’s six heads has the face of a goat and is always worshipped by the group of
mothers. The chief among his six heads is known as Bhadrashakha. It is through this that he created divine energy.
All these incidents occurred on the ﬁfth day of shuklapaksha. O lord of men! The extremely terrible war transpired
on the sixth.”’
515(218)

‘Markandeya said, “Skanda was seated, with golden armour. He wore a golden crest and crown. His eyes were
golden and he was immensely radiant. His garments were tinged with red. His teeth were sharp and he was beautiful. He possessed all the auspicious marks. He was the beloved of the three worlds. He was the granter of boons.
He was brave. He was young. He was adorned with earrings. In the form of an embodied lotus, Shri herself worshipped him. When the greatly famous Kumara was thus united with Shri, all the beings saw him, like the moon on
the night of the full moon. The great-souled brahmanas worshipped the extremely powerful one.
‘“The maharshis spoke to Skanda in these words. ‘O fortunate one! O one with the golden complexion! May
you be the saviour of the worlds. Though you have been born in six nights,266 the worlds have been subdued by
you. O supreme among gods! You have granted them freedom from fear again. You should therefore become Indra
and free the three worlds from their fear.’ Skanda asked, ‘O ones rich in austerities! What does the Indra of all the
worlds do? How does the lord of the gods always protect the masses of gods?’ The rishis replied, ‘Indra grants beings strength, energy, offspring and happiness. When he is satisﬁed, the lord of the gods grants everyone their
shares. He withdraws it from those who perform evil deeds and grants it to those who perform good ones. The destroyer of Bala assigns beings to their tasks. He acts as the sun when there is no sun, and as the moon when there is
no moon. He becomes the ﬁre, the wind, the earth and the water and their origins. These are Indra’s tasks and Indra’s strength is immense. You are brave and you are supreme in strength. Therefore, you should be our Indra.’
Shakra said, ‘O mighty-armed one! O excellent one! You become Indra and bring happiness to everyone. You are a
worthy one and we will instate you today.’ Skanda replied, ‘You alone will rule over the three worlds, ﬁxed on victory. O Shakra! I will remain as your servant. I do not desire to become Indra.’
‘“Shakra said, ‘O brave one! Your strength is extraordinary. Kill the enemies of the gods. Amazed at your prowess, the worlds will ignore me. O brave one! Though I am established as Indra, I am inferior in strength and have
been vanquished. Incessantly, they will attempt to bring about false dissension among us. O lord! When you have
been separated, the world will be divided into two factions. The beings of the worlds will then decide to split into

these two sides. O immensely strong one! Because of this division of beings, there will be strife then. O son!267
Let me assure you that you will then vanquish me in battle. Therefore, you should become Indra. Do not think
about this.’ Skanda answered, ‘O fortunate one! You are my king, as well as of the three worlds. O Shakra! What
can I do for you? Tell me what your instructions are.’ Shakra said, ‘O Skanda! If you have spoken true words according to your decision, and if you wish to follow my instructions, then listen to me. O immensely strong one! Be
instated as the general of the gods. O immensely strong one! Following your words, I will remain as Indra.’ Skanda answered, ‘For the destruction of the danavas, for accomplishing the objectives of the gods, for the protection of
cows and brahmanas, then instate me as the general.’ So Maghavan,268 together with all the masses of gods, instated him. He looked extremely handsome and was worshipped by the maharshis. The golden umbrella269
sparkled like the circle of a ﬁre that has been kindled well. Vishvakarma had created a golden and celestial garland.
The slayer of Tripura270 fastened this on him. O tiger among men! O scorcher of enemies! He himself arrived,
with the famous goddess.271 Extremely happily, the illustrious Vrishadhvaja272 showed him homage. The brahmanas also refer to Agni as Rudra and he is thus Rudra’s son. The semen secreted by Rudra became Mount Shveta.
It was on Mount Shveta that the Krittikas placed Agni’s semen.273 All the residents of heaven saw Rudra offer
homage to Guha, foremost among those who possess all the qualities. So he came to be known as Rudra’s son. The
child was born after Rudra entered Agni. Because he was born in this way, he became Rudra’s son. It was thus that
Skanda, foremost among the gods, was born as Rudra’s son, through the energy of Rudra, Agni, Svaha and the six
ladies.
‘“Agni’s son was attired in a pair of red garments that had no dust. His blazing body shone, like the sun attired
in a pair of red clouds. Agni gave him a cock and that became his ornamental sign.274 Perched on his chariot, it
blazed like the red ﬁre of destruction. His body was cased in armour that he had naturally been born with. It is always visible when the god goes into battle. O lord of the people! With Skanda, power, dharma, energy, beauty,
truthfulness, devotion to brahmanas, lack of delusion, protection of devotees, destruction of enemies and protection of the worlds were also born. Having been thus instated by the masses of all the gods, in his ornaments, he
looked happy and satisﬁed. His visage was as radiant as the full moon. Pavaki275 was thus instated by the gods.
The sounds of hymns from the Vedas, celestial music, the songs of the gods and the gandharvas and all the masses
of apsaras arose. He sported, surrounded by many who were happy, satisﬁed and ornamented. Thus instated by the
residents of heaven, Mahasena could be seen, like the rising sun when darkness has been destroyed. At that, thousands of armies of the gods came to him from all the directions and said that he was their lord. The illustrious one
was surrounded by masses of all the beings. He was worshipped and praised and comforted them.
‘“Having instated Skanda as the general, Shatakratu remembered Devasena, whom he had once freed. ‘Brahma
himself must have destined that he will be her husband.’ Thinking this, the slayer of Bala fetched Devasena,
adorned in her ornaments and told Skanda, ‘O supreme among gods! Even before you were born, the self-creating
one276 destined this maiden to be your wife. Therefore, in accordance with the prescribed rites and to the chanting
of mantras, accept her hand. The right hand of this goddess is like a lotus. Accept it.’ Having been thus addressed,
he accepted her hand, in accordance with the prescribed rites. Brihasapati recited the prescribed mantras and offered oblations. Thus, wise ones know Devasena to be Skanda’s queen. The brahmanas know her as Shashthi, Lakshmi, Asha, Sukhaprada, Sinivali, Kuhu, Sadvritti and Aparajita. When Devasena obtained Skanda as her eternal
husband, the goddess Lakshmi herself sought refuge with him, in embodied form.277 Since Skanda was united
with Shri on the ﬁfth lunar day, this is known as Shripanchami.278 He accomplished his objective on the sixth and
this is known as the great tithi of shashthi.”’279
516(219)

‘Markandeya said, “When Mahasena was united with Shri and became the general of the gods,280 the six goddesses who were the wives of the saptarshis came to him. They had been abandoned by the rishis, though they were devoted to dharma and were great in their vows. They swiftly went to the lord who was the general of the gods and

said, ‘O son! Without any reason and driven by anger, our divine husbands have abandoned us. O son! We have
been dislodged from our pure positions. It is said that someone reported we gave birth to you and they heard this
falsehood. You should save us. O lord! Through your favours, we should attain eternal heaven. We wish that you
should be our son. When you do this, you will be freed from your debt.’ Skanda replied, ‘O unblemished ones!
You are truly my mothers and I am your son. You will obtain everything that you have asked for.’ When this had
been said, he281 asked Shakra, ‘What should be done?’ Asked thus by Skanda, Vasava replied, ‘Abhijit is Rohini’s
younger sister, but is proud.282 The goddess wishes to be the eldest and has gone to the forest to perform austerities. O fortunate one! I am bewildered, because a nakshatra has been dislodged from the sky. O Skanda! Consult
with Brahma about that excellent time.283 Brahma determined the time for Dhanishtha and the others. Rohini was
the ﬁrst and their number used to be complete.’ Having been thus addressed by Shakra, the Krittikas went to heaven. This nakshatra is presided over by the god of ﬁre and shines in the form of a cart.284
‘“Vinata285 told Skanda, ‘You are my son and you are entitled to offer me funeral oblations. O son! I wish to
live with you always.’ Skanda replied, ‘I bow before you. Let it be that way. Instruct me with a mother’s affection.
O goddess! Worshipped by your daughter-in-law, you will always live here.’ Then the entire group of mothers
spoke to Skanda in these words. ‘The wise ones have praised us as the mothers of all the worlds. But we wish to be
your mother. Therefore, show us honour.’ Skanda replied, ‘You will be my mothers and I will be your son. Tell me
what I should do to satisfy your wishes.’ The mothers said, ‘In earlier times, others had been thought of as mothers
of the world. Let us have that position and let them no longer have that position. O bull among gods! Let us be
worshipped by the world, not them. Because of you, we have been deprived of our offspring.286 Give them back
to us.’ Skanda replied, ‘You cannot wish for offspring that have already been given away. But if you so wish, I can
give you other offspring.’ The mothers said, ‘While we are with you, we wish to devour the offspring of those
mothers.287 Give them to us. They and their gods are different from you.’ Skanda replied, ‘I can give you offspring. But what you have asked for will be extremely painful. O fortunate ones! Protect the offspring as long as
they are good and show you homage.’ The mothers said, ‘O fortunate one! O Skanda! As you desire, we will protect the offspring. O Skanda! O lord! If it pleases you, we wish to live with you always.’ Skanda replied, ‘In different forms, afﬂict the offspring of young humans until they have attained sixteen years of age. I will give you undecaying and terrible souls. With these, you will live in supreme happiness and also be worshipped a lot.’ At that, an
extremely strong being, golden in complexion, sprung up from Skanda’s body to devour the offspring of humans.
Oppressed by hunger, it suddenly fell down on the ground, unconscious.
‘“With Skanda’s permission, it became a graha,288 terrible in form. Supreme brahmanas know it by the name
of Skandapasmara.289 The extremely terrible Vinata is known as the graha Shakuni. The rakshasa woman Putana
is known by the learned as the graha Putana. She is terrible in form. She is fearful in form. She causes great pain
and roams around in the night. The pishacha woman who is terrible in form is known as Shitaputana. Her form is
fearful and she steals embryos from women. Aditi is known as Revati and her graha is known as Raivata. This extremely terrible and gigantic graha afﬂicts children. Diti, the mother of the daityas, is known as Mukhamandika.
This inaccessible demoness happily feeds on the ﬂesh of children. The Kumaras and the Kumaris are said to have
been created from Skanda. O Kouravya! They are extremely large grahas and all of them devour embryos.
They290 are known as the husbands of the Kumaris. They are terrible in deeds, and without it being known, they
snatch small children. O king! The wise know Surabhi to be the mother of cattle. Shakuni rides on her, and with
her, devours children on earth. O lord of men! The goddess Sarama is the mother of dogs. She always robs the embryos of women. The mother of trees resides in a karanja.291 Men who wish to have sons worship her in the
karanja. These eighteen grahas, and others, are fond of meat and liquor.292 They always live for ten nights in
places where delivery takes place. Assuming a subtle form, Kadru enters a woman who is pregnant. She devours
the embryo there and she293 gives birth to a serpent instead.294 The mother of gandharvas grasps the embryo and
departs. On earth, that woman is seen as one whose foetus has vanished. The mother of apsaras grasps the embryo
and sits and the learned refer to this as a foetus that is seated.295 The daughter of the ocean of blood is known as

Skanda’s nurse. In a kadamba tree, she is worshipped by the name of Lohitayani.296 Arya dwells among women,
the way Rudra resides in men. Kumara’s mother Arya is separately worshipped for the fulﬁlment of desires.
‘“I have thus recounted for you the great grahas of the Kumaras. They are inauspicious up to sixteen years of
age. After that, they turn auspicious. The listed group of mothers and the male grahas are always known by everyone as Skanda grahas, residing in the body. They are paciﬁed through oblations, bathing, incense, collyrium, sacriﬁces and gifts, especially rites for Skanda. When thus worshipped and offered homage properly, all of them bestow
welfare, long lives and energy on men. O Indra among kings! After worshipping Maheshvara, I will now recount
the grahas that afﬂict men beyond the sixteenth year. The man who sees gods, whether asleep or awake, swiftly
turns mad and the learned know this as devagraha. The man who sees his ancestors, whether seated or asleep,
swiftly turns mad and this is known as pitrigraha. He who disrespects the siddhas angers them and is cursed by
them, swiftly turning mad, and this is known as siddhagraha. He who inhales fragrances and tastes different
ﬂavours, swiftly turns mad and this is known as rakshasagraha. A man on earth who is touched by celestial gandharvas, swiftly turns mad and this is known as gandharvagraha. Over a period of time, a man who is entered by
yakshas, swiftly turns mad and this is known as yakshagraha. A man who is always ascended by pishachas, swiftly
turns mad and this is known as pishachagraha. A man whose mind is deluded and turbulent because of these evils,
swiftly turns mad, and must be cured in accordance with the sacred texts. Men swiftly turn mad because of perplexity, fear and terrible sights, and must be cured through rites. There are three types of grahas—some are frolicsome, others are gluttons, and others are lustful. They afﬂict men until the attainment of seventy years of age. After
that, fever is the equivalent of a graha for men. Grahas always avoid those who have not dispersed their senses and
those who are controlled, pure and always attentive, and also those who believe in god and are devoted. This is the
description of grahas that afﬂict men. Grahas do not touch men who are devoted to the god Maheshvara.”’
517(220)

‘Markandeya said, “When Skanda had done all this, to please the mothers, Svaha appeared before him and said,
‘You are the son born from my womb. I wish that you should give me happiness that is extremely difﬁcult to obtain.’ Skanda replied to her, ‘What kind of bliss do you wish for?’ Svaha said, ‘O mighty-armed one! I am Daksha’s beloved daughter and my name is Svaha. Ever since I was a child, I have always desired Agni. O son! But
the ﬁre does not completely know how much I love him. O son! I wish to reside eternally with Agni.’ Skanda
replied, ‘O goddess! Whatever oblations are properly offered to gods and ancestors by brahmanas, with the recital
of mantras and through Agni, will henceforth be rendered with the utterance of the word “svaha”. O beautiful one!
Thus, you will always reside with Agni.’ Having been thus addressed and worshipped by Skanda, Svaha was satisﬁed. She was united with her husband Agni and offered homage to Skanda.
‘“Then Prajapati Brahma told Mahasena, ‘Go to your father Mahadeva, the destroyer of Tripura. For the welfare
of the worlds, you have been born invincible, with Rudra entering Agni and Uma entering Svaha. The great-souled
Rudra moistened Uma’s vagina with his semen. This was thrown on the mountain and created Minjika and Minjika.297 The remaining semen ﬂowed into the red river.298 Other parts ascended into the rays of the sun and others
fell on the earth. Still others adhered to the trees. Thus, it fell in ﬁve ways.299 The wise ones know your terrible
companions of many different forms, the eaters of ﬂesh, as ganas.’ Mahasena agreed and the one whose soul was
immeasurable, worshipped his father Maheshvara, and he in turn was affectionate towards his son. Those who
wish to acquire riches should worship the ﬁve ganas with arka ﬂowers and worship them if they wish diseases to
be cured.300 Those who wish to ensure welfare for children should always worship Minjika and Minjika,301 generated from Rudra. Those who wish to obtain offspring should bow in obeisance before the divine women named
Vriddhikas, who were born from trees and eat human ﬂesh. Thus is known the innumerable masses of pishachas. O
king! Now learn from me about the origins of the bells and the pennants. Airavata302 had two bells known as Vaijayanti. The intelligent Shakra brought them himself and gave them to Guha. One of those bells was for Vishakha
and the other for Skanda. The pennants of both Kartikeya and Vishakha are red. The immensely strong god Mahasena played happily with these toys, given to him by the gods. Surrounded by the masses of pishachas and the
masses of gods, he was radiant on that golden mountain, blazing with prosperity. With that brave one, the moun-

tain and its pure groves was radiant, like the beautiful caverns of Mandara with the rays of the sun. Mount Shveta
was radiant with groves blossoming with samtanaka ﬂowers,303 groves of karaviras,304 groves of parijatas,
japas,305 groves of ashokas, clusters of kadamba trees, masses of divine animals and masses of divine birds. All
the masses of gods and all the devarshis were there. The clouds thundered like drums, like the sound of the turbulent ocean. The celestial gandharvas danced there, together with the apsaras. The great sound of happy beings was
heard there. Thus the entire universe, together with Indra, gathered on Mount Shveta and happily beheld Skanda,
not tired of looking.”’
518(221)

‘Markandeya said, “When Agni’s illustrious son was instated as the general, the radiant lord Hara306 was delighted and left for Bhadravata307 in a chariot that had the complexion of the sun, together with Parvati. One thousand
lions were yoked to that supreme chariot. Driven by destiny, it ascended into the bright ﬁrmament. It seemed to
drink up the sky and terriﬁed mobile and immobile objects. Those lions with handsome manes roared and went up
to the sky. Pashupati was resplendent, seated on that chariot, together with Uma. It looked like the sun amidst
clouds thick with lightning and Indra’s bow.308 The illustrious Naravahana, lord of riches,309 together with the
guhyakas, advanced in front on the beautiful Pushpaka. Behind Vrishadhvaja, the granter of boons, Shakra followed, ascended on Airavata, accompanied by the gods. The great yaksha Amogha was on the right side, with
jambhakas,310 yakshas and rakshasas adorned with garlands. Also on the right advanced the gods, the Maruts,
armed with many different weapons, together with the Vasus and accompanied by the Rudras.311 Yama, together
with Mrityu,312 terrible in form, advanced, surrounded on all sides by hundreds of terrible diseases. Behind Yama
followed Rudra’s beautiful, sharp and decorated trident, by the name of Vijaya. There was also the illustrious
Varuna, lord of the ocean, advancing slowly with his terrible noose and surrounded by innumerable aquatic animals. Vijaya was followed by Rudra’s spear, with maces, clubs, lances and several other supreme weapons. O
king! The spear was followed by Rudra’s extremely radiant umbrella and his water pot,313 served by masses of
maharshis. On the right was his radiant staff, accompanied by Shri, with Bhrigu, Angiras314 and the gods worshipping it. Behind these was Rudra on his unblemished chariot, gladdening all the gods with his energy. The
rishis, the gods, the gandharvas, the serpents, female rivers, male rivers, trees, masses of apsaras, nakshatras, planets, the children of the gods and different types of women followed Rudra at the rear. The lovely and beautiful
women scattered showers of ﬂowers. Parjanjya followed, worshipping the wielder of the pinaka.315 Soma316 held
a white umbrella over his head. Agni and Vayu held whisks on either side. O king! Shakra was behind them, accompanied by Shri and all the rajarshis, singing praises of Vrishadhvaja.317 Gouri, Vidya, Gandhari, Keshini and
Mitrasahrya—all of them followed Parvati at the rear, together with Savitri. The different branches of knowledge,
created by those who are wise and recited by Indra and the other gods, were in the vanguard. The rakshasas and
grahas, holding pennants, were in front, as was Rudra’s friend Pingala, the Indra of the yakshas, who ensures happiness to the world and is always busy in burning grounds. Accompanied by all these, the god happily travelled.
His course was not certain. He was sometimes in the front, and sometimes at the back. Those on earth worship the
god Rudra through good deeds, using the name Shiva. He is also known as Isha, Rudra and Pinaki. Maheshvara is
worshipped with all kinds of objects. Thus, Krittika’s son, the general of the gods and with the qualities of a brahmana, followed the lord of the gods, surrounded by the army of the gods.
‘“Then Mahadeva spoke words of great import to Mahasena. ‘Always, steadfastly, protect the seventh corps of
the Maruts.’ Skanda replied, ‘O lord! I will protect the seventh corps of the Maruts. O god! Tell me quickly what
else I should do.’ Rudra said, ‘O son! You will always see me in every task you undertake. By looking at me devotedly, you will ensure supreme welfare.’ Having said this, Maheshvara embraced him and gave him permission
to leave. O great king! When Skanda was allowed to go, a great portent suddenly appeared. To bewilder all the
gods, the ﬁrmament, with all its nakshatras, blazed. The earth trembled and groaned. The entire universe was enveloped in darkness. On witnessing this terror, Shankara318 was disturbed. So were the immensely fortunate Uma

and the gods, together with the maharshis. While they stood around in bewilderment, a great army appeared. It was
like a mass of mountains or rain clouds. It was terrible to see and had many weapons. This terrible army roared and
uttered diverse sounds. It advanced towards the illustrious Shankara and the gods to do battle. They hurled many
showers of arrows on them, and mountains, shatagnis,319 javelins, clubs and maces. From that great and terrible
shower of weapons, the entire army of the gods was scattered in an instant and was seen to waver. Oppressed by
the danavas, the army of the gods was mauled. The soldiers, the elephants and the horses were sliced down. The
weapons and the maharathas were shattered. They were killed by the asuras, like a grove by many ﬁres. It fell
down burnt, like a forest full of large trees. The gods were mowed down, heads severed from bodies. They were
slaughtered in that great battle and were without a protector. On seeing the army destroyed, the god Purandara, the
slayer of Bala, spoke comfortingly to the army that was oppressed by the danavas. ‘O fortunate ones! O brave
ones! Discard your fear. Grasp your weapons. Set your minds on valour. Do not be disheartened. Vanquish the extremely evil danavas, terrible in form. O fortunate ones! Attack those great asuras with me.’ Having heard Shakra’s
words, the residents of heaven were comforted. Seeking refuge with Shakra, they attacked the danavas. Then all
the thirty gods, the immensely strong Maruts and the Sadhyas, together with the Vasus, returned the attack with
great force. The weapons that they angrily unleashed on the armies in battle, and the arrows, drunk up large quantities of blood from the daityas. The sharp arrows pierced their bodies, which could be seen to fall down, like serpents from a mountain. O king! The bodies of the daityas were sliced by the arrows and fell down on the ground
everywhere, like shredded clouds. In that battle, attacked by all the masses of gods with their diverse arrows, the
army of the danavas was terriﬁed and retreated. On seeing this, all the gods raised their weapons. There was great
rejoicing and the sounding of many musical instruments. Thus an extremely terrible and fearful battle raged between the gods and the danavas, creating muck out of ﬂesh and blood.
‘“But suddenly those from the world of the gods were seen to be worsted. The terrible danavas slaughtered the
residents of heaven. The chiefs among the danavas uttered terrible roars like lions. They sounded their musical instruments and there was a great noise from their kettledrums. An extremely strong and terrible danava emerged
from the army of the daityas then. His name was Mahisha and he grasped a giant mountain. He looked like the sun,
surrounded by dense clouds. O king! On seeing him raise the mountain, the gods ﬂed. But Mahisha pursued the
gods and ﬂung the mountain. O king! The army of the gods was struck by that falling mountain, which was terrible
in form. They were killed in large numbers and fell down on the ground. With the other danavas, Mahisha terriﬁed
the gods. He shattered them in battle, like a lion on small animals. On seeing Mahisha descend on them, Indra and
the other gods ﬂed from the ﬁeld of battle. Their weapons and their pennants were strewn around. Then Mahisha
was extremely angered and advanced towards Rudra’s chariot. Approaching it, he seized the pole of Rudra’s chariot. When the angry Mahisha suddenly seized Rudra’s chariot, the sky and the earth groaned deeply and the maharshis fainted. Gigantic daityas, that were like clouds, roared. They were certain that they would triumph. But
even in this state, the illustrious one320 did not kill Mahisha in battle. He knew that the evil-minded one’s death
would be at Skanda’s hands. The fearful Mahisha exulted at having seen Rudra’s chariot. He roared, delighting the
daityas and terrifying the gods.
‘“When the gods confronted this terrible danger, Mahasena arrived. He ﬂamed like the sun in his wrath. He was
attired in red garments. He was adorned in red garlands and ornaments. His mouth was red. The mighty-armed lord
was clad in golden armour. He was astride his chariot, golden in hue and like the sun. On seeing him, the army of
the daityas suddenly lost their hearts in battle. O Indra among kings! The immensely strong Mahasena hurled a
ﬂaming spear, which was capable of shattering, at Mahisha. Once unleashed, it struck Mahisha’s gigantic head.
The head was severed from the body and Mahisha fell down, having lost his life. He hurled that spear again and
again, slaying enemies by the thousands. As the gods and the danavas looked on, it then returned to Skanda’s hand.
The residual masses of the terrible daitya army were mostly killed by the wise Mahasena with his arrows. They
were frightened and terriﬁed and Skanda’s unassailable companions killed and devoured them in hundreds. They
ate the danavas and drank their blood. In a short time, they exterminated all the danavas and began to rejoice. Like
the sun destroys darkness, a ﬁre destroys trees and the wind dispels clouds, the famous Skanda destroyed enemies
through his own valour. He was shown homage by the thirty gods and he worshipped Maheshvara. The son of the
Krittikas was resplendent, like the gorgeous sun amidst its rays. When the enemies were destroyed by Skanda and

Maheshvara had left, Purandara embraced Mahasena and spoke to him. ‘O Skanda! You have killed Mahisha, who
had received a boon from Brahma. The gods were like straw to him. You are foremost among victorious ones. O
mighty-armed one! You have destroyed the thorn of the gods. In battle, you have killed a hundred danavas who
were the equals of Mahisha. You have slain the enemies of the gods, who had oppressed us earlier. Your followers
have devoured hundreds of other danavas. You are as invincible in battle as the illustrious husband of Uma.321 O
god! This will be famous as your ﬁrst deed. Your fame will be eternal in the three worlds. O son of a god! The
gods will be under your suzerainty.’ Having spoken these words to Mahasena, Shachi’s husband322 stopped. He
took the permission of the illustrious Tryambaka323 and left, together with the other gods. Rudra returned to
Bhadravata. The gods returned. Rudra spoke to the gods, ‘Regard Skanda as you regard me.’ Having killed masses
of danavas, Agni’s son subjugated all the three worlds within a single day and was worshipped by the maharshis.
He who attentively reads this account of Skanda’s birth, obtains prosperity here and Skanda’s world in the hereafter.”’

Section Thirty-Eight
Droupadi–Satyabhama-sambada Parva
This parva has eighty-eight shlokas and three chapters.
Chapter 519(222): 59 shlokas
Chapter 520(223): 12 shlokas
Chapter 521(224): 17 shlokas
Sambada means conversation and this short parva has a conversation between Droupadi and Satyabhama. Krishna and Satyabhama return
to Dvaravati.
519(222)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the brahmanas and the great-souled Pandavas were seated, Droupadi and Satyabhama
entered together. They were extremely happy and seated themselves comfortably. O Indra among kings! They had
seen each other after a long time. They were pleasant in speech and spoke to each other about the deeds of the
kings from the Kuru and Yadu lineages. Then the slender-waisted Satyabhama, Krishna’s beloved queen and the
daughter of Satrajit, spoke to Yajnaseni in private. “O Droupadi! How do you conduct yourself when you attend to
the Pandavas? Those brave and young ones are the equals of the guardians of the world. O beautiful one! How do
you keep them under your control? O one who is beautiful to behold! The Pandavas are always under your control.
They always look towards you and do your bidding. Tell me the reason. Do you follow vows or is it austerities? Is
it ablutions, bathing, mantras or herbs? Is it the valour of knowledge or the valour of roots? Is it meditation, oblations or medicaments? O Panchali! O Krishna!1 Tell me about your famous knowledge of amorous matters, so that
Krishna will always remain under my control.” Having said this, the famous Satyabhama stopped.
‘The immensely fortunate Droupadi, who was devoted to her husbands, replied. “O Satya! You are asking me
about the practices of evil women. How can one praise those who travel along wicked paths? Such questions and
uncertainties are not worthy of you. You yourself have enough intelligence. You are Krishna’s beloved queen.
When a husband learns that a woman uses mantras or roots, he becomes as terriﬁed of her as of a snake that has
entered the house. How can someone who is anxious ﬁnd peace? How can there be happiness without peace? No
woman is able to control her husband through mantras. Those who propagate roots are enemies. They are violent
and transmit poison and extremely terrible diseases. When a man accepts these powders through the tongue or the
skin, there is no doubt that he will soon be killed. Women have caused dropsy, leprosy, old age, impotence, dumbness, blindness and deafness through these means. Addicted to wicked ways, these evil women cause great harm to
their husbands. A woman should never act so as to cause displeasure to her husband. O illustrious Satyabhama!
Listen. I will tell you everything about how I behave towards the great-souled Pandavas. I always avoid vanity, desire and anger. I always steadily serve the Pandavas and their wives.2 In return for the love, I always place my soul
in their souls. I always serve them without any sense of pride. I protect the hearts of my husbands, without being
anxious about wrong words, wrong situations, wrong looks, difﬁcult seats, difﬁcult roads and difﬁcult signs. That
is the way I serve the maharatha Parthas, who are extremely terrible in their energy and are equal to the sun, the
ﬁre and the moon and who are capable of killing with their glances. My mind never turns to other men—be it a
god, a man, a gandharva, a young one with ornaments, one who is rich or one who is handsome. I do not eat, bathe

or sleep before my husband,3 together with his servants, has performed these acts. When my husband returns
home from the ﬁeld, the forest or the village, I always get up to welcome him and offer him a seat and water. The
stores for food are clean. The food is clean. I serve food at the right time. I am careful in maintaining the grain and
ensure that the house is clean. I am direct and reﬁned in speech. I do not consort with evil women. I always do that
which is pleasant. I am never lazy. I do not laugh unless there is a joke. I do not tarry for a long time at the gate. I
do not spend a long time in the toilet or in the garden. I do not laugh loudly or complain, or give cause for anger. O
Satya! I am always engaged in steadfastly serving my husbands. In no way do I desire anything that does not bring
my husband pleasure. When my husband is not at home because of some work connected with the relatives, I follow a vow of not using ﬂowers or fragrances. When my husband does not drink or does not eat, neither do I. I always renounce everything that my husband does not enjoy. O beautiful one! I always base myself on what has
been instructed. I am ornamented well. I am extremely careful. I am engaged in the pleasure of my husband. Earlier, my mother-in-law had told me about this dharma followed in the household—about offering alms, sacriﬁces,
funeral ceremonies, cooking food on auspicious lunar days and everything else that should be respected. I know all
that. I always follow them untiringly, day and night, with all my soul always ﬁxed on humility and injunctions. My
husbands are mild, righteous, truthful and the followers of true dharma. But I serve them as if they are angry and
venomous serpents. It is my view that the eternal dharma of women is to be dependent on the husband. He is the
god and he is the path. How can one cause him displeasure? I do not transgress my husbands in sleeping, eating or
speech. I always control myself and never complain about my mother-in-law. O fortunate one! Through constant
attention in daily pursuits and through servitude to the superiors, my husbands remain under my control. I always
serve Kunti, the mother of brave ones and one who is always true in her words, myself—in her bathing, dressing
and eating. I never cross her in issues of garments, ornaments or food. Pritha4 is the equal of the earth itself and I
never complain about her. Earlier, in Yudhishthira’s abode, eight thousand brahmanas were fed every day on golden plates. Eighty-eight thousand snataka householders5 were supported by Yudhishthira, with thirty servant girls
for each. Other than this, ten thousand ascetics, with their desire under control, were fed well-cooked food on golden plates. All those brahmanas were knowledgeable about the brahman and had been given grants of land. I worshipped them in due order, with drink, garments and food. The great-souled Kounteya possessed one hundred
thousand servant girls. They were adorned with necklaces and bracelets made of shells, gold around their necks,
ornaments, expensive garlands, gold and sandalwood paste and sported their gems and their gold. They were
skilled in dancing and singing. I knew the names, the forms, the food and the garments of each of them and also
their work, what each one did and did not do. Kunti’s intelligent son had one thousand maid servants, who used to
serve the guests day and night, holding vessels in their hands. When Yudhishthira lived in Indraprastha, he possessed one hundred thousand horses and one hundred thousand elephants. Such were the king’s instructions when
he ruled the earth. I listened to them and laid down the number and tasks for all the servants and everything that
was done in the inner quarters. I knew everything about the cowherds and the shepherds, what they did and did not
do. I knew everything about the king’s revenue and expenditure. O fortunate one! I alone knew everything about
the famous Pandavas. Those bulls among the Bharatas passed on everything about the household to me. O one
with the beautiful face! That is the reason they were devoted to me. This load was incapable of being borne by
someone who was evil in soul. I gave up all pleasure, day and night. That treasury of my husbands, who followed
dharma, was such an ocean that even Varuna could not manage it. I alone knew about the store. I endured hunger
and thirst, day and night. I attended to the Kouravyas, and day and night were the same for me. I was the ﬁrst to
rise from my bed. I was the last to lie down. O Satya! That has always been my practice. I know this to be the
greatest technique of making husbands devoted to you. I have not followed the practices of evil women. Nor do I
desire to do that.” Having heard these words from Krishna, full of dharma, Satya honoured Panchali, whose conduct always abided by dharma, and said, “O Panchali! O Yajnaseni! I have been at fault. Pardon me. Among
friends, it does happen that words are spoken in jest, without having been intended.”’
520(223)

‘Droupadi said, “I will tell you about a way that is without deceit, for capturing the heart of the husband. O friend!
If you follow that true path, you will be able to restrain your husband from other women. O Satya! In all the
worlds, with all their gods, there is no god equal to the husband. You will obtain all your desires through his
favours. But if he is angered, you will lose them. It is from there that you obtain offspring, various objects of desire, beds, seats, garments that are wonderful to see, garlands, fragrances, the world of heaven and extensive fame.
Happiness cannot be obtained through easy means. It is through hardship that a virtuous woman ﬁnds happiness.
Therefore, always worship Krishna with all your heart, love and affectionate deeds. Through beautiful seats, excellent garlands, various fragrances and prompt service, he will know that you love him and will himself embrace you
with all his affection. When you hear your husband’s voice at the gate, you must arise and stand in the middle of
the house. When you see him enter, you must swiftly give him a seat. You must worship him with water for washing the feet. Send your servant girls away. Arise and do every task yourself. O Satya! Let Krishna know that you
love and worship him with all your soul. When your husband says something in your presence, protect it as a secret, even if it is not a secret. If one of your co-wives reports it to Vasudeva, he might feel disenchanted with you.
Through whatever means, you must invite for meals those whom your husband loves, those who are devoted to
him and those who desire his welfare. But you must always distance yourself from his enemies and opponents,
those who wish him ill and those who are evil and deceitful. If the man is intoxicated or distracted, control your
mind and maintain silence. You should never spend a long time alone with your sons, Pradyumna and Samba. You
should be friends with women who are born in noble lineages and those who are virtuous and without sin. You
must avoid those who are wrathful, addicted to drink, addicted to food, thieves, evil and ﬁckle. This is the glorious
secret of love, which leads to heaven and ensures the destruction of enemies. Therefore, adorn yourself with expensive garlands, ornaments, unguents and pure fragrances and worship your husband.”’
521(224)

Vaishampayana said, ‘After having been seated with Markandeya, the other brahmanas and the great-souled Pandavas and spoken to them about pleasant subjects, Janardana Madhusudana took his leave in the appropriate way.
Keshava ascended his chariot and asked for Satya. Then Satyabhama embraced Drupada’s daughter and spoke
these cordial words to her, as was in conformity with her affectionate sentiments. “O Krishna! May you not suffer
from any anxiety or grief. May you not lie awake at night. You will win the earth when your husbands, who are the
equals of the gods, subjugate it. You are good in conduct. You have the propitious marks. O black-eyed one! No
one like you can confront difﬁculties for long. I have heard that it is certain that, together with your husbands, you
will enjoy the earth, without any enemies and without any thorns. O Drupada’s daughter! When the sons of Dhritarashtra have been killed and the enmity has been avenged, you will behold the earth, protected by Yudhishthira.
You will soon see those wives of the Kuru lineage, who, deluded by insolence, laughed at you when you left for
banishment, in a state of despair. O Krishna! Know that all those who caused you misery, when you were in a situation that was unpleasant, will depart for Yama’s abode. Your sons Prativindhya, the illustrious Sutasoma, Arjuna’s
son Shrutakarma, Nakula’s son Shatanika and Shrutasena begotten by Sahadeva are all brave and skilled. Your
sons are skilled in use of weapons. They are living happily with Abhimanyu in Dvaravati, a place they love. Like
you, Subhadra loves them with all her soul. Without any conﬂict, she is affectionate towards them and has no worries on their account. Pradyumna’s mother6 loves them with all her soul. Keshava instructs them, with Bhanu7 and
the others. My father-in-law always looks after their food and attire. With Rama8 and the others, all the Andhakas
and Vrishnis are devoted towards them. O beautiful one! They love them as much as Praduymna.” Having spoken
these affectionate and kind words, pleasant to the mind, she made up her mind to leave and went towards Vasudeva’s chariot. The beautiful Satyabhama, Krishna’s queen, circumambulated Krishna9 and ascended Shouri’s10
chariot. After he had smiled and comforted Droupadi, the best of the Yadu lineage, the scorcher of enemies, took
his leave and left on those swift steeds.’

Section Thirty-Nine
Ghosha Yatra Parva
This parva has 519 shlokas and nineteen chapters.
Chapter 522(225): 31 shlokas
Chapter 523(226): 22 shlokas
Chapter 524(227): 24 shlokas
Chapter 525(228): 29 shlokas
Chapter 526(229): 29 shlokas
Chapter 527(230): 31 shlokas
Chapter 528(231): 21 shlokas
Chapter 529(232): 21 shlokas
Chapter 530(233): 21 shlokas
Chapter 531(234): 28 shlokas
Chapter 532(235): 25 shlokas
Chapter 533(236): 15 shlokas
Chapter 534(237): 15 shlokas
Chapter 535(238): 49 shlokas
Chapter 536(239): 26 shlokas
Chapter 537(240): 47 shlokas
Chapter 538(241): 37 shlokas
Chapter 539(242): 24 shlokas
Chapter 540(243): 24 shlokas
Ghosha means a herdsman, as well as a station where cowherds assemble. Yatra means an expedition or invasion. This parva is named after
an expedition the Kouravas undertake to see the ghoshas in Dvaitavana, where the Pandavas are residing. The Kouravas are captured by the
gandharvas and are released by the Pandavas. At this insult, Duryodhana resolves to fast to death and is dissuaded. He returns to Hastinapura and performs a sacriﬁce.
522(225)

Janamejaya asked, ‘While those foremost among men lived in the forest, their bodies lean from the cold, the heat,
the wind and the sun, they arrived at the lake and the sacred wood.1 What did the Parthas do next?’
Vaishampayana said, ‘When Pandu’s sons arrived at the lake, they dismissed their people and gave them instructions. They then roamed through beautiful forests and mountains and regions that were along rivers. When those
brave ones dwelt there, studying and engaged in austerities, many venerable ones, learned in the Vedas, came to
visit them. Those foremost among men showed them homage. One day, a brahmana arrived to visit the Kurus. He
was skilled in recounting tales. Having spent some time, he went as he willed to visit the king who was Vichitravirya’s son.2 Having been honoured by the aged king, supreme among the Kurus, he seated himself. On being
asked, he began to recount stories about the sons of Dharma, Anila and Indra, and the twins.3 They were in difﬁculties. They were lean in their bodies from the wind and the heat. They were almost prostrate through terrible
misery. Though she had the brave ones for her protectors, Krishna was like one without a protector and was overwhelmed through suffering.
‘On hearing his words, the king who was Vichitravirya’s son was disturbed and was ﬂooded with compassion.
He had learnt that the sons and grandsons of a king had been immersed in a river of difﬁculties in the forest. His
inner soul was full of misery. His sighs were full of tears shed for the Parthas. He thought that he himself was re-

sponsible for everything. He collected himself in some fashion and spoke these words. “Dharmaraja is the eldest of
my sons. How is it that the truthful Ajatashatru, pure and devoted to the conduct of aryas, must now sleep on the
ground? He earlier used to sleep on beds covered with soft ranku4 skin. He is like Indra and used to be awoken
every day by the praises of minstrels and bards. Before night is over, he is now awoken from the bare ground by
ﬂocks of birds. Vrikodara is lean in the body from the wind and the sun. His limbs are full of wrath. His limbs do
not deserve this. Before Krishna’s eyes, how does he sleep on the earth, on the surface of the ground? Arjuna is
delicate and intelligent. He is under the control of the king who is Dharma’s son. But yet, with all his limbs in pain,
it is certain that he will not sleep at night, overcome by anger. On seeing the twins, Krishna, Yudhishthira and Bhima, devoid of happiness, he will sigh like an energetic serpent and it is certain that he will not sleep at night, overcome by anger. Though deserving of happiness, the twins are wretched. Their forms are the equal of the gods. It is
certain that they are disturbed and will spend the nights awake, restrained only because of dharma and truth. The
son of the wind-god is strong and is equal to the wind-god in strength. It is certain that his terrible energy is restrained by dharma. It is certain that he sighs, suffering this in rage. Tossing and turning on the ground, he desires
the death of my sons. He is restrained by truth and dharma. He is waiting for the time when he can overcome them
in battle. Ajatashatru was vanquished through deceit and Duhshasana spoke harsh words to him then. They must
have penetrated Vrikodara’s limbs and consumed his inside, like a ﬁre burns kindling. Dharma’s son never thinks
about evil deeds. Dhananjaya always follows him. But dwelling in the forest, Bhima’s anger is increasing, like a
ﬁre fanned by the wind. He is being tormented by that rage. The brave one is kneading one hand with the other. He
is heaving terrible and warm sighs, as if he wants to burn down my sons and grandsons. The wielder of the Gandiva and Vrikodara are like the ﬁre at the time of destruction. With arrows that blaze like thunder, they leave no
residue from the armies of enemies. Duryodhana, Shakuni, the son of the suta5 and the extremely evil-minded
Duhshasana only saw the honey. They did not see the fall, nor Vrikodara and Dhananjaya. Having performed good
or evil deeds, a man awaits the fruits of the deed that has been done. But the fruits often bind him. How can a man
be freed from that? When the ﬁeld has been ploughed well and the seed has been sown, when the god has rained at
the right time, has it ever been seen that there is no fruit? I think that it is not possible without destiny. The Pandavas are always devoted to that which is right. But the one who knows the minds of dice6 was not fair. Attached
to my evil sons, neither was I. That became the ﬁre of destruction for the Kurus. It is certain that the wind will
blow, even if it is not instructed. It is certain that a woman who has conceived will give birth to offspring. It is certain that dawn signals the death of night and that evening signals the death of the day. Regardless of the acts performed by us and those performed by others, regardless of riches donated by men, when it comes to obtaining the
fruits, what are the fruits one obtains? If nothing remains of deeds, why perform them? We protect our riches so
that they are not divided, do not drain off, and are not eroded. If they are not protected, they would divide into a
hundred parts. But it is certain that deeds are not destroyed in this world. Behold Dhananjaya’s valour. From the
forest, he went to Shakra’s world. He obtained divine weapons of four kinds.7 Having obtained the knowledge, he
again returned to this world. Where is the man who has gone to heaven in his own body and desires to return
again, unless he has seen the innumerable Kurus on the point of death, overcome by destiny? Arjuna Savyasachi is
the wielder of the bow. The bow named Gandiva is the essence of the world. There are celestial weapons in his
possession. Who can withstand the energy of those three?”8 Having secretly heard these words of the king, Duryodhana and Soubala9 were disturbed. They went to Karna and told him everything. The one with limited intelligence10 was unhappy at what he had heard.’
523(226)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Together with Soubala, Karna heard these words of Dhritarasthra. At an appropriate time, he
spoke thus to Duryodhana. “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You have exiled the brave Pandavas through
your own valour. You now enjoy the earth alone, like the killer of Shambara in heaven.11 O lord of men! O king!
All the kings of the east, south, west and north pay tribute to you. The blazing Lakshmi used to serve the Pandavas
earlier. O king! But with your brothers, you have now won her. O king! The blazing prosperity that we earlier saw,

for a short time, with Yudhishthira in Indraprastha, is now with you and he is oppressed by sorrow. O king! You
have snatched it from Yudhishthira with your intelligence and strength. O mighty-armed one! That radiance is seen
to be with you now. O Indra among kings! O slayer of enemy warriors! All the kings are now established under
your suzerainty and ask you what they should do. O king! The entire goddess earth is yours now—with the ocean
as a garment, with mountains and forests, with villages, cities and mines, with many groves and countries, and
adorned with habitations. O king! The brahmanas praise you and you are worshipped by the kings for your manliness. You shine among them, like the one with the rays12 among the gods in heaven. O king! Surrounded by the
Kurus, you shine like King Yama amidst the Rudras, Maruts and Vasava,13 like the king of the nakshatras.14 Let
us go and see the Pandavas, residing in the forest and bereft of prosperity. They always slighted you and never
showed you respect. O great king! It is said that the Pandavas reside, together with the forest-dwelling brahmanas,
near Lake Dvaitavana. O great king! Go there with your supreme prosperity and torment the sons of Pandu with
your energy, like the sun. You are established in your kingdom and they have been dislodged from their kingdom.
You have wealth and they are deprived of wealth. They are without prosperity and you are full of prosperity. O
king! Go and see the sons of Pandu. Let the Pandavas behold you like Nahusha’s son Yayati, with great splendour
and established in great fortune. O lord of the earth! This prosperity, that well-wishers and ill-wishers see in a radiant man, is considered to be real power. Like a man who stands on a mountain and looks down on earth, what happiness can there be that is greater than being on plain ground while one’s foes are on uneven terrain? O tiger
among kings! The birth of a son or the obtaining of a kingdom does not bring as much bliss as seeing one’s enemies in misery. What happiness will there not be, on being successful oneself, and on seeing Dhananjaya attired in
bark and skins? Let your wives, attired in excellent garments, see the miserable Krishna, attired in bark and skins,
and thereby increase her grief. Bereft of riches, let her criticize her own self and her life. She felt grief in the midst
of the assembly hall. But on seeing your wives adorned in ornaments, the grief will be greater.” O Janamejaya!
Thus did Karna and Shakuni speak to the kings,15 and having spoken, they fell silent.’
524(227)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When King Duryodhana heard Karna’s words, he was extremely delighted. But he again became sad and spoke these words. “O Karna! What you have told me has always been in my mind. But I will not
obtain permission to go to where the Pandavas are. Dhritarashtra, lord of the earth, always mourns for those brave
ones. Because of the power of their austerities, he considers the Pandavas to be superior. If the king gets to know
about our desires, he will seek to protect the future and not grant us permission. O immensely radiant one! There
can be no reason to go to Dvaitavana than to exterminate the enemies who are in the forest. At the time of gambling with the dice, you know the words Kshatta16 addressed to me, you and Soubala. Thinking of all those words
and the other lamentations, I cannot make up mind as to whether one should go or not go. I will obtain great pleasure if I see Bhima and Phalguna,17 together with Krishna, miserable in the forest. The pleasure that I will get
from winning the earth is less than that from seeing the sons of Pandu, clad in bark and skins. O Karna! What joy
can be greater than the sight of Drupada’s daughter Droupadi, clad in red18 garments in the forest? If Dharmaraja,
Bhimasena and Pandava19 see me united with this supreme prosperity, it is worth living. But I do not see a means
whereby we can go to the forest, or a means whereby the king will give us permission to go. Therefore, together
with Soubala and Duhshasana, ﬁnd out a skilful means whereby we can go to the forest. After I have thought about
whether one should go or not go, I will approach the king tomorrow. When I am seated with Bhishma, supreme
among the Kurus, together with Soubala, you must propose the reason that you have thought of. Having heard the
words of Bhishma and the king about going, I will then entreat the grandfather20 and decide on the course of action.” All of them agreed to this and returned to their houses.
‘When night was over, Karna came to the king. Karna smilingly told Duryodhana, “O lord of men! A means has
been found. Listen. O lord of men! All the ghoshas21 are in Dvaitavana, awaiting you. There is no doubt that we
can undertake an expedition to the ghoshas. O lord of the earth! It is always proper to go on a ghosha expedition. O
king! If you tell your father this, he will grant you permission.” While they were conversing in this fashion, having

decided on the ghosha expedition, Shakuni, the king of Gandhara, smilingly replied. “I can see that this means of
going is without any difﬁculties. The king will not only give us permission, he will press us to go. O lord of men!
All the ghoshas in Dvaitavana are waiting for you. There is no doubt that we can go there on a ghosha expedition.”
All of them then laughed and offered each other their palms.22 Having decided on this, they went to see the foremost among the Kurus.’
525(228)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O Janamejaya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then they all went to Dhritarashtra and
asked about the king’s welfare, and the king asked about them in return. A cowherd named Samanga had been instructed earlier. He approached Dhritarashtra and told him about the cattle that were nearby. O lord of the earth!
Then Radheya23 and Shakuni spoke to Dhritarashtra, lord of men and the foremost among kings. “O Kourava!
The ghoshas are in beautiful regions. The right time for branding the calves has arrived. O king! This is also an excellent time for your son to go on a hunt. Therefore, you should give Duryodhana permission to go.” Dhritarashtra
replied, “O son! Hunting and inspecting of cattle are worthy tasks. I remember that one should not trust cowherds
completely. But I have heard that those tigers among men24 are somewhere near. Therefore, I do not think that you
should go there yourself. They were vanquished through deceit and now live in that great forest in misery. O Radheya! Those maharathas are capable and are always engaged in austerities. Dharmaraja is never angered. But Bhimasena is prone to anger. Yajnasena’s daughter25 is also full of ﬁre. Full of insolence and delusion, you are certain
to commit a transgression and they will burn you down with the power of their austerities. Or the brave and armed
ones may be overcome with anger. With swords that are girded and with energetic weapons, they will burn you
down. Even if you succeed in harming them through force of numbers, that will not be the act of an arya. But I do
not think this to be possible. The mighty-armed Dhananjaya has lived in Indra’s world. Having obtained celestial
weapons, he has returned to the forest. In earlier times, when he had not obtained these weapons, Bibhatsu26 had
conquered the earth. Having obtained the weapons, why should the maharatha not be able to kill you now? If you
listen to my words once you have gone there, even then, there will be reason for anxiety and it will be a sojourn of
unhappiness. Some soldiers of yours may cause injury to Yudhishthira. Even if the act has not been intended, the
sin will be ascribed to you. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Therefore, let skilled men go there for the branding. I do not like the idea of your going there yourself.” Shakuni said, “The eldest Pandava is learned in dharma.
He has taken an oath in the assembly hall that he will live in the forest for twelve years. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! All the Pandavas follow him and are devoted to dharma. Kounteya Yudhishthira will never exhibit anger towards us. We are extremely desirous of going out on a hunt. We also wish to do the numbering.27 We
have no desire to see the Pandavas. There will be no conduct there that does not beﬁt an arya. We will not go to the
place that they have sought refuge in.” Having been thus addressed by Shakuni, Dhritarashtra, the lord of men, reluctantly gave Duryodhana permission to go, together with his advisers.
‘Having obtained permission, Gandhari’s son,28 foremost among the Bharatas, left with a large army, together
with Karna, Duhshasana and Shakuni the dice player, and surrounded by his other brothers and thousands of
women. When the mighty-armed one departed to see Lake Dvaitavana, all the citizens, together with their wives,
followed him to the forest. There were eight thousand chariots, thirty thousand elephants, many thousands of infantry and nine thousand horses, carriages, shopping carts, whores, traders, bards and men who were skilled in
hunting, in hundreds and thousands. O lord of the earth! The departure of the king raised a mighty roar, like the
deep rumble of the winds during the rainy season. While headed towards Lake Dvaitavana, with all his mounts,
King Duryodhana camped at a distance of one gavyuti.’29
526(229)

Vaishampayana said, ‘King Duryodhana resided in that forest and eventually reaching the ghoshas, began to live
there. His attendants constructed his house in a lovely spot that had water and large trees, with all the qualities.

Nearby, they also constructed many houses for Karna, Shakuni and all his brothers. The king saw his cows, in hundreds and thousands. He inspected them and had them all marked with numbers and brands. He had the calves
marked and learnt which cows had given birth and which calves were young, so that the time for their weaning had
not arrived. After having completed the task of counting and branding all calves that were three years old, the descendant of the Kuru lineage was surrounded by the cowherds and pleasured himself. As it pleased them, like the
immortals, the citizens and soldiers in thousands sported in that forest. The cowherds were skilled in singing and
knew the art of dancing and music. With their daughters, adorned in ornaments, they served Dhritarashtra’s son.
Surrounded by masses of women, the king was delighted and donated riches, food and many kinds of drink to
them, according to what each one was worth. With all of them, he killed hyenas, buffaloes, deer, oxen,30 bear and
boar in every direction. With his arrows, he pierced elephants in that great forest. He captured deer in that beautiful
region. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He drank milk and enjoyed succulent fruit. He saw beautiful forests
in bloom. They swarmed with intoxicated bees and noisy peacocks.
‘In due course, he went to sacred Lake Dvaitavana. He went there with supreme prosperity, like the great Indra,
the wielder of the vajra. O lord of the earth! It so happened that on the same day, Dharma’s son, Yudhishthira, performed the sadyaska sacriﬁce31 undertaken by rajarshis. The supreme among the Kurus observed the divine rite
and tendered offerings from the forest. Having observed it, the wise Kourava, lord of men, went with Droupadi, his
wife according to dharma, to the lake.
‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Together with his younger brothers, Duryodhana instructed his servants to
quickly construct pleasure houses. They said that they would act as Kouravya had asked them to. They went towards Lake Dvaitavana to build the pleasure houses. Having reached Lake Dvaitavana, the vanguard of the army
of Dhritrarashtra’s son was about to enter the forest, but was restrained at the gate by the gandharvas. O lord of the
earth! O king! Surrounded by his masses, the king of the gandharvas had already arrived there from Kubera’s
abode. He was in the habit of sporting with masses of apsaras and the sons of the thirty gods and had therefore
barred entry to the lake. O king! When the king’s servants found that the lake had been barred, they returned to
King Duryodhana. On hearing their words, Kouravya dispatched his war-crazy soldiers to evict the others. On
hearing the words of the king, the soldiers in the vanguard went to Lake Dvaitavana and spoke to the gandharvas.
“King Duryodhana, Dhritarashtra’s strong son, has come here to sport. Leave this place.” O lord of the earth! Having been thus addressed, the gandharvas laughed. They replied to those men in harsh words. “Your king Suyodhana is evil in his intelligence. How can he command us, as if we are his servants? We are inhabitants of heaven.
There is no doubt that you are evil in wisdom, since you are heading towards death. You have lost your senses if
you repeat his orders to us. All of you should swiftly go back to the Kourava king. If you do not do that, you will
depart today for Yama’s abode.” Having been thus addressed, the vanguard of the king’s army rushed back to
where the king, Dhritarashtra’s son, was.’
527(230)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O great king! All of them then went to Duryodhana. They told him what had been said about
the Kourava. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dhritarashtra’s powerful son was ﬁlled with anger that his army
had been restrained by the gandharvas. He told his soldiers, “Chastise the ones who do not follow dharma and dare
to do that which brings me displeasure, even if Shatakratu and all the gods happen to be sporting there.” On hearing Duryodhana’s words, the immensely strong sons of Dhritarashtra and thousands of soldiers armed themselves
for battle. Repulsing the gandharvas, they forcibly entered the forest. They ﬁlled the ten directions with giant roars,
like those of lions. The gandharvas sought to restrain the Kuru soldiers. O lord of the earth! But though restrained
by the gandharvas peacefully, they ignored those gandharvas and entered the great forest. When Dhritarashtra’s
sons and their servants did not stop, despite their words, they took to the sky and reported this to Chitrasena.32 On
hearing everything, the king of the gandharvas had the following to say about the Kouravas. In anger, Chitrasena
said, “They do not behave like aryas. Punish them.” O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Taking their leave of
Chitrasena, all the gandharvas grasped weapons and rushed at the sons of Dhritarashtra.

‘On seeing the gandharvas swiftly descend on them with raised weapons, the sons of Dhritarashtra could be seen
to ﬂee in all the directions. On seeing that the sons of Dhritarashtra were ﬂeeing from the ﬁeld of battle, the brave
Vaikartana33 was the only one who wasn’t reluctant to do battle. On seeing the great army of gandharvas descend
on him, Radheya repulsed them with a mighty shower of arrows. With great lightness of hand, the suta’s son killed
hundreds of gandharvas with kshurapras,34 vishikhas,35 bhallas,36 vatsadantas37 and iron arrows. The maharatha sliced off the heads of many gandharvas and in a short while, dispersed all of Chitrasena’s army. Although
the gandharvas were killed by the intelligent son of the suta, they returned again in hundreds and thousands. In a
short instant, the earth was covered with gandharvas and Chitrasena’s soldiers descended with great force. Then
King Duryodhana, Shakuni Soubala, Duhshasana, Vikarna and other sons of Dhritarashtra ascended chariots that
screeched like Garuda and began to kill those soldiers. They fought again, placing Karna at the forefront. There
was the giant roar of chariots and the stamping of the feet of horses. Supporting Vaikartana, they repulsed the
gandharvas. Then all the gandharvas descended on the Kouravas and the battle that raged was extremely terrible. It
made the body hair stand up. Oppressed by the arrows, the gandharvas began to wilt. On seeing that the gandharvas were suffering, the Kouravyas roared loudly. On seeing that the gandharvas were frightened, Chitrasena was
overcome with anger. He angrily ﬂew up from his seat, resolving to kill them. That brave one began to ﬁght with
weapons of maya, following wonderful paths. The Kouravyas were bewildered because of Chitrasena’s maya. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! It seemed as if each one of Dhritrarashtra’s sons was assailed and surrounded
by ten gandharvas.
‘O king! Being thus oppressed by a great army, they were frightened. They ﬂed the ﬁeld of battle and went to
where King Yudhishthira was, seeking refuge with him. Everywhere, the soldiers of the sons of Dhritarashtra were
being destroyed. O king! Vaikartana Karna was the only one who stood immobile like a mountain. Duryodhana,
Karna and Shakuni Soubala were severely wounded in the ﬁeld of battle, but kept ﬁghting the gandharvas. With a
desire to kill Karna in battle, hundreds and thousands of gandharvas rushed collectively towards him. With a desire
to kill the son of the suta, the immensely strong ones surrounded him from all sides, with swords, javelins, spears
and maces. Some sliced off the yoke,38 others brought down the ﬂagpole. Some brought down the shafts, the horses and the charioteer. Some sliced down the umbrella, others the fenders39 and the diadem. In many thousands, the
gandharvas shattered the chariot. Holding a sword and a shield in his hand, the son of the suta jumped down from
the chariot. He leapt onto Vikarna’s chariot and whipped the horses, so that he might escape.’
528(231)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O great king! When maharatha Karna was routed by the gandharvas, in the sight of the sons
of Dhritarashtra, the entire army ﬂed. O great king! On seeing all the sons of Dhritarashtra ﬂee, Duryodhana refused to run away. On seeing the great army of gandharvas descend on him, the scorcher of enemies unleashed a
great shower of arrows. Without thinking about this shower of arrows, and desiring to kill Duryodhana, the gandharvas surrounded his chariot from all sides. They cut down the yoke, shafts, fenders, pennants, charioteer, horses,
trivenu40 and seat into pieces that were as small as sesame seeds. Duryodhana was thus unseated from the chariot
and fell down on the ground. The mighty-armed Chitrasena rushed at him and captured him alive. O Indra among
kings! When he had been thus captured, the gandharvas surrounded Duhshasana on his chariot and captured him
too. With Chitrasena, others rushed at Vivimshati and still others at Vindu and Anuvindu and all the wives of the
kings. The soldiers of Dhritrarashtra’s sons were routed by the gandharvas.
‘Together with the ones who had been wounded before, they then went to the Pandavas. When the king had been
captured, all the wagons, shopping carts, whores, carriages and vehicles sought refuge with the Pandavas. Dhritarashtra’s son was handsome, mighty-armed and immensely strong. But the king was taken prisoner by the gandharvas and the Parthas pursued them. Duhshasana, Durvishaha, Durmukha and Durjaya41 were captured and tied
by the gandharvas, as were all the wives of the kings. When the king had been captured, Duryodhana’s advisers
were miserable. Lamenting in sorrow, all of them went to Yudhishthira. Bhimasena spoke to Duryodhana’s aged
advisers, who were grief-stricken and miserable and were begging Yudhishthira. “They42 came here for a different

purpose, but something else has transpired. The gandharvas have accomplished what we should have undertaken.
O son!43 This is the outcome of the king listening to evil counsel and indulging in deceitful gambling. We have
heard it said that others bring down the enemies of one who is impotent. The gandharvas have performed this extraordinary act before our eyes. We are fortunate that, in this world, there exist men who wish to do that which is
pleasant for us and while we were seated, they have taken up our burden and made us happy. We have been suffering from the cold, the heat and the wind and have become emaciated through our austerities. The evil-minded one
was comfortable and wished to see us in this state. Those who followed the conduct of that evil-souled Kouravya,
the adherent of adharma, are witnessing their own defeat. It is because adharma was performed that this instruction
is now being given. I am telling you. You can see that the Kounteyas are not violent or evil.” When Kounteya Bhimasena was speaking in this way, the king44 said that this was not the time for harsh words.’
529(232)

‘Yudhishthira said, “O son!45 Why are you speaking in this way to the terriﬁed Kouravas who have sought refuge
with us? They are confronted with difﬁculties. O Vrikodara! Dissension and quarrels occur among those who are
related by blood. While enmity continues, the dharma of the lineage is not destroyed. If a stranger not related by
blood seeks to harm a lineage, those who are good do not tolerate that stranger’s violence. The evil-minded one46
knows that we have been residing here for some time. But he has ignored us and done something that is unpleasant
for us. Through Duryodhana’s forcible capture by the gandharva and through a stranger’s oppression of the
women, our lineage has been sullied. O tigers among men! For the sake of those who have sought refuge with us
and to save the lineage, arise and get ready, without any delay. Let Arjuna, you, and the brave and invincible twins
free Dhritarashtra’s son, Suyodhana, from captivity. O tigers among men! These chariots are stocked with all the
weapons. They have golden ﬂags and are driven by Indrasena47 and the other charioteers. O sons!48 Ride them
and ﬁght the gandharvas in battle. Ceaselessly endeavour to free Suyodhana. O Vrikodara! Every king will protect
one who has come for refuge, not to speak of someone as capable as you. Who can ignore cries for help and the
sight of hands joined in salutation, even if it happens to be a certain enemy? O Pandava! Out of granting a boon,
obtaining a kingdom, the birth of a son and freeing an enemy from misery, the last is superior to the other three.
What can provide greater satisfaction to you than that Suyodhana should be in distress now and that his life depends on the strength of your arms? O Vrikodara! O brave one! There is no doubt that I myself would have rushed
to help him, had the sacriﬁce not been going on.49 O Bhima! O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Try all the different means of conciliation to free Suyodhana. If the king of the gandharvas does not return him through conciliation, free Suyodhana through mild use of your valour. O Bhima! But if the Kouravas are not released through a
mild battle, use every means possible to crush those who are contrary. They must be freed. O Vrikodara! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I am only capable of giving you instructions, as long as the sacriﬁce is going on.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having heard these words of Ajatashatru,50 Dhananjaya agreed to his senior’s51 words
about freeing the Kouravas. Arjuna said, “If the gandharvas do not free the sons of Dhritarashtra through peaceful
means, the earth will drink the blood of the king of the gandharvas.” O king! Having heard the oath of the truthful
Arjuna, the Kouravas took heart again.’
530(233)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing Yudhishthira’s words, all the bulls among men, with Bhimasena at the forefront,
arose with happy faces. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the maharathas clad themselves in impenetrable
armour that was radiant with gold. They ascended chariots, all of which had pennants. With bows and arrows in
their hands, the Pandavas blazed like the ﬁre. Those chariots were equipped well and were yoked to swift steeds.
Using those chariots, those tigers travelled fast. On seeing the maharatha sons of Pandu advance, the army of the
Kouravas let out a great roar. The travellers of the sky52 and the maharathas were not frightened and were ﬂush
with victory. In a short while, they encountered each other in that forest. All the gandharvas were ﬂush at the

prospect of victory. On seeing the four brave Pandavas advance into battle on their chariots and on seeing them as
resplendent as the guardians of the worlds, the residents of Gandhamadana53 established themselves in battle formations. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Remembering the words of the king who was Dharma’s son, the
ﬁrst battle that was engaged was a mild one. But the soldiers of the king of the gandharvas were deluded in intelligence. They were incapable of realizing that something that was mild might beneﬁt them.
‘At that, Savyasachi, the invincible scorcher of enemies, addressed the travellers of the skies on the ﬁeld of battle. “This is not an act that is worthy of the king of the gandharvas, oppressing the wives of other men and consorting with humans. Free the extremely brave ones, the sons of Dhritarashtra. On the instructions of Dharmaraja, free
their wives.” On hearing the words of the famous Pandava, the gandharvas laughed. They replied to Partha in these
words. “O son!54 There is only one person on earth whose instructions we obey. Under his rule, we roam around,
without any anxiety. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! We do only what he commands us to do. Other than that
lord of the gods, there is no one else who can command us.” Having been thus addressed by the gandharvas, Kunti’s son, Dhananjaya, replied to the gandharvas in these words. “O gandharvas! If you do not free the sons of Dhritarashtra through peaceful means, I will exhibit my valour and free Suyodhana myself.” Having uttered these
words, Partha Savyasachi Dhananjaya released sharp arrows, which travelled through the sky, at those roamers of
the sky. The gandharvas were insolent of their strength and released a shower of arrows at the Pandavas, and the
Pandavas did the same to those residents of heaven. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus began a terrible
battle between the swift gandharvas and the immensely swift Pandavas.’
531(234)

Vaishampayana said, ‘The gandharvas were bedecked with golden garlands and possessed celestial weapons. They
enveloped them with blazing arrows from all the directions. There were four brave Pandavas and thousands of
gandharvas. O king! They attacked each other in that battle and it was extraordinary. Just as the gandharvas had
shattered the chariots of Karna and the sons of Dhritarashtra into a hundred pieces, they attempted to do it again. O
king! Hundreds of gandharvas attacked them in that battle and the tigers among men repulsed them with many
showers of arrows. Repulsed by showers of arrows in all the directions, those travellers of the sky could not approach near the sons of Pandu. On seeing that the gandharvas were angered, Arjuna used great and celestial
weapons against them. In that war, insolent about his strength, Arjuna used his agneya weapon to send a million
gandharvas to Yama’s abode. O king! With his sharp arrows, Bhima, the great archer and supreme among strong
ones in battle, killed hundreds of gandharvas. O king! Insolent of their strength, Madri’s two sons fought and captured and killed hundreds of enemies. When the gandharvas were thus killed by the great-souled ones with celestial weapons, they took to the sky and took the sons of Dhritarashtra with them. But Kunti’s son, Dhananjaya, saw
them arise. He surrounded them on all sides with a great net of arrows. Having been tied down by that net of arrows, they were like birds in a cage. They angrily hurled showers of maces, spears and swords at Arjuna. But
Dhananjaya pierced the bodies of the gandharvas with bhallas. Heads, legs and arms55 fell down from above like a
shower of rocks and the others took fright. When the gandharvas were being killed by the great-souled Pandava,
who was on the ground, they showered down arrows on him from the sky. But Savyasachi, the energetic scorcher
of enemies, repulsed all of them with his own weapons and began to pierce the gandharvas. Arjuna, the descendant
of the Kuru lineage, unleashed his weapons—sthunakarna, indrajala, soura, agneya and soumya.56 The gandharvas were burnt up by the arrows of Kunti’s son. They were in supreme despondence, like the daityas at Shakra’s
hands. When they tried to escape upwards, his net of arrows restrained them. When they tried to slither away,
Savyasachi restrained them with his bhallas.
‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing the gandharvas terriﬁed by Kunti’s intelligent son, Chitrasena
grasped a mace and rushed towards Savyasachi. In that battle, he held the iron mace in his hand. But with his arrows, Partha sliced the mace into seven pieces. On seeing that the mace had been cut into many pieces by the arrows of the nimble one, he57 made himself invisible and began to ﬁght with Pandava. Established in the sky, he
repulsed those celestial weapons. The powerful king of the gandharvas hid himself through his powers of maya.
Arjuna saw that he was invisible and was striking. He therefore attacked him with divine weapons that could travel

in the sky, invoked with mantras. Arjuna was angered. Dhananjaya used the weapon known as shabdabheda58 and
restrained his disappearance into many different forms. Pierced by the weapons of the great-souled Arjuna, the
gandharva revealed himself to his beloved friend.59 On seeing his friend Chitrasena, ﬁghting feebly in battle,60
the bull among the Pandavas withdrew the weapon he had released. When all the other Pandavas saw that Dhananjaya had withdrawn his weapons, they too restrained their swift steeds and their bows and arrows. Chitrasena, Bhima, Savyasachi and the twins then asked about each other’s welfare, while they were astride their respective
chariots.’
532(235)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Then the great archer and immensely radiant Arjuna smiled and spoke to Chitrasena in the
midst of the gandharva soldiers. “O brave one! Why did you decide to chastise the Kouravas? Why did you capture Suyodhana with his wives?” Chitrasena replied, “O Dhananjaya! The great-souled god resides here.61 He
knows the motives of the evil-souled Duryodhana and the evil Karna. Knowing that you were residing in the forest
and suffering, though you did not deserve it, they came here to see you and the famous Droupadi. On learning their
intentions, the lord of the gods told me, ‘Go and bind Duryodhana and his advisers. Bring them here. Protect
Dhananjaya and his brothers in battle. The Pandava is your beloved friend and your student.’ On the instructions of
the king of the gods, I swiftly came here. The evil one has been tied up and I will go to the abode of the gods.” Arjuna replied, “O Chitrasena! Suyodhana is our brother. If you wish to do that which brings me pleasure, set him
free. Those are Dharmaraja’s instructions.” Chitrasena said, “He is evil and is always mean. He does not deserve to
be freed. O Dhananjaya! He has deceived Dharmaraja and Krishna.62 Kunti’s son, Dharmaraja, great in his vows,
does not know why he decided to come here. After hearing the reason, do what you wish.” Then all of them went
to King Yudhishthira. Having gone there, they told him about all his63 evil deeds.
‘Having heard the words of the gandharva, Ajatashatru praised the gandharva and said that all of them should be
set free. “It is fortunate that despite your strength and might, none of you has injured the evil sons of Dhritarashtra,
or their advisers, kin and relatives.64 O father!65 This is a great favour that the travellers of the sky have done to
me. Because the evil-souled one has been freed, the honour of the lineage has not been tainted. I am delighted at
having seen you. Tell me what your instructions are. Having obtained everything that you wish for, return swiftly.”
Thus, the gandharvas took their leave of the intelligent son of Pandu. Extremely delighted, they left with the apsaras, with Chitrasena at the forefront. With a divine shower of ambrosia,66 the king of the gods revived the gandharvas who had been killed in the battle with the Kouravas. Having performed the difﬁcult task of setting their relatives and all the wives of the kings free, the Pandavas were extremely pleased. The maharathas were honoured by
the Kurus and their wives and sons. Amidst the Kurus, the great-souled ones were as resplendent as the ﬁre. Having freed Duryodhana, together with his brothers, Yudhishthira lovingly told him, “O son!67 Never commit such
rashness again. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! One who is rash never comes to a happy end. O descendant
of the Kuru lineage! Return safely with all your brothers. If it pleases you, without any despondency, return to your
houses.” Having been thus given permission by the Pandava, King Duryodhana was overcome with shame and returned to his city. With the Kouravya gone, Kunti’s son, Yudhishthira, was honoured by the brahmanas, together
with his brave brothers. Surrounded by the ones rich in austerities, like Shakra amidst the immortals, he pleasured
himself happily in Dvaitavana.’
533(236)

Janamejaya said, ‘He was vanquished and bound by his enemies in battle. Later, he was freed by the great-souled
Pandavas. The extremely evil-souled Duryodhana was always boastful, insolent and proud. He always looked
down upon the manliness and generosity of the Pandavas. It seems to me that the wicked one’s entry into Hastinapura must have been difﬁcult. He must have been overcome by shame and sorrow. His heart must have been full of
grief. O Vaishampayana! Recount in detail his entry.’

Vaishampayana said, ‘Dhritarashtra’s son, Suyodhana, was given his leave by Dharmaraja. His face was lowered
in shame. He was extremely miserable. He returned slowly. The king left for his city, followed by four components
of his army.68 On the way, there was a region that was full of excellent grass and water. He set his vehicles free
there. As he wished, he camped in an auspicious and beautiful spot of ground. In due order, his elephants, horses,
chariots and infantry were stationed around him. The king seated himself on a couch that was like the ﬁre in its radiance. He looked like the moon, eclipsed by Rahu. When night was over, Karna came to Duryodhana and spoke
to him. “O son of Gandhari! It is fortunate that you are alive and fortunate that we have met again. It is fortunate
that you have vanquished the gandharvas, who are capable of assuming any form at will. O descendant of the Kuru
lineage! It is fortunate that I see all of your brothers. They are maharathas and have been victorious, triumphing
over the enemies in battle. While you looked on, I was worsted by all those gandharvas. My own army was routed
and I was incapable of ensuring that they remained there. I was sorely wounded by the arrows and hard-pressed. I
ran away. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I think it is extraordinary that I see you here, without harm and
without injury, and with all your wives, riches and vehicles. You have freed yourself from that superhuman battle.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O great king! There is no other man in this world who is like you, or can
achieve what you have done in battle with your brothers.” O king! Having been thus addressed by Karna, King
Duryodhana lowered his head and spoke in a voice that was choked with tears.’
534(237)

‘Duryodhana said, “O Radheya!69 I do not take offence at your words, because you do not know what transpired.
You think that I defeated the gandharva enemies through my energy. O mighty-armed one! My brothers and I did
ﬁght with the gandharvas for a long time and there was destruction on both sides. But when those brave ones
fought with the use of maya, the battle with the travellers of the sky was no longer equal. We then encountered defeat in the battle and were taken captive, together with the servants, advisers, wives, riches and vehicles. We were
then extremely miserable and were abducted by them through the sky. Then, miserable, some of our advisers and
soldiers went to the maharatha Pandavas and sought refuge. ‘King Duryodhana, Dhritarashtra’s son, together with
his younger brothers and his advisers and wives, is being carried away through the sky by the gandharvas. O fortunate ones! Please free the king and his wives. Otherwise, all the wives of the Kuru lineage will suffer a lot.’70 The
eldest of Pandu’s sons has dharma in his soul. Having been thus addressed, he paciﬁed his brothers and ordered
them to free us. The Pandavas, bulls among men, went to that spot. Though they were capable, the maharathas
tried conciliation ﬁrst. But though they were conciliatory, the gandharvas did not free us. Then, insolent in their
strength, Arjuna, Bhima and the twins unleashed many showers of arrows at the gandharvas. At that, all of them71
gave up the ﬁght and ﬂed to the sky, though dragging our miserable selves along in delight. I then saw Dhananjaya,
surrounded by nets of arrows on all sides, release his superhuman weapons. All the directions could be seen to be
enveloped by the Pandava’s sharp arrows. Chitrasena, Dhananjaya’s friend, showed himself and he and the Pandava, scorcher of enemies, embraced each other. They asked each other about their welfare. On meeting each other,
they discarded their armour and arms. The brave gandharvas mixed freely with the Pandavas. Chitrasena and
Dhananjaya displayed each other honours.”’
535(238)

‘Duryodhana said, “When he met Chitrasena, Arjuna smiled. The scorcher of enemies spoke these words, which
weren’t those of an impotent one. ‘O brave one! O supreme among gandharvas! You should release our brothers.
They should not be oppressed as long as the sons of Pandu are alive.’ O Karna! Having been thus addressed by the
great-souled Pandava, the gandharva revealed the reason why we had come—to see the Pandavas and their wife in
misery, devoid of happiness. When the gandharva revealed this through his words, I wished to enter a hole in the
earth in shame. Together with the Pandavas, the gandharva then went to Yudhishthira and told him about our plans,
handing us over to him in bonds. What greater misery can there be than being offered to Yudhishthira, miserable
and tied, under the control of the enemy, and in the sight of the women? They have always been persecuted by me.

They have always been my enemies. They set me free. I am evil-minded indeed, that I owe my life to them. O
brave one! It would have been better had I encountered my death in that great battle, than to obtain my life in this
way. Had I been killed by the gandharvas, my fame would have been recounted on earth. In Indra’s world, I would
have obtained the sacred worlds of eternal bliss. O bull among men! Listen to what I have now resolved to do. I
will remain here and fast to death. The rest of you return home. Let all my brothers also return to the city now and
also my well-wishers and relatives, with Karna and the others. With Duhshasana at the forefront, let them return to
the city. Humiliated by the enemy, I will not return to the city. I used to rob the enemy of his honour and earn respect for my well-wishers. I have now inﬂicted sorrow on my well-wishers and have increased the delight of my
enemies. Having returned to Varanahrya,72 what will I tell the king? What will Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Drona’s
son,73 Vidura, Sanjaya, Bahlika, Somadatta, the others who are honoured by the elders, the brahmanas, the chiefs
of the various professions and those who are strangers, have to say to me? What will I reply to them? So far, I have
stood on the heads of my enemies and have trod on their chests. Through my own sins, I have now been dislodged.
What will I tell them? Insolent ones may obtain prosperity, learning and riches. But like me, because they are intoxicated by insolence, they cannot maintain that fortune for long. Out of my foolishness, I have committed an evil
act. I was deluded by my own evil intelligence. That is the reason why I am confronted with this calamity. I will
therefore fast to death. I am incapable of living any longer. No one with spirit wishes to remain alive after an enemy has saved him from a calamity. I am proud, but have lost my manliness. The enemy has laughed at me. The
Pandavas have great valour and have looked down at me with disrespect.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘While he was thinking in this way, he spoke these words to Duhshasana. “O Duhshasana!
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen to my words. You are being instated as a king by me and accept this.
Protected by Karna and Soubala, rule over this extensive earth. Protect your brothers as conﬁdently as the slayer of
Vritra74 protects the Maruts. Just as the gods earn a living from Shatakratu, let your relatives earn a living from
you. Without any deviation, always provide livelihood to brahmanas. Always be the refuge for your relatives and
well-wishers. Just as Vishnu looks after the masses of gods, look after the relatives. Protect the seniors. Go and
govern the earth. Gladden all your well-wishers and chastise the enemies.” Embracing him75 by the neck, he
asked him to go. On hearing these words, Duhshasana was miserable. He was extremely sorrowful and his words
were choked with tears. He joined his hands in salutation. In a broken voice, he told his elder brother to relent. His
heart burnt and he prostrated himself on the ground. In sorrow, he shed tears on his76 feet and the tiger among men
said, “This cannot be. The earth with its mountains can be shattered. They sky can be splintered. The sun can lose
its light. The moon can lose its cool. The wind can lose its speed. The Himalayas can begin to walk. The water of
the ocean may be dried up. The ﬁre can lose its head. O king! But I will not govern the earth without you.” He repeatedly spoke words asking him to relent. “In our lineage, you alone will be the king for one hundred years.” He
touched the feet of his elder brother, who deserved to be honoured by him.
‘On seeing Duhshasana and Suyodhana in grief, Karna, who was himself miserable, approached and said, “O
Kouravyas! Why are you overcome by childish grief, like two ordinary people? Sorrow can never be driven away
through grieving. Grieving never alters the state of the one who is sorrowful. What will be gained through this
lamentation? Get a grip on your own selves. Do not delight the enemies through this sorrow. O king! The Pandavas
performed their duty in freeing you. Those who reside within a king’s dominions, must always do that which is
pleasant for him. Under your protection, the Pandavas have resided without any anxiety. You should not grieve like
an ordinary person. Your brothers are despondent because you have decided to fast to death. O fortunate one! Arise
and move around. Comfort your brothers. O king! I do not understand your present foolish conduct. O brave one!
O destroyer of enemies! What is surprising in the Pandavas setting you free, when you were in the clutches of your
enemies? O Kouravya! Those who live within the kingdom, especially those who are soldiers, must act for the
pleasure of the king, whether they are known to him or not. It often happens that the foremost among men, capable
of crushing enemy armies, are captured on the ﬁeld of battle and are freed by ordinary soldiers. Men who are soldiers and reside within a king’s dominions, must appropriately endeavour to accomplish the king’s objectives. O
king! The Pandavas live in your kingdom. Even if they have freed you now, what is the reason for this lamentation? O king! O supreme among kings! When you marched out with your army, what is improper is that the Pan-

davas did not follow you at the back. They are brave and powerful. But they withdrew from the ﬁeld of battle,
though they had earlier become your possessions in the assembly hall. You are enjoying the riches of the Pandavas.
But look at the Pandavas. They are still powerful and are not fasting to death. O king! O fortunate one! Arise! You
should not think about this. Those who live within a king’s boundaries must do pleasant things for the king. Why
should one lament about that? O Indra among kings! Listen to my words. O destroyer of enemies! If you do not act
in accordance with them, I will stay here at your feet and serve you. O bull among men! Without you, I do not desire to live. O king! If you decide to fast to death, all the other kings will laugh at you.” Having been thus addressed by Karna, King Duryodhana still decided not to rise, having set his mind on going to heaven.’
536(239)

Vaishampayana said, ‘King Duryodhana was intolerant and was still determined to fast to death. O king! Shakuni
Soubala spoke gently to him. “O Kourava! You have heard what Karna has told you and his words are right. Out of
delusion, why should you throw away the riches that I obtained for you? O supreme among kings! Like a foolish
one, why do you desire to give up your life? It seems to me that you have never visited the elders.77 If one does
not control sudden happiness or unhappiness, even if one obtains prosperity, it is destroyed, like an unbaked vessel
in water. A king who is extremely timid, extremely impotent, procrastinating, absent-minded and addicted to the
senses—is not served by prosperity. You have been served by a good act. Why do you exhibit this contrary sentiment of sorrow? You should not destroy the good act of the Parthas by resorting to this sorrow. You should reward
the good act of the Pandavas by being happy. O Indra among kings! Instead, you are sorrowing and acting in a
contrary way. Be gracious and do not give up your life. Be satisﬁed and remember the good deed. Return the kingdom to the Parthas and earn fame and dharma. By performing this act, you will show your gratitude. Be fraternal
towards the Pandavas and give them their places again. You will be happy if you return the ancestral kingdom to
them.” Having heard Shakuni’s words, and glancing with brotherly affection at Duhshasana prostrate at his feet,
who was brave but was now acting timidly, he embraced Duhshasana, the scorcher of enemies, with his wellformed arms and raised him. He lovingly smelt the fragrance of his head.
‘King Duryodhana was already sorrowful. Having heard Karna and Soubala’s words, he was overcome with
shame and became extremely despondent. Having heard his well-wishers, he angrily said, “I am no longer concerned with dharma, riches, friendship, prosperity or acts of pleasure. Do not be frustrated. Leave. I have made up
my mind that I will fast to death. All of you return to the city and show honour to my superiors.” But they replied
to the king who was the destroyer of his enemies. “O Indra among kings! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The
path that you traverse is also ours. How can we return to the city without you?” He was addressed in many different ways by his well-wishers, advisers, brothers and relatives. But he had made up his mind and would not waver.
In accordance with his resolution, Dhritarashtra’s son spread darbha on the ground.78 He puriﬁed himself by
touching water and sat down on the ground. He was attired in rags and a garment made of kusha and established
himself in the supreme rite. The tiger among kings maintained silence. He was desirous of going to heaven. He
controlled his mind and cut himself off from the external world.
‘On learning of his resolve, the daityas and the danavas, the terrible denizens of the nether regions, who had earlier been defeated by the gods, knew that their own side would be weakened because of Duryodhana.79 They performed a sacriﬁce so as to summon him. They were skilled in mantras and pronounced mantras uttered by Brihaspati and Ushanas. They performed the rites mentioned in the Atharva Veda and the Upanishads, those that were
capable of being performed through mantras and prayers. There were brahmanas who were learned in the Vedas
and the Vedangas and extremely ﬁrm in their vows. Extremely attentively, they uttered mantras and poured offerings of milk into the ﬁre. When those rites were completed, Kritya arose from the ﬁre.80 O king! She was extremely wonderful and had a gaping mouth. “What must I do?” she asked. Extremely happy in their souls, the daityas
told her, “The king who is Dhritarashtra’s son is fasting to death. Bring him here.” Thus commanded, Kritya
agreed that she would do this, and departed. In an instant, she went to where King Suyodhana was. She grasped the
king and entered the nether regions.81 Within an instant, she brought him and handed him over to the danavas. On

seeing that the king had been brought, the danavas assembled at night. All of them were delighted in their minds
and their eyes were dilated in delight. They then spoke these proud words to Duryodhana.’
537(240)

‘The danavas said, “O Suyodhana! O Indra among kings! O extender of the Bharata lineage! You are always surrounded by brave and great-souled ones. Why have you resorted to this rash deed of fasting to death? Suicide always brings a person down and ill words are spoken about such a person. Intelligent ones like you should never
embark on contrary tasks that strike at the roots of their best interests. Restrain this resolution. O king! This is destructive of dharma, artha and happiness. It kills fame, power and fortitude and increases the happiness of the enemies. O lord! O king! Hear the truth about your divine origins and how this body of yours came to be created.
Then resort to fortitude. O king! In ancient times, through our austerities, we obtained you from Maheshvara.82 O
unblemished one! The upper part of your body has been made from a collection of vajras and is impenetrable to
every type of weapon.83 The lower part was created by the goddess84 herself, out of ﬂowers, and its handsome
form is attractive to women. O supreme among kings! O tiger among kings! Thus, your body was created both by
Ishvara and by the goddess. You are divine, not human. There are extremely valorous kshatriyas, with Bhagadatta
at the forefront. They are brave and skilled in the use of divine weapons and will kill your enemies. Therefore, do
not grieve. There is no reason for fear. To aid you, many brave danavas have been born on earth. Other asuras will
penetrate Bhishma, Drona and Kripa. Possessed by them, they will discard their kindness and ﬁght with your enemies. O supreme among Kurus! When the danavas have possessed their inner souls, they will cast aside all affection and kill everyone in battle—sons, brothers, fathers, relatives, students, kin, young and old. Those tigers among
men will be deluded through ignorance. They will be driven by the dictates of destiny. Their minds will be dark
and they will discard all love. They will gleefully tell each other, ‘You will not escape with your life.’ They will
establish themselves in their manliness and release every kind of weapon.85 Priding themselves, those foremost
ones among the Kurus will destroy a large number of people. The great-souled Pandavas will be capable of ﬁghting back. Those greatly strong ones are favoured by destiny. O king! They will kill masses of daityas and rakshasas
who have been born in the wombs of kshatriyas and who will ﬁght with your enemies with clubs, maces, swords
and missiles.86 O brave one! Whatever fear there exists in your heart about Arjuna, for that too, we have devised a
means for Arjuna. The soul of Naraka, who had been killed, has entered Karna. O brave one! Because of that enmity, he will ﬁght Keshava and Arjuna.87 Karna is supreme among warriors. He is proud in battle. That maharatha
will defeat Partha and all the enemies in battle. The wielder of the vajra88 knows this. To protect Savyasachi, he
will rob Karna of his earrings and armour. But there are hundreds and thousands of daityas with us. We have also
appointed rakshasas by the name of samshaptakas.89 Those famous ones will kill the brave Arjuna. Do not sorrow. O king! This entire earth will be yours, without any rivals. Do not resort to despondency. That is not worthy
of you. O Kourava! If you are destroyed, our side will be weakened. O brave one! Depart. You should never direct
your intelligence towards any other task. You are our recourse, just as the Pandavas are of the gods.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having thus addressed him, the daityas then embraced that elephant among kings. Like a
son, the bulls among the danavas consoled that invincible one. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They steadied
his intelligence with loving words. Then they gave him permission to leave, saying, “Go,” and “Be victorious.”
When he had obtained permission, Kritya again brought the mighty-armed one back to the spot where he had decided to fast unto death. Having placed the brave one down and having honoured him, Kritya took his permission
to leave and instantly disappeared. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When she had disappeared, King Duryodhana thought that it had all been a dream. But a thought always remained with him. “I will vanquish the sons of
Pandu in battle.” Suyodhana thought that Karna and the samshaptakas had been given the task of killing of Partha,
the slayer of enemies, and that they were capable of this. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Thus did resolution
harden in Dhritarashtra’s evil-minded son, about defeating the Pandavas. Karna’s mind and soul had been possessed by Naraka’s soul. This turned his mind towards the cruel task of killing Arjuna. Various rakshasas possessed
the intelligence of the brave samshaptakas. They were overtaken by rajas and tamas90 and wished to kill

Phalguna.91 The minds of Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and the others were taken over by the danavas. O lord of the
earth! They were no longer as affectionate towards the sons of Pandu. But King Suyodhana did not tell anyone
this. When the night was over, Karna Vaikartana smiled at King Duryodhana, and joining his hands in salutation,
spoke words full of reason to him. “No one who is dead can defeat his enemies. Only those who are alive witness
fortune. O Kouravya! How does a dead one obtain fortune? Where is the victory? This is not the time for despondency, fear or death.” He then embraced the mighty-armed one with his arms and said, “O king! Arise. O destroyer
of enemies! Why are you lying down? Why are you sorrowing? How can you desire to die when the enemy has
been tormented through your valour? Or if fear has been engendered at the sight of Arjuna’s valour, I truly promise
that I will kill Arjuna in battle. O lord of men! When thirteen years have elapsed, I swear on my weapons that I
will bring the Parthas under your subjugation.” Having been thus addressed by Karna, remembering the words of
the daityas and witnessing the prostrations of the others, Suyodhana arose. Having heard the words of the daityas,
he adopted a ﬁrm resolution in his heart. The tiger among men asked his army to be prepared, with many chariots,
elephants, horses and large numbers of infantry. O king! The great army marched like the waves of the Ganga. It
had white umbrellas and pennants and extremely white whisks. It was extremely radiant with chariots, elephants
and infantry, like the sky when the thick clouds have disappeared and autumn is yet to arrive. Indras among brahmanas pronounced benedictions of victory over him and praised him like an emperor. With hands joined in salutation, Dhritarashtra’s son, the lord of men, received the homage of garlands. O Indra among kings! Blazing in
supreme prosperity, Suyodhana was in the front, together with Karna and the dice-player Soubala. Beginning with
Duhshasana, all his other brothers were there, and Bhurishravas, Somadatta and the great king Bahlika. The extenders of the Kuru lineage followed that lion among kings on many types of chariots, horses and excellent elephants.
O king! In a short while, they entered their own city.’
538(241)

Janamejaya asked, ‘O excellent one! When the great-souled Parthas lived in the forest, what did the sons of Dhritarashtra, great archers, do? What about Karna Vaikartana, the immensely strong Shakuni, Bhishma, Drona and
Kripa? You should tell me all this.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O great king! When the Parthas had left in that way and Suyodhana had been freed by the
sons of Pandu and had returned to Hastinapura, Bhishma spoke these words to Dhritarasthra’s son.92 “O son!93 I
had told you earlier, when you had intended to go to the forest of ascetics, that I did not like the idea of the trip.
But you went despite that. O brave one! You were then forcibly taken captive by the enemies. You were freed by
the virtuous Pandavas. But you still have no shame. O Gandhari’s son! O lord of the earth! In your sight and in the
presence of your army, the suta’s son94 was frightened of the gandharvas and ﬂed from the ﬁeld of battle. O Indra
among kings! O son of a king! While you and your soldiers cried in distress, you witnessed the valour of the greatsouled Pandavas and that of the mighty-armed and evil-minded Karna, the son of a suta. O supreme among kings!
Whether it is in knowledge of arms, valour, dharma or devotion to dharma, Karna is not worth a small part of the
Pandavas. O foremost among those who strive for peace! Therefore, for the welfare of this lineage, I think that
peace with the great-souled Pandavas is desirable.” O king! Having heard Bhishma’s words, Dhritarashtra’s son,
the lord of men, laughed and abruptly departed with Soubala.
‘On seeing him leave, Karna, Duhshasana and the other mighty archers followed the immensely strong son of
Dhirtarashtra. O king! Having seen them depart, Bhishma, the grandfather of the Kurus, lowered his head in shame
and left for his own house. O great king! When Bhishma had gone, Dhritarashtra’s son, the lord of men, returned
to that spot again and consulted with his advisers. “What is the best course of action for us? What is left to be
done? How should we act now?”95 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He sought advice thus. Karna replied, “O
Duryodhana! O Kourava! Listen to what I have to say. O destroyer of enemies! Having listened to it, act accordingly. O brave one! O supreme among kings! The earth is yours now, without any rivals. O great-minded one!
With your enemies killed, protect it like Shakra.” Having been thus addressed by Karna, the king again spoke to
Karna. “O bull among men! Nothing can be unattained by one who has someone like you. You are my aide and
you are always ready to serve me. I will now tell you about my intention. Listen to it attentively. O son of a suta!

On witnessing the great and supreme rajasuya sacriﬁce of the Pandavas, I am ﬁlled with the desire of undertaking
it and satisfy my wishes.” Having been thus addressed, Karna spoke to the king. “O supreme among kings! All the
lords of the earth have now been brought under your subjugation. Summon the foremost among brahmanas and
collect offerings, in accordance with the prescribed rites. O best of the Kuru lineage! Let all the ingredients and requirements for the sacriﬁce be collected. O king! O destroyer of enemies! Let the summoned ofﬁciating priests,
learned in the Vedas, perform the rites in accordance with the sacred texts. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Let
your great sacriﬁce have plenty to eat and drink and let it also be extremely prosperous, with all the qualities.” O
lord of the earth! Having been thus addressed by Karna, Dhritarashtra’s son summoned the priest and spoke these
words to him. “Arrange for rajasuya, the best of sacriﬁces, with the best of dakshina, and according to all the rites
in the proper order.” Having been thus addressed by the king, the bull among brahmanas replied. “O best of
Kouravas! O supreme among kings! That best of sacriﬁces cannot be performed in your lineage as long as Yudhishthira is alive. O king! Your father Dhritarashtra, with a long life, is also alive. O supreme among kings! Because of these reasons, you cannot perform this sacriﬁce. O lord! However, there is another great sacriﬁce that is
equal to the rajasuya. O Indra among kings! Listen to my words and perform that sacriﬁce. O king! All the lords of
the earth who pay you tribute, will bring tributes of gold, worked and unworked. O supreme among kings! With
this, you must have a plough constructed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Plough the sacriﬁcial ground with
this. O foremost among kings! Let a sacriﬁce be organized there, well arranged and with plenty of food. Without
obstructions in any direction, let it be held there, in accordance with the rites. This sacriﬁce has the name of Vaishnava and is familiar to all righteous ones. No one except the ancient Vishnu has ever performed it. This great sacriﬁce is the equal of rajasuya, supreme among sacriﬁces. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is attractive to us
and will ensure your welfare. Let it be performed without obstructions and your desires will be fruitful.” Having
been thus addressed by the brahmanas, Dhritarashtra’s son, the lord of the earth, spoke to Karna, Soubala and his
brothers. “There is no doubt that the words of the brahmanas are attractive to me. If they are attractive to you, let
me know that, without any delay.” Having been thus addressed, all of them agreed to what the king had said. Then,
in due order, the king gave instructions to the appointed people. He instructed all the artisans to construct the
plough. O best of kings! Everything that he had instructed was carried out in the due order.’
539(242)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Then the artisans, all the chief advisers and the immensely wise Vidura spoke to Dhritarashtra’s son. “O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The time for the supreme sacriﬁce has arrived. The extremely expensive plough, made out of gold, has been constructed.” O lord of the earth! On hearing this, Dhritarashtra’s son, foremost among kings, instructed the kings that the king of sacriﬁces should be initiated. Then the
sacriﬁce, well designed and with many ingredients, was started. Gandhari’s son was consecrated, in due order, in
accordance with the sacred texts. Dhritarashtra, the immensely famous Vidura, Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna and
Gandhari’s famous son were delighted. O Indra among kings! Swift messengers were dispatched to invite the kings
and the brahmanas. As instructed, the messengers ascended on swift mounts.
‘Duhshasana spoke to a messenger who was about to start. “Go swiftly to Dvaitavana and invite the Pandavas,
evil men, in accordance with what is prescribed, and also the brahmanas who are in that great forest.” He went to
where the Pandavas resided. Bowing down to them, he said, “O great king!96 Duryodhana, supreme among kings,
is observing a sacriﬁce. He is supreme among the Kurus and has acquired a lot of riches through his own valour.
The kings and brahmanas are going there from all directions. O king! I have been sent here by the great-souled
Kourava, with an invitation from the king who is Dhritarashtra’s son and is the lord of men. O king! He loves that
sacriﬁce and you should come and witness it.” On hearing the messenger’s message, King Yudhishthira, tiger
among kings, replied. “It is fortunate that King Suyodhana is performing the foremost of sacriﬁces. He will extend
the deeds of his ancestors. We will go there, but we cannot do that now. We will have to abide by our oath until
thirteen years have passed.” Hearing Dharmaraja’s words, Bhima said, “Dharmaraja Yudhishthira will go when
that king has been hurled into a ﬂaming ﬁre lit with weapons and missiles.97 When thirteen years have passed, the
king who is Dhritarashtra’s son will be offered as oblation into the ﬁre of war by the angry Pandavas. We will then

come. Say this to Suyodhana.” O king! The other Pandavas did not speak any unpleasant words. The messenger
reported everything to Dhritarashtra’s son.
‘Many foremost among men, many kings of countries and many immensely fortunate brahmanas went to the
city of Dhritarashtra’s son. They were honoured, in accordance with the sacred texts, in accordance with their varnas and in due order. O lord of men! They were supremely delighted. O Indra among kings! Surrounded by all the
Kouravas, Dhritarashtra’s son was extremely happy and spoke to Vidura. “O Kshatta!98 Act so that everyone is
happy and has plenty of food. You should swiftly act so that everyone at the site of the sacriﬁce is satisﬁed.” O destroyer of enemies! The learned Vidura, devoted to dharma, entertained all the varnas, as he had been instructed.
He happily honoured them and gave them food, drinks, garlands, fragrances and many garments. When the brave
one had observed the sacriﬁce in accordance with the sacred texts and in the proper order, he comforted kings and
brahmanas in thousands. The Indra among kings gave away a large quantity of riches. Then, having given all the
kings permission to leave, surrounded by his brothers, he entered Hastinapura, together with Karna and Soubala.’
540(243)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O great king! When he entered, bards sang praises of the unblemished one. Others eulogized
the great archer, supreme among kings. Sprinkling fried grain and sandalwood powder over him, the people said,
“O king! It is through good fortune that your sacriﬁce has been completed without any impediments.” There were
others present, who were not careful in speech. They told the king, “Your sacriﬁce has not been equal to Yudhishthira’s sacriﬁce. It does not equal a sixteenth part of that sacriﬁce.” Thus some, who were voluble, spoke to
that lord of men. However, his well-wishers said, “Your sacriﬁce has surpassed all the others. Puriﬁed by performing such a sacriﬁce, Yayati, Nahusha, Mandhata and Bharata have all gone to heaven.” O bull among the Bharata
lineage! On hearing such pleasant words from his well-wishers, that lord of men was extremely pleased and entered his city and his own house. O lord of the earth! He bowed in obeisance at the feet of his father and mother,
Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and the wise Vidura. He was himself honoured by his younger brothers, brothers whom he
loved.
‘Surrounded by his brothers, he sat down on an excellent seat. O great king! The son of the suta arose and spoke
to him, “O foremost among Bharatas! It is through good fortune that your great sacriﬁce has been completed. O
best of men! When you have killed the Parthas in battle and have performed a rajasuya, I will honour you again.”
The immensely famous son of Dhritarashtra, great among kings, replied, “O brave one! You have spoken the truth.
O best among men! When the evil-souled Pandavas have been killed and the great sacriﬁce of rajasuya has been
performed, you will honour me again.” O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With these words, the immensely
wise Kourava embraced Karna and began to think about rajasuya, the greatest of sacriﬁces. That supreme of kings
then spoke to the Kouravas who were by his side. “O Kouravas! When will I perform the supreme and extremely
expensive sacriﬁce of rajasuya, after having killed all the Pandavas?” Karna then told him, “O elephant among
kings! Listen to my words. I will not wash my feet until Arjuna is dead.” When Karna vowed to kill Phalguna99 in
battle, Dhritarashtra’s sons, maharathas and great archers, roared in approval. Dhritarashtra’s sons thought that the
Pandavas had already been conquered.
‘O Indra among kings! Duryodhana then permitted those bulls among men to leave. The lord100 entered his
beautiful house, which was like Chaitraratha.101 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those other great archers
also went to their own houses. Prodded by the words of the messenger, the great archers, the Pandavas, began to
think about the purport of those words and could not ﬁnd any happiness. O Indra among kings! The news had been
brought to them by spies that the son of the suta had taken a vow to kill Vijaya.102 O lord of men! On learning
this, Dharma’s son was greatly anxious. He thought of the impenetrable armour that Karna, extraordinary in valour, possessed. He thought of all their difﬁculties and had no peace of mind. The great-souled one’s intelligence
was full of such thoughts. He decided to leave the forest of Dvaitavana, infested with many predators and animals.
The king, who was Dhritarashtra’s son, ruled the earth with his brothers and the brave Bhishma, Drona and Kripa.
He consorted with Karna, the son of a suta, who was radiant in battle. King Duryodhana was always engaged in
bringing pleasure to others. He honoured the chief brahmanas and performed sacriﬁces with a lot of donations. O

king! That scorcher of enemies did that which brought pleasure to his brothers. The brave one had decided that the
fruits of wealth were to be enjoyed and given.’

Section Forty
Mriga-Svapna-Bhaya Parva
This parva has sixteen shlokas and one chapter.
Mriga means deer. Deer appear to Yudhishthira in a dream (svapna) and tell him about their fears (bhaya), requesting the Pandavas to relocate from Dvaitavana.
541(244)

Janamejaya asked, ‘After having freed Duryodhana, what did the immensely strong Pandavas do in that
forest? You should tell me this.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘One night, when Kounteya Yudhishthira was asleep in Dvaitavana, the deer
showed themselves to him in a dream. Their voices were choked with tears. They trembled and stood before him, their feet joined in salutation. The Indra among kings told them, “Who are you and what do you
wish for? Tell me what you desire.” Having been thus addressed by the famous Kounteya Pandava, the
remaining deer1 spoke to Yudhishthira. “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! We are the remnants of the
deer in Dvaitavana. O great king! Find a residence somewhere else. Otherwise, all of us will be killed. All
your brothers are brave and are skilled in the use of weapons. They have reduced the lineage of those that
live in the forest, until only a few remain. O immensely intelligent one! A few of us have been left, as
seed for the future. O Indra among kings! O Yudhishthira! Let us extend through your favours.” On seeing
the trembling and frightened deer, with only a few remaining as seed, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was extremely unhappy. The king was always engaged in the welfare of all beings. He told them, “It shall be as
you say. I will do what you have asked me to.” He took an oath in this fashion. When night was over, the
supreme among kings was ﬁlled with compassion towards the deer and spoke to his brothers. “The deer
that still remain spoke to me in a dream last night. They said, ‘O fortunate one! Only a few of us remain
as seed. You should show compassion towards us.’ They spoke the truth. We should show compassion towards those who live in the forest. We have lived on them for one year and eight months. Therefore, let us
go towards the supreme and beautiful forest of Kamyaka, which is full of large numbers of deer. It is located at the head of the desert, near the famous lake of Trinabindu. Let us pleasantly pass the rest of our
time there.” O king! The Pandavas, learned in dharma, swiftly left, together with the brahmanas who lived
with them, and followed by Indrasena2 and the other servants. They followed an excellent road that was
full of superb grain and pure water. They soon saw the sacred hermitage of Kamyaka, populated by ascetics. O best of the Bharata lineage! Surrounded by the bulls among the brahmanas, the Kouravyas entered it, like virtuous ones entering heaven.’

Section Forty-One
Vrihi-Drounika Parva
This parva has 117 shlokas and three chapters.
Chapter 542(245): 34 shlokas
Chapter 543(246): 36 shlokas
Chapter 544(247): 47 shlokas
Vrihi means rice, or a grain of rice. Drouni or drona means a vessel, as well as a measure of capacity. Vyasa visits the Pandavas and tells
them the story of Mudgala, who lived on a measure (drona) of rice (vrihi) and was generous enough to give it away. Mudgala was tested by
the sage Durvasa and turned down an opportunity to go to heaven.
542(245)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O bull among the Bharata lineage! When the great-souled Pandavas lived in the forest, they
spent eleven years in great difﬁculties. Although they deserved happiness, those supreme among men confronted
extreme misery and lived on fruits and roots. They kept thinking about when this period would be over. The
mighty-aremd rajarshi Yudhishthira thought that this supreme misery had befallen his brothers because of the sin
of his own deeds. The king did not sleep happily. His heart seemed to be pierced with stakes. At that time, he witnessed the calamity that had arisen from the game with the dice. On remembering the harsh words of the suta’s
son, the Pandava sighed in misery, retaining the great poison of his anger. Arjuna, the twins, the famous Droupadi
and the immensely energetic Bhima, supremely strong among all of them, suffered extreme sorrow when they
looked at Yudhishthira. The bulls among men thought that only a short period of time remained. Their bodies were
so agitated with endeavour and anger that their appearances seemed to change.
‘After some time, the great yogi Vyasa, Satyavati’s son, came there to see the Pandavas. When Kunti’s son Yudhishthira saw him arrive, he approached and welcomed the great-souled one in accordance with the proper rites.
Having satisﬁed Vyasa by prostrating himself, the descendant of the Pandava lineage, willing to serve and controlled in his senses, seated himself below him. On seeing that his grandson was lean from surviving on forest fare,
the maharshi was driven by compassion and spoke in a voice that was choked with tears. “O mighty-armed Yudhishthira! O foremost among those who uphold dharma! Listen to my words. Those who do not torment themselves with austerities, do not ﬁnd great happiness in this world. In due order, men experience happiness and unhappiness. O bull among the Bharata lineage! No one experiences continuous happiness. A man who is wise has
superior insight and knows that fortune rises and sets. He does not rejoice or sorrow. When there is happiness, one
enjoys it. When there is unhappiness, one endures it, just as one who has ploughed the land waits for the right time.
There is nothing superior to austerities. Austerities lead to greatness. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Know
that there is nothing that austerities do not lead to. O great king! Truthfulness, honesty, restraint from anger, willingness to share, self-control, calmness, freedom from envy, non-violence, purity and control of the senses—these
are the methods used by men whose deeds are pure. People who are addicted to adharma, those who are deluded
and follow the ways of inferior species, achieve births that bring difﬁculties and never attain happiness. Whatever
acts are performed here, ﬁnd fruits in the next world. Therefore, one should yoke one’s body to austerities and
rules. O king! One should donate according to one’s ability, happily and devoid of envy, to the right person at the
right time, showing homage and honours. One who is honest and truthful obtains a life without difﬁculties. One

without anger and malice obtains supreme contentment. One with self-control and serenity never confronts difﬁculties. One who has controlled his soul is not tormented on seeing the prosperity of others. A man who gives the
right share, and the one who receives, ﬁnd happiness. One who is non-violent attains supreme health. He who honours those who deserve to be honoured, obtains birth in a great lineage. He who has conquered his senses, never
confronts misfortune. If one’s intelligence is directed towards good deeds, following the law of time, because of
this, he obtains superior intelligence.”
‘Yudhishthira asked, “O illustrious one! O great sage! There is the dharma of giving and there are austerities.
Which of these has greater qualities in the next world and which is said to be more difﬁcult?”
‘Vyasa said, “It is said that nothing is more difﬁcult in this world than giving. There is great thirst for wealth and
wealth is obtained through difﬁculty. Brave men give up the love for life and enter into great battles for the sake of
wealth. They enter oceans and forests. Men resort to agriculture and rearing cattle and become servants for the
sake of obtaining wealth. Therefore, it is extremely difﬁcult to give up something that has been obtained with great
difﬁculty. Therefore, there is nothing more difﬁcult than giving and I hold charity to be superior. It must specially
be said that riches that have been obtained through just means must be given away to virtuous ones, to the right
person, and at the right time and place. But if the riches have been obtained through unjust means, the deed of observing the dharma of charity does not save the giver from great danger. O Yudhishthira! It has been said that even
a small gift, given to the right person at the right time, and with a pure mind, brings eternal fruits in the hereafter.
On this, there is an ancient account about how Mudgala obtained great rewards by giving away a drona of rice.”’
543(246)

‘Yudhishthira asked, “Why did that great-souled one give up a measure of rice? O illustrious one! Whom did he
give it to and in what fashion? Please tell me. I think that a person who follows dharma has had a successful birth
if he has been able to please the illustrious one1 who has made his dharma manifest.”
‘Vyasa said, “O king! Mudgala used to live in Kurukshetra. He was good in his conduct and had dharma in his
soul. He was rigid in his vows. He was truthful and without envy. He survived by gathering grains of rice.2
Though he drew his sustenance like a pigeon, he served the guests and performed rites. The great ascetic observed
the sacriﬁce known as ishtikrita.3 Together with his wife and son, the sage ate for a fortnight. For the next fortnight, he lived like a pigeon, collecting one drona of vrihi. Without any distortions, he observed the new moon and
full moon sacriﬁces. He sustained his body on the food left after gods and guests had eaten. O great king! Indra
himself, the lord of the three worlds, would arrive there with the other gods on auspicious lunar days, to partake of
their shares. At such auspicious times, the one who lived like a sage, happily entertained the guests with food.
When that great-souled one gave rice from his measure without any envy, whatever remained always increased
when another guest arrived. Because of the pure way the sage gave away rice, it increased so that hundreds of
learned brahmanas enjoyed it.
‘“O king! On hearing about the virtuous Mudgala, rigid in his vows, Durvasa, clad in nothing but air, went to
him. O Pandava! The sage was in the form of a dishevelled lunatic. His head was shaven and he spoke harsh
words. Having arrived, the supreme of sages spoke to the brahmana. ‘O supreme among brahmanas! Know that I
have come here desirous of food.’ Mudgala told the sage that he was welcome. He offered him water to wash the
feet and the mouth and devoted to his guests, gave the hungry one the supreme food he had obtained with great
difﬁculties, though he seemed to be mad. Rigid in his vows, he was devoted. But the mad one was hungry and ate
up all the tasty food that had been offered and Mudgala gave him more. When he had eaten all the food, he4
smeared his body with the left overs and went away, the way he had come.5 When the learned one6 observed the
next auspicious lunar day, he7 came again and ate up all the rice that the one who lived on collections possessed.
Thereupon, the sage8 had to go without food and had to go out again to gather. But that hunger was incapable of
upsetting Mudgala’s temperament. There was no anger, jealousy, disrespect or agitation in the mind of that
supreme of brahmanas, or in those of his sons and wife. In this way, ﬁrm in his resolution, Durvasa, supreme
among sages, arrived at the right time on six occasions, to the one whose dharma was collection. But the sage

could not see any distortions in his mind. He saw that the mind of that pure-hearted one was always pure and
clean. Extremely delighted, the sage spoke to Mudgala. ‘In this world, there is no one who is your equal, with your
generosity and lack of envy. Hunger drives away all sense of dharma and removes self-possession. The tongue follows the senses and is attracted towards the succulent. Life is sustained through food. The mind is ﬁckle and it is
difﬁcult to control it. The control of the mind and the senses is certain asceticism. It is difﬁcult to give up with a
pure mind that which has been earned through labour and misery. O virtuous one! But all this has been exactly
achieved by you. We are delighted and favoured to have met you. Control of the senses, fortitude, generosity, selfcontrol, serenity, compassion, truthfulness and dharma are all established in you. You have conquered the worlds
through your deeds. You have obtained the supreme objective. Even the residents of heaven proclaim your great
deeds of giving. O one who is extremely good in his vows! You will go to heaven in your own body.’ While the
sage Durvasa was still speaking in this way, a messenger of the gods arrived before Mudgala in a celestial chariot
that was yoked to swans and cranes and had networks of bells. It was coloured, divinely scented and could travel
wherever it wished. He9 told the brahmana rishi, ‘O sage! Ascend this chariot. Through your deeds, you have obtained the supreme objective.’ The rishi told the messenger of the gods, ‘O messenger of the gods! I wish that you
should describe to me the qualities of those who reside in heaven. What are the attributes of those who live there?
What are their austerities and their resolutions? What is the divine happiness in heaven and what are its shortcomings? Learned ones, who know about family customs, say that seven steps together is all that is required for friendship with the righteous.10 O illustrious one! On the basis of that friendship, I am now asking you. Without any
hesitation, tell me the facts and what is prescribed. On hearing your words, I will act in accordance with them.’”’
544(247)

‘“The messenger of the gods said, ‘O maharshi! Are you still thinking about what should be done about the
supreme happiness of heaven? You have obtained a great honour and you are still deliberating about it, like one
who is not wise. Know that the world which exists above is known by the name of heaven. It is high up. O sage! It
has excellent streets, along which the vehicles of the gods travel. O Mudgala! Men who have not tormented themselves with austerities, those who have not performed great sacriﬁces, those who are untruthful and those who are
atheists cannot go there. Men with dharma in their souls, those who have conquered their souls, the serene, the
self-controlled, those who are without jealousy, those who are devoted to the dharma of giving and brave ones who
bear injury marks on their bodies, go there. Through serenity and self-control, they are the best practitioners of
dharma. O brahmana! Those worlds, meant for performers of pure deeds, are served by righteous ones. O
Moudgalya!11 The gods, the Sadhyas, the Vishvas,12 the maharshis, the yamas,13 the dhamas,14 the gandharvas
and the apsaras live there. The many separate worlds of these masses of gods are separate, and one after another,
are radiant, energetic and beautiful, satisfying all desires. The golden Mount Meru, the king of mountains, is there,
extending for thirty-three thousand yojanas. O Mudgala! The celestial gardens are there. There is the sacred Nandana,15 where the performers of pure deeds can pleasure. There is no hunger, thirst, fatigue, cold, heat or fear
there, nor anything terrible or inauspicious, nor any disease. Fragrances, pleasing to the mind, are everywhere.
Everything is pleasurable to the touch. O sage! There are sounds everywhere and they are pleasant to the ear and
the mind. There is no sorrow or old age there, nor labour and repentance. O sage! The world that is obtained as the
fruit of one’s own deeds is like this. It is possible for men to go there through their own good deeds. O Moudgalya!
The bodies of those who live there are resplendent because of their own deeds, and not a consequence of their
mothers or fathers. There is no sweat or bad smell, no excrement and urine. O sage! Dust does not soil one’s garments there. The beautiful garlands, with celestial fragrances, never fade. O brahmana! The residents travel on
many celestial vehicles. They have no jealousy, sorrow or fatigue. They are devoid of confusion and envy. O great
sage! They live there in heaven, in happiness.
‘“‘O bull among sages! But beyond these worlds, and higher up, there are Shakra’s worlds, with divine qualities.
O brahmana! Beyond these are the sacred and effulgent worlds of Brahma. O brahmana! Rishis who have been puriﬁed through their sacred deeds go there. The gods of the gods, by the name of the Ribhus,16 live there. These
worlds are supreme and are worshipped even by the gods. These worlds are radiant in their own lustre and they

yield every object of desire. These lords of the worlds17 are not tormented on account of women and are free from
envy. They do not offer oblations, nor do they feed on amrita. They possess divine bodies and do not have physical
forms. These eternal gods of the gods do not crave for happiness. They are not transformed when the eras18
change. How can they have old age, death, joy, pleasure or happiness? O sage! How can they have unhappiness,
happiness, affection or hatred? O Moudgalya! That supreme state is craved even by the celestials. But that supreme
salvation is difﬁcult to obtain and cannot be got by those who are still subject to desire. There are thirty-three
worlds.19 The worlds of the learned are beyond these. Those who follow the best of restraints, or donate according
to the norms, attain these. You have attained that because of your generous deeds. Enjoy the happiness that you
have earned through your good deeds, illuminated by the radiance of your austerities. O brahmana! Such is the
bliss of heaven, in many different worlds. I have described the qualities of heaven to you. Now hear about the
taints. In heaven, while enjoying the fruits of deeds performed, one must enjoy them right up to the roots, and cannot perform any other deeds. In my view, this is a blemish, because there is a fall at the end of it and those who
minds have been full of bliss, must fall. O Mudgala! After having witnessed that brilliance and prosperity, the discontentment and regret that follow the relocation to a different region, must be extremely difﬁcult to endure. For
those who fall, the consciousness is confounded. The passions cause agitation. The garlands fade and fear descends
on those who are falling. O Moudgalya! These are the terrible taints that exist all the way up to Brahma’s abode.
But this is not true of the higher worlds of the performers of good deeds. For such men, the qualities are innumerable.20 O sage! There is another supreme characteristic of those who have been dislodged from heaven. After their
good deeds are over, they are born among men. They are born as immensely fortunate and enjoy their share of
prosperity. But if one does not attain wisdom there, one obtains an inferior status.21 The deeds performed in this
world are enjoyed in the next. O brahmana! It has been said that this is a world of deeds. The next is one of fruits.
O Mudgala! I have explained everything that you have asked me. Through your grace, without any delay, let us go
to the region of the righteous.’”
‘Vyasa said, “When Moudgalya heard these words, he reﬂected on them in his mind. Having thought about
them, the best of sages replied to the messenger of the gods. ‘O messenger of the gods! I bow down before you. O
father!22 Please go, according to your wishes. If there are such great taints, I have nothing to do with heaven or
happiness. There will be great unhappiness at the time of the fall, by those who have enjoyed heaven. There will be
extremely terrible regret. Therefore, I do not desire heaven. I will only look for the inﬁnite region where there is no
sorrow, unhappiness or dislodging, once one has traversed the path and has reached there.’ Having spoken these
words, the sage gave the messenger of the gods permission to leave. He returned to a life of collecting rice and
achieved supreme serenity. He looked on praise and blame equally. A brick, a stone and a piece of gold were the
same to him. Through the yoga of knowledge, he was always engaged in meditation. Having obtained strength
through the yoga of meditation, he obtained supreme wisdom. He attained the eternal and supreme success, the
marks of supreme salvation.23 O Kounteya! Therefore, you should not sorrow. You have been dislodged from a
prosperous kingdom. But you will regain it through your austerities. Happiness follows unhappiness and unhappiness follows happiness in circles around a man, like the rim of a wheel. You have inﬁnite valour and you will obtain the kingdom of your fathers and grandfathers, once the thirteen years have passed. You should discard the
fever in your mind.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having spoken these words to the descendant of the Pandava lineage, the illustrious and
wise Vyasa returned to his hermitage, for the performance of austerities.’

Section Forty-Two
Droupadi Harana Parva
This parva has 1247 shlokas and thirty-six chapters.
Chapter 545(248): 17 shlokas
Chapter 546(249): 13 shlokas
Chapter 547(250): 9 shlokas
Chapter 548(251): 21 shlokas
Chapter 549(252): 27 shlokas
Chapter 550(253): 26 shlokas
Chapter 551(254): 21 shlokas
Chapter 552(255): 59 shlokas
Chapter 553(256): 30 shlokas
Chapter 554(257): 10 shlokas
Chapter 555(258): 16 shlokas
Chapter 556(259): 40 shlokas
Chapter 557(260): 15 shlokas
Chapter 558(261): 55 shlokas
Chapter 559(262): 41 shlokas
Chapter 560(263): 43 shlokas
Chapter 561(264): 73 shlokas
Chapter 562(265): 30 shlokas
Chapter 563(266): 68 shlokas
Chapter 564(267): 54 shlokas
Chapter 565(268): 40 shlokas
Chapter 566(269): 14 shlokas
Chapter 567(270): 29 shlokas
Chapter 568(271): 27 shlokas
Chapter 569(272): 26 shlokas
Chapter 570(273): 33 shlokas
Chapter 571(274): 31 shlokas
Chapter 572(275): 69 shlokas
Chapter 573(276): 13 shlokas
Chapter 574(277): 41 shlokas
Chapter 575(278): 32 shlokas
Chapter 576(279): 23 shlokas
Chapter 577(280): 33 shlokas
Chapter 578(281): 108 shlokas
Chapter 579(282): 44 shlokas
Chapter 580(283): 16 shlokas
Harana means abduction and this parva is about Droupadi’s abduction by Jayadratha. Jayadratha abducts Droupadi. The Pandavas defeat
Jayadratha and free Droupadi, shaving Jayadratha’s head in the process. Jayadratha obtains a boon from Shiva. This section then tells the
story of the Ramayana and Savitri and Satyavan, where Savitri brings her husband, Satyavan, back from the land of the dead.
545(248)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Those maharathas, the best of the Bharata lineage, sported like immortals in the forest of
Kamyaka, full of large numbers of deer. They gazed upon many forest regions in all directions and woods full of
blossoms, beautiful according to the season. The Pandavas, the destroyers of enemies, equals of Indra and fond of
hunting deer, roamed for some time in that great forest. One day, at the same time, all of them went out in the four

directions, since those tigers among men, the scorchers of enemies, wished to obtain deer for serving the brahmanas. With the permission of maharshi Trinabindu, blazing in austerities, and Dhoumya, they left Droupadi in the
hermitage. At that time, the famous king of the Sindhus, the son of Vriddhakshatra, was headed for the country of
Shalva, desiring to get married.1 He was surrounded by a large retinue, as was appropriate for a king. With the
many kings who were with him, he stopped in Kamyaka. In that deserted forest, he saw the famous Droupadi, the
beloved wife of the Pandavas, standing at the gate of the hermitage. Her form was radiant in its supreme beauty. It
illuminated the forest region, like lightning on a dark cloud. “Is she an apsara, a daughter of the gods, or an illusion
created by the gods?” Thinking this, all of them joined their hands in salutation and gazed at the unblemished one.
‘The king of the Sindhus, Jayadratha, the son of Vriddhakshatra, was amazed and happy in his mind to see her
unblemished limbs. He was deluded by desire and told King Kotikashya, “Who is this one with the unblemished
limbs? Is she human? I do not desire to marry, since I have seen this extremely beautiful lady. I will take her with
me and return to my own abode. O gentle one! Go and ﬁnd out who she is. Whom does she belong to and where
has she come from? Why has the one with the beautiful eyebrows come to a forest that is full of thorns? She has
beautiful hips. She is the beauty of this world. She is slender of waist and her teeth are beautiful. Her eyes are
large. Will she love me now? I will consider my desires to be satisﬁed if I can obtain this supreme of women. O
Kotika! Go and ﬁnd out who her protector is.” On hearing these words, Kotikashya, who was adorned with earrings, descended from his chariot and approached her, the way a jackal approaches the wife of a tiger, and asked
her.’
546(249)

‘Kotikashya said, “O beautiful one! Who are you, standing alone in this hermitage and holding onto the lowered
branch of a kadamba tree? O one with the beautiful brows! You are as radiant as the ﬂames of a ﬁre in the night,
fanned by the wind. You are endowed with supreme beauty. Are you not scared of this forest? Are you a goddess, a
yakshi or a danavi? Are you a beautiful apsara or a beautiful lady from the daitya lineage? Is your beautiful form
that of a serpent princess? Are you a demoness who walks the forests at night? Are you the wife of King Varuna,
or Yama, or Soma, or the lord of riches? Have you come from the abodes of Dhata, Vidhata, Savita, Vibhu or
Shakra?2 You have not asked us who we are, nor do we know who your protector is. O fortunate one! Increasing
your respect, we are asking you who your powerful lord is. Tell us the names of your relatives, husband and lineage, and also the details of what you are doing here. I am the son of King Suratha and men know me as
Kotikashya. The one who is seated on that golden chariot, like oblations being poured into the ﬁre in an altar, is the
king of Trigarta. His eyes are as long as a lotus and that brave one has the name of Kshemankara. The foremost
son of the king of Kuninda is behind him, holding a giant bow in his hand. He is wide in the shoulders and is gazing at you in wonder. He always dwells in the mountains. A dark and handsome youth is standing near the pond.
He is the son of Subala, king of the Ikshvakus. O one with the beautiful body! He is one who slays his enemies.
There is one who is followed by twelve princes from Souvira, waving ﬂags.3 All their chariots are yoked to red
horses, like blazing ﬁres at sites of sacriﬁces. Their names are Angaraka, Kunjara, Guptaka, Shatrunjaya, Sanjaya,
Supravriddha, Prabhankara, Bhramara, Ravi, Shura, Pratapa and Kuhara. He4 is followed by six thousand on chariots and elephants, horses and infantry. O fortunate one! If you have heard of the name of Jayadratha, the king of
Souvira, that one is he. After him, there are his undaunted brothers, Balahaka, Anika and Vidarana, and all the other brave and young ones from Souvira. But they are all inferior to the king in strength. The king is travelling with
these companions, like Indra protected by the Maruts. O one with the beautiful hair! Now tell us what we do not
know. Whose wife are you? Whose daughter are you?”’
547(250)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Then princess Droupadi replied to the question that the foremost of the Shibis5 had asked.
She glanced gently and let go off the branch. She gathered her silken upper garment and replied, “O son of a king!
I know in my heart that it is not proper for someone like me to address you thus. But there is no other man or
woman here who can reply to your question. O fortunate one! I am alone here and must therefore, give my own

reply. Listen. I am alone in this forest. Being always devoted to my own dharma, how can I speak to you then? I
know that you are the son of Suratha and that men know you by the name of Kotikashya. O Shaibya! Therefore, I
will tell you about my relatives.6 Listen. O Shaibya! I am the daughter of King Drupada and men know me as
Krishna. I have chosen ﬁve men to be my husbands. You may have heard of them, since they come from Khandavaprastha. They are Yudhishthira, Bhima, Arjuna and the two brave sons of Madri. The Parthas have left me
here and have left in the four directions to hunt. The king7 has gone east, Bhimasena south, Jaya8 west and the
twins to the north. I think that the time has come for those great charioteers to return. Depart after they have honoured you. Descend and unyoke your steeds. The great-souled son of Dharma loves guests and will be delighted to
see you here.” Having thus spoken to Shaibya’s son, Drupada’s moon-faced daughter thought of the dharma of attending to guests and entered the extensive cottage, made out of leaves.’
548(251)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When all the kings were seated, the king of Souvira
heard Kotikashya’s words and replied to Shaibya. “On hearing her words, my mind is besotted by her. She is
supreme among women. Why have you returned from there? O mighty-armed one! I tell you truthfully. Now that I
have seen this lady, all other women seem like monkeys to me. She has stolen my heart, from the moment that I
have seen her. O Shaibya! Tell me if that fortunate one is human.” Kotikashya said, “She is the famous princess
Droupadi Krishna. She is the revered queen of the ﬁve sons of Pandu. That respected one is the beloved of all the
Parthas. O Souvira! Now that you have met her, let us happily proceed towards Souvira.” But Jayadratha, the lord
of Souvira and Sindhu, was evil in his inclinations. He replied, “Let us go and see Droupadi.” He entered the empty hermitage, like a wolf entering a den of lions.
‘He himself was the seventh9 and spoke these words to Krishna. “O one with the beautiful thighs! Are you
well? Are your husbands in good health? Are those whose welfare you desire in good health?” Droupadi replied,
“Kouravya King Yudhishthira, Kunti’s son, is well. So am I, his brothers, and the others you have asked about. O
son of a king! Accept this seat and water to wash your feet. Let me give you ﬁfty deer for your breakfast. Kunti’s
son, Yudhishthira, will himself give you black antelopes, spotted antelopes, deer, fawn, sharabhas,10 rabbits,
white-footed antelopes, ruru, shambara,11 oxen, many deer, boar, buffaloes and many others of the deer species.”
Jayadratha said, “You have already done everything to ensure a good breakfast for me. Come. Ascend my chariot
and discover complete happiness. The Parthas are wretched and live in the forest. They have lost their fortune and
have been dislodged from their kingdom. They have lost their intelligence. You should not serve them. It is not
wise to be devoted to husbands who have lost their fortune. One should be united with a husband when he is united
with prosperity, but no longer reside with him when the fortune is destroyed. The sons of Pandu are without fortune. Their kingdom has been destroyed for an eternal period. Out of affection towards them, you should not suffer
that misery. O one with the beautiful hips! Be my wife. Abandon them and obtain happiness. With me, share the
kingdoms of Sindhu and Souvira.” At these words of the king of Sindhu, which made the heart tremble, Krishna
left the spot, a deep frown on her face. The slender-waisted Krishna ignored his words in contempt and told the
one from Sindhu, “Do not speak in this way again. Are you not ashamed?” Expecting her husbands to return soon,
the unblemished one began to distract him with words, mingled with more words.’
549(252)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Her beautiful face was crimson with anger. Her eyes were red with anger. Her knitted brows
were raised. With her face suffused, Drupada’s daughter again spoke to the king of Souvira. “You have insulted
famous maharathas whose poison is virulent. O foolish one! Do you have no shame? Each of them is like the great
Indra and is devoted to his own task. They have not wavered in battle against yakshas and rakshasas. O Suvira!
Never speak ill of an ascetic, who is full of knowledge and deserves to be praised, whether he roams in the forest
or lives the life of a householder. Only dogs speak like that. You will descend into the mouth of hell that has now
opened. I do not think that there is anyone in this great assembly of kshatriyas who can hold you by the hand and
prevent this. You hope to defeat and kill Dharmaraja. The rutting elephant is like the peak of a mountain and roams

around in the valleys of the Himalayas. You are like a man who wishes to chase it from its herd, armed only with a
stick. You are childish. The immensely strong lion was asleep. You have woken it, trying to pluck eyelashes from
its face. You will have to run away, when you see the wrathful Bhimasena. The immensely strong, terrible and fully grown lion was asleep in its mountainous cavern. Like a man who has kicked it, you wish to counter the angry
and terrible Jishnu.12 You are like a mad man, who has stamped with his feet on the backs of two dark, forktongued serpents, virulent in their poison. You are seeking to battle with two brave men, the youngest of the Pandavas. The bamboo, the reed and the plantain bear fruit. But then they die and do not grow in size. A crab conceives only so as to perish. Like that, you wish to grasp me, although I am protected by them.”
‘Jayadratha said, “O Krishna! I know all this and I know what those sons of kings are like. But you will not be
able to frighten me with those threats now. O Krishna! We have all been born in the seventeen noble lineages.13
We possess the six qualities.14 O Droupadi! We think that the sons of Pandu are devoid of these. Therefore, swiftly ascend this elephant or this chariot. You cannot dissuade us with words alone. Hope, by lamenting piteously,
that you are able to obtain the favours of the king of Souvira.”
‘Droupadi replied, “Though I am extremely powerful, the king of Souvira now takes me to be weak. He thinks
that I am not sure of myself and therefore, I will plead and demean myself before the king of Souvira. Both Krishnas15 will follow my footsteps, riding together on a single chariot. Indra himself cannot abduct me, not to speak of
a weak and wretched human. Kiriti,16 the slayer of enemy heroes, terriﬁes the hearts of enemies on his chariot.
When he enters your army for my sake, he will consume it like the summer’s dry wood. Janardana,17 followed by
Vrishni warriors, all the mighty archers from the Kekaya lineage, and all the other princes, will happily follow my
footsteps. The arrows released from Gandiva by Dhananjaya’s arms are extremely swift and make a thunderous
noise. They will make a terrible roar. The large showers of arrows released from Gandiva are extremely swift and
are like locusts. There will be the roar of conch shells and the roar of leather gloves. The wielder of the Gandiva
will release them repeatedly. When those arrows pierce your chest, what thoughts will pass through your mind?
You will see Bhima advance, with a mace in his hand. Madri’s two sons will stride in every direction, vomiting the
poison of their anger. O wretched one! You will repent this for a very long time. In my thoughts, I have never been
false to my husbands, extremely deserving of respect. Because of that truth, I will see you bound and dragged by
the sons of Pritha. I may be violently seized by you. But you are incapable of frightening me. I will encounter
those braves of the Kuru lineage and return again to Kamyaka forest.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Her eyes were dilated. She saw that they were about to seize her and remonstrated with
them again. She cried out in fear, “Do not touch me.” She also sought help with the priest, Dhoumya. Jayadratha
grasped her by her upper garment, but she forcibly pushed him away. Pushed by her, that evil one fell, like a tree
that has been uprooted. However, she was seized again with great force and the princess began to sigh repeatedly.
Krishna showed obeisance at Dhoumya’s feet and then Krishna was made to ascend the chariot. Dhoumya said,
“Without vanquishing the maharathas, you cannot take her away. O Jayadratha! You should remember the ancient
dharma of the kshatriyas. There is no doubt that you will reap the fruits of this mean and evil act. You will encounter the brave Pandavas, with Dharmaraja at the forefront.” The famous princess was being carried away. Having said this, Dhoumya followed, by entering the ranks of the infantry.’
550(253)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having roamed in all the directions separately and having killed deer, boars and buffaloes,
the Parthas, foremost among archers on earth, assembled together. The great forest teemed with deer and predators
and was full of birds. On hearing the resounding cries of the deer, Yudhishthira spoke to his brothers. “The birds
and animals are headed in the direction that has been lit up by the sun. They are making harsh noises and seem to
be in great excitement, as if this mighty forest has been invaded by enemies. Let us hasten, forgetting the deer. My
mind is burning with a raging ﬁre. My intelligence is clouded. The breath of life in my body is tormented. Kamyaka now appears to me like a pond that has been robbed of its serpents by Suparna,18 a kingdom that is without its
king and its fortune, or a pot that has been emptied of its liquor by drunkards.” The brave ones then headed for the

hermitage on excellent chariots, yoked to Saindhava19 steeds that had the speed of the wind or a storm. While they
returned, they beheld a jackal howling hideously on the left hand side. On noticing it, the king20 spoke to Bhima
and Dhananjaya. “This jackal has appeared on our left hand side and the inferior animal is speaking. This clearly
shows that the evil Kurus must have mounted a ﬁerce attack on us.” They had gone out for a hunt in the great forest. They now entered the grove21 and saw the maid who used to serve their beloved wife. She was weeping.
‘O Indra among kings! Indrasena swiftly descended from the chariot and rushing to the maid, who was stricken
with grief, spoke these words. “Why are you lamenting and why have you fallen down on the ground? I hope evil
ones have not caused violence to the princess Droupadi. Her form is without blemish and her eyes are extremely
large. Her form is equal to the bulls among the Kurus. Even if the goddess has entered into the earth, ascended to
heaven or plunged into the sea, the Parthas will follow her steps there, because Dharmaraja is gravely tormented.
They are the destroyers of their enemies and bear their difﬁculties, unvanquished. This supreme jewel is as dear to
them as their own lives. Who is the foolish one who will dare to carry her away? Does he not know that she has
protectors now? She is like the walking heart of the Pandavas. Whose body will now be horribly pierced by sharp
and terrible arrows that will then enter the earth? O timid one! Do not sorrow over her. Know that Krishna will return today. Having killed all their enemies, the Parthas will be united with Yajnaseni.” Wiping her beautiful face,
the maid then spoke to the charioteer Indrasena. “Ignoring the ones who are like ﬁve Indras, Jayadratha violated
this place and abducted Krishna. The traces remain and are still fresh. The broken branches have not yet faded.
Swiftly turn22 and pursue. The princess cannot have gone far. All of you are the equals of Indra. Prepare yourselves with large, expensive and handsome armour. Grasp your great bows and arrows and swiftly travel along her
steps. Else, she may be confounded through scolding and sticks. Her face will dry and her mind will be bewildered. She may give up her body to an unworthy person, like sacred oblations thrown into ashes.23 Else, she may
become an oblation to the ﬁre, like a chaff of grain. Else, a wreath may be ﬂung onto a burning ground. While the
ofﬁciating brahmana is inattentive, the offering of soma on the altar may be licked by a dog. When you went for a
hunt in the great forest, the jackal has destroyed the lotus.24 Your loved one’s face has a ﬁne nose and beautiful
eyes. Her brilliant and pure face is as beautiful as the moonlight. Let it not be touched by an evil one, like a dog
that eats up a sacriﬁcial cake. Follow her swiftly. Hasten, lest time passes you by.”
‘Yudhishthira said, “O fortunate one! Be quiet and control your words. You should not speak harsh words while
we are here. Whether kings or princes, if they are deluded because of the insolence of their strength, they are certain to be deceived.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Saying this, they departed swiftly. They followed the remaining trails of the others. Like
predatory beasts, they sighed repeatedly. They twanged their mighty bows. Then they saw the dust raised by the
soldiers, thrown up from the hooves of the horses. Dhoumya was in the midst of the infantry and he addressed Bhima, asking him to attack. The princes comforted Dhoumya, who was extremely miserable in his mind, and asked
him to return happily. Then they swooped down on that army, like hawks on raw meat. They were like the great
Indra in their valour. They were angered at Yajnaseni’s molestation. On seeing their beloved stationed on
Jayadratha’s chariot, their rage ﬂared up. Vrikodara, Dhananjaya, the twins and the king, all mighty archers, called
out to the king of Sindhu to stop. At this, the enemies lost all sense of direction.’
551(254)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On seeing Bhimasena and Arjuna, the intolerant kshatriyas raised a terrible roar in that forest. On seeing the foremost pennants of those bulls among the Kurus, the evil-souled King Jayadratha was robbed
of his energy. He spoke to Yajnaseni, resplendent on his chariot. “O Krishna! Five great chariots are advancing. I
think they must be your husbands. You know them. O beautiful one! Point out to me the separate Pandavas, riding
on their separate chariots.”
‘Droupadi replied, “O foolish one! How will it help you to know those great archers, now that you have performed your terrible and evil deed? My brave husbands have arrived here and you will have no remnants left in
this war. However, you are about to die and everything should be told to such a person. It is the dharma that I
should answer your question. On having seen Dharmaraja and his younger brothers, I suffer no pain or fear on ac-

count of you. Two beautiful drums25 sweetly sound at the top of his pennant. They are named Nanda and Upananda. He knows how to decide about the true nature of dharma and those who are successful, always follow him. His
complexion is like that of pure gold. His nose is high. He is lean and his eyes are large. He is known as the foremost among the Kurus, Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma, and my husband. He provides refuge even to an enemy.
He is brave among men and is a follower of dharma, ready to give up his life for it. O foolish one! For your own
welfare, run to him quickly. Discard your weapons and join your hands in salutation. You will see a mighty-armed
one seated on his chariot, like a fully grown shala tree. He is biting his lips and his brows are furrowed. His name
is Vrikodara and he is my husband. He is immensely strong and brave and is drawn by well-controlled and strong
horses. The deeds that he has done are superhuman. He is known on earth by the name of Bhima. Nothing is left of
those who commit crimes against him. He never forgets an enemy. He thinks of every possible way to avenge the
enmity and even after that, he is not paciﬁed. He is gentle, generous, forbearing and famous. He is brave among
men. He is in control of his senses and serves his elders. He is Yudhishthira’s brother and disciple. His name is
Dhananjaya and he is my husband. Desire, fear or avarice will never cause him to abandon dharma. He never performs a cruel act. His energy is equal to that of the ﬁre-god. He is Kunti’s son and he withstands and represses all
his enemies. He is knowledgeable about everything concerning dharma and artha. The learned one removes the
fear from those who are frightened. It is said that his form is the most beautiful on earth. All the Pandavas protect
him. He is devoted to his vows and he is dearer to me than my life. This brave one is Nakula, my husband. The
second one is light of hand and ﬁghts with the sword. He is mighty and intelligent and he is Sahadeva. O foolish
one! You will witness his deeds in battle today, like Shatakratu against the army of the daityas. He is brave and
skilled in the use of weapons. He is wise and learned. He performs acts that bring pleasure to the king, the son of
Dharma. He is like the moon and the sun in his energy. He is the youngest of the Pandavas and is loved by them.
There is no other man who is his equal in intelligence. He is eloquent in an assembly of the wise. He is brave and
always intolerant. He is wise and learned. He is Sahadeva, my husband. He is ready to give up his life or enter the
ﬁre, rather than act against dharma. He is always wise and devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. He is brave among
men and is dearer to Kunti than her life. Like a boat ﬁlled with gems on the edge of the ocean, riding on the back
of a shark26 and destroyed, you will see the soldiers in your army destroyed and freed27 by the sons of Pandu. I
have thus described to you the sons of Pandu, whom you have foolishly shown disrespect for. If you escape from
them with an uninjured body, you will have been reborn, though you are still alive.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Then the ﬁve Parthas, equal to ﬁve Indras, ignored the terriﬁed infantry, standing with
hands joined in salutation. They angrily attacked the army of chariots from all sides, with dark showers of arrows.’
552(255)

Vaishampayana said, ‘While this was going on, the king of Saindhava told the kings, “Stand ﬁrm. Attack. Surround them.” When the soldiers saw Bhima, Arjuna and the twins with Yudhishthira, the terrible sound of battle
arose. On seeing those tigers among men, intoxicated with their strength, like tigers, those from Shibi, Sindhu and
Trigarta were despondent. Bhima grasped a mace that was constructed entirely out of iron and was decorated with
gold. He rushed towards Saindhava, who had been driven by destiny. Then Kotikashya placed himself in between.
He surrounded and attacked Vrikodara with a large number of chariots. Though the arms of the warriors hurled
many spears, javelins and iron arrows at him, Bhima did not tremble at all. With his mace, Bhima slew an elephant, the rider and fourteen foot soldiers who were in the vanguard of Saindhava’s army. Wishing to seize Souvira, in the vanguard, Partha28 slew ﬁve hundred maharathas, who hailed from the mountains. In an instant, in that
battle, the king29 himself killed one hundred brave and chief Souvira warriors who had attacked him. Nakula was
seen to descend from his chariot, with a sword in his hand. Like scattered seeds, he severed the heads of those who
were guarding at the rear. Like peacocks falling from a tree, Sahadeva fought warriors on elephants from his chariot and struck them down with his iron arrows. Then Trigarta descended from his great chariot with a bow. He was
skilled with the club and slew the four horses of the king.30 On seeing the foot soldier who was near, King Dharmaraja, Kunti’s son, pierced him in the chest with an arrow that was in the shape of a half-moon. Struck in the
chest, the brave one began to vomit blood and fell down before Partha,31 like a tree that had been uprooted. Since

his horses had been slain, Dharmaraja, together with Indrasena, descended from his chariot and climbed onto Sahadeva’s giant chariot. Picking out Nakula, Kshemankara and Mahamukha attacked him from both sides with
showers of sharp arrows. While they showered arrows on him like monsoon clouds, Madri’s son slew them with
one large arrow32 each. Suratha, the king of Trigarta, was skilled in ﬁghting with elephants. He stood on the pole
of his chariot and had Nakula’s chariot destroyed by an elephant. But Nakula wasn’t frightened and descended
from his chariot. He held a sword and a shield in his hand. He whirled them and stood his ground, as immobile as a
mountain. Suratha desired to kill Nakula and dispatched his supreme elephant, which angrily attacked with its
trunk raised. But Nakula approached the elephant and sliced off the elephant’s trunk and tusks, from the roots, with
his sword. The elephant was adorned with anklets. It lowered its head, and with a giant roar, fell down on the
ground, crushing the riders through this fall. Having accomplished this great deed, Madri’s brave and maharatha
son ascended Bhimasena’s chariot to ﬁnd some rest. On seeing King Kotikashya rush towards the battle, Bhima
sliced off his charioteer’s head, who was goading the horses, with an arrow that had the head of a razor. The king
did not realize that his charioteer had been slain by the mighty-armed one. With the charioteer killed, the horses
ran hither and thither on the ﬁeld of battle. He33 was without a charioteer and wished to ﬂee. But Bhima Pandava,
supreme among warriors, killed him with a javelin he hurled with his hand. Using sharp and iron arrows, Dhananjaya cut off the heads and bows of twelve from Souvira. With his arrows, the atiratha34 slew in battle Shibis, the
foremost among Ikshvakus, Trigartas and Saindhavas, as soon as they came within range. Many elephants with
ﬂags and many warriors with pennants were seen to have been killed by maharatha Savyasachi. Headless torsos
and torso-less heads were strewn all over the entire earth. Dogs, vultures, herons, crows, ravens, kites, jackals and
birds feasted on the ﬂesh and blood of warriors who had been slain.
‘On seeing that the brave ones had been killed, Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, was terriﬁed. He freed Krishna
and got ready to run away. His soldiers were in disarray and he lowered Droupadi.35 Then that worst of men ran
towards the forest to save his life. On seeing Droupadi, with Dhoumya at the forefront, Dharmaraja asked Madri’s
brave son to pick her up on his chariot.36 After Jayadratha had run away, Vrikodara slew the remaining soldiers
with iron arrows. On seeing that Jayadratha was running away, Savyasachi restrained Bhima from killing off
Saindhava’s soldiers. Arjuna said, “I do not see Jayadratha on the ﬁeld of battle. It is because of that evil one that
we confronted this calamity. O fortunate one! Let us search for him. Why are you killing these soldiers? This is a
pointless task. What do you think?” Having been thus addressed by the wise Gudakesha,37 Bhimasena looked at
Yudhishthira and eloquently spoke these words. “The foremost warriors of the enemy have been killed. Others
have ﬂed in different directions. O king! Take Droupadi with you and return from here. O Indra among kings! Take
Droupadi to the hermitage with the twins and great-souled Dhoumya and comfort her. I will not allow the stupid
king of Saindhava to escape alive, even if he escapes to the nether regions or has Shakra as a charioteer.” Yudhishthira replied, “O mighty-armed one! Though he is evil in his soul, Saindhava does not deserve to be killed. We
must think of Duhshala and the illustrious Gandhari.” On hearing these words, Droupadi was agitated. Though
bashful, she angrily spoke to Bhima. The wise one addressed her husbands, Bhima and Arjuna. “If you wish to do
something that brings me pleasure, kill that wretch of a man. Saindhava is wicked, evil in his intelligence and
brings ill fame to his lineage. An enemy who carries away one’s wife, though there is no cause for enmity, or steals
the kingdom, should not be allowed to live, even if he craves pardon in battle.” Having been thus addressed, the
two tigers among men went to search for Saindhava. The king returned with Krishna, together with the priest.
‘When he entered the hermitage, he saw that the seats and the pots were strewn around. Markandeya and the
other brahmanas had been dispersed. The assembled brahmanas had been lamenting over Droupadi and the immensely wise one met them, together with his wife and brothers. On seeing that the king had returned and Droupadi had been brought back again, after the defeat of Sindhu and Souvira, they were delighted. Surrounded by them,
the king seated himself there. The radiant Krishna entered the hermitage with the twins.
‘On learning that the enemy had travelled only one krosha, Bhima and Arjuna spurred their horses and swiftly
rushed after him. Manly Arjuna performed an extraordinary act. He killed Saindhava’s horses from a distance that
was one krosha away. He possessed divine weapons and he wasn’t disturbed in times of difﬁculty. He performed
this difﬁcult task with arrows that had mantras invoked over them. Then the brave Bhima and Dhananjaya rushed

at the terriﬁed and solitary Saindhava, who had lost his horses and was disturbed in his senses. Saindhava saw that
his horses had been killed and was extremely miserable. Dhananjaya had performed an extremely valorous task.
He38 made up his mind to run away towards the forest. But seeing that he was running away, mighty-armed Phalguna followed him and spoke these words. “With such valour, how did you think of abducting a woman by force?
O prince! Turn around. Flight does not become you. Leaving your followers in the midst of an enemy, how can
you run away?” But though addressed by Partha,39 Saindhava did not turn around. The strong Bhima suddenly
rushed at him, exclaiming, “Stay! Stay!” “Don’t kill him,” responded the compassionate Partha.’
553(256)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On seeing the two brothers raise their weapons, Jayadratha was extremely miserable. He
wished to live and ﬂed swiftly. But the powerful Bhimasena descended from his chariot and chased the one who
was running away. He angrily grasped him by the hair on his head. Raising him up, he angrily crushed him down
on the ground. Then grasping the king by the neck, he thrashed him. When he had regained his senses, he expressed a desire to rise up. But the mighty-armed one kicked him in the head with his feet. Bhima struck him with
his thighs and his ﬁsts. Oppressed by these blows, the king lost consciousness. But Phalguna restrained the angry
Bhimasena, saying, “O Kourava! For Duhshala’s sake, remember what the king40 has said.” Bhimasena replied,
“This wicked and stupid one does not deserve to be alive. This worst of men has oppressed Krishna, who did not
deserve it. How can I possibly do what the compassionate king has said? Out of your childish intelligence, you are
also always trying to restrain me.” Having said this, with an arrow that had a head shaped like a half-moon, Vrikodara shaved off his head until there were ﬁve tufts of hair left,41 though he42 said nothing. Vrikodara then told the
king, “O stupid one! If you wish to remain alive, listen to what I am telling you. In public gatherings and assemblies, you must say that you are our slave. I will then grant you your life. This is known to be the custom of the
victorious.” King Jayadratha was scared for his life and agreed. He told Bhima, tiger among men and one who
makes the ﬁeld of battle beautiful, that it would be this way.
‘Partha Vrikodara then bound him so that he could not move and placed the unconscious one, dirty with dust, on
his chariot. Following Partha’s43 request, he placed him on the chariot and went to the centre of the hermitage,
where Yudhishthira was seated. Bhima displayed Jayadratha, who was in that state. On seeing him in that state, the
king44 laughed and said, “Set him free.” Bhima told the king, “Tell Droupadi that this evil-minded one has become a slave of the sons of Pandu.” Then the eldest brother affectionately replied, “If you have any respect for me,
act so as to set him free.” Glancing at Yudhishthira, Droupadi also told Bhima, “Set the king’s slave free, the one
you have shaved with ﬁve tufts left.” The king was freed and he showed his respects to Yudhishthira. In bewilderment, the king45 honoured all the sages who were there. On seeing Jayadratha held up by Savyasachi, the compassionate King Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, said, “You are free. Go as a free man. But do not act in this way again.
Shame on you. You lusted after a woman. You are mean and your companions are mean. Who but the worst of
men can act in this fashion?” Though he was the performer of an evil act, on seeing him bereft of his senses, the
king who was the foremost of the Bharatas, was moved by compassion. “May dharma increase in your intelligence. May your mind never turn towards adharma again. O Jayadratha! Go in peace, with your horses, your chariots and your infantry.” Being thus addressed, he was ashamed. He lowered his face a little and was silent.
‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Stricken with grief, the king went to Gangadvara and sought refuge with
the god Virupaksha,46 Uma’s consort. He performed great austerities and pleased Vrishadhvaja. Pleased with him,
the three-eyed one accepted his sacriﬁces in person. The god granted him a boon and he accepted it. Listen to it.
“May I be able to vanquish the ﬁve Pandavas, on their chariots, in battle.” Thus spoke the king to the god and the
god replied, “No. They are invincible in battle and cannot be killed in battle. But you will be able to restrain them,
except for the mighty-armed Arjuna, whom even the gods ﬁnd impossible to assail. He is foremost among those
who are skilled in the use of weapons. He is protected by Krishna, known as the one who cannot be vanquished,
and who holds the conch shell, the chakra and the mace.” Having been told this, the king went to his own abode.
The Pandavas continued to live in Kamyaka forest.’

554(257)

Janamejaya asked, ‘After they had suffered incomparable miseries because Krishna had been abducted, what did
the Pandavas, tigers among men, do?’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having freed Krishna and vanquished Jayadratha, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira sat down with
the masses of sages. In the midst of those maharshis, who listened and lamented, the descendant of the Pandu lineage spoke these words to Markandeya. “O illustrious one! I think that time, and destiny created by the gods, is inevitable for all beings and cannot be transgressed. Our wife is learned about dharma and conducts herself according to dharma. How can she have been touched in this way, like a false allegation of theft against a pure one? She
has never committed an evil deed. She has never committed an act that can be censured. Droupadi has always
practised the greatest form of dharma among brahmanas. The foolish King Jayadratha abducted her by force. Because of that abduction of her, he had the hair on his head shaved off. He was defeated in battle, with all his companions. It is true that we have got her back after killing the Saindhava forces. But the act of abduction, while we
were distracted, has sullied us. This life in the forest is full of misery. We sustain ourselves through hunting. This
means that those who live in the forest cause violence to those of the deer family. This exile has been brought
about by relatives who resorted to falsehood. Is there any other man who is more unfortunate than I? Have you
seen, or heard of, any such one earlier?”’
555(258)

‘Markandeya said, “O bull among the Bharata lineage! Rama confronted incomparable misery. His wife, Janaki,47
was forcibly abducted by a rakshasa. Having swiftly killed the vulture Jatayu by resorting to maya, Ravana, Indra
of the rakshasas, abducted her from the hermitage, travelling through the sky. Resorting to the strength of Sugriva,
Rama bound a bridge over the ocean, burnt Lanka with his sharp arrows, and obtained her back.”
‘Yudhishthira asked, “In what lineage was Rama born? What was his valour? How gallant was he? Whose son
was Ravana and what was his enmity with him? O illustrious one! Please tell me all this in detail. I wish to hear
Rama’s account, the one whose deeds were unsullied.”
‘Markandeya said, “In the lineage of Ikshvaku, there was a great king by the name of Aja. His son was
Dasharatha, pure and always devoted to learning. He had four sons who were learned in dharma and artha—Rama,
Lakshmana, Shatrughna and the immensely strong Bharata. Rama’s mother was Koushalya and Bharata’s was
Kaikeyi. Lakshmana and Shatrughna, scorchers of enemies, were the sons of Sumitra. O lord! Janaka was the king
of Videha and his daughter was Sita. Tvashtra48 himself created her, so that she might be Rama’s beloved queen. I
have thus recounted to you the births of Rama and Sita. O lord of men! I will now tell you about Ravana’s birth.
Ravana’s great grandfather was the god Prajapati49 himself, the self-creating great ascetic and the lord of all the
worlds. He had a beloved son named Pulastya, born through his mental powers. Through a cow, that lord had a son
by the name of Vaishravana. But he abandoned his father and went to his grandfather. O king! His father was angered at this. He created another self, based on his own self. In great wrath, the brahmana created Vishrava from
half of himself, so that Vaishravana could be countered. But delighted, the grandfather conferred immortality on
Vaishravana. He also made him lord of riches and a guardian of the worlds. He was given friendship with Ishana
and a son named Nalakubara. His capital became Lanka, inhabited by masses of rakshasas.”’50
556(259)

‘Markandeya said, “The sage Vishrava was born from half of Pulastya’s body, out of his anger. He glanced at
Vaishravana with great anger. O king! But on knowing that his father was extremely angry with him, Kubera, lord
of the rakshasas, always tried to please him. Living in Lanka, the lord of the yakshas,51 Naravahana, sent three
rakshasis to serve his father. O tiger among the Bharata lineage! They were always ready to satisfy the great-souled
rishi and were skilled in dancing and singing. O lord of the earth! Their names were Pushpotkata, Raka and Malini.
O king! They were slender of waist and rivalled each other in trying to do their best. Being pleased with them, the
great-souled lord granted them boons. As they desired, he gave each of them a son, equal to a guardian of the
world. Pushpotkata gave birth to two sons who were the lords of the rakshasas—Kumbhakarna and Dashagriva,52

unmatched on earth in strength. Malini gave birth to a single son named Vibhishana. Raka gave birth to twins—
Khara and Shurpanakha. Vibhishana surpassed all of them in beauty. He was immensely fortunate and always performed rites of dharma. Dashagriva was the eldest of them all and was a bull among the rakshasas. He was immensely energetic, immensely valorous, immensely spirited and brave. Kumbhakarna surpassed all of them in
strength. He was a terrible stalker of the night and was frightening in battle because of his skills of maya. Khara
was powerful in the use of the bow, hated brahmanas and ate raw ﬂesh. The terrible Shurpanakha always used to
obstruct religious rites. All of those brave ones were learned in the Vedas and all of them were good in the observance of their vows. They lived with their father on Mount Gandhamadana.
‘“They saw Vaishravana Naravahana there. He was seated with his father and possessed great prosperity. Jealousy was born in them and they resolved to perform austerities. They pleased Brahma with terrible austerities.
Dashagriva stood on one foot for a thousand years. He controlled himself and lived on the wind, amidst ﬁve
ﬁres.53 Kumbhakarna lay down on the ground, controlled in his food and controlled in his vows. The wise and
generous Vibhishana fasted and meditated, surviving on one dry leaf and performing severe austerities throughout
the period. With delighted minds, Khara and Shurpanakha served them and protected them, while they tormented
themselves with austerities. When one thousand years had passed, the invincible Dashanana54 cut off one of his
heads and offered it into the ﬁre and the lord of the universe was pleased at this. Brahma then went there himself
and asked them to refrain from austerities.
‘“He tempted each of them separately with a boon. Brahma said, ‘O sons! Stop! I am pleased with you. Ask for
boons, except for immortality, and I will give you whatever you ask for. All the heads that you have offered into
the ﬁre out of your great desire, will be reunited with your body according to your wishes.55 There will be no disﬁgurement of your body and you will be able to assume any form that you desire. There is no doubt that you will
be able to vanquish your enemies in battle.’ Ravana replied, ‘May I never suffer defeat at the hands of gandharvas,
gods, asuras, yakshas, rakshasas, serpents, kinnaras and demons.’56 Brahma said, ‘You will have no fear from all
those you have mentioned, but for man. O fortunate one! This is the way I have ordained it.’ At these words,
Dashagriva was satisﬁed. Because of his evil intelligence, the man-eating one ignored men. In the same way, the
great grandfather addressed Kumbhakarna. But since his reasoning was clouded by darkness, he asked for a long
period of sleep. Granting this, he repeatedly spoke to Vibhishana, ‘O son! Ask for a boon. I am pleased with you.’
Vibhishana replied, ‘May my mind not turn towards adharma, even in times of supreme difﬁculty. O illustrious
one! The brahmastra weapon cannot be instructed. May it become manifest in me.’ Brahma said, ‘O destroyer of
enemies! Though you have been born in a rakshasa womb, your intelligence does not turn towards adharma. I am
granting you immortality.’ O lord of the earth! Having obtained this boon, rakshasa Dashagriva defeated the lord
of riches57 in battle and won Lanka from him.
‘“The illustrious one left Lanka and went to Gandhamadana, followed by the gandharvas, the yakshas, the rakshasas and the kimpurushas. Ravana fought and won the Pushpaka vimana from him. Then Vaishravana cursed
him. ‘This will not bear you. It will carry the one who will kill you in battle. Since you have treated your elder58
with contempt, you will soon perish.’ O great king! Vibhishana, with dharma in his soul, followed him,59 united
with great prosperity. The illustrious lord of the riches was satisﬁed with his younger brother. The wise one made
him the general of the armies of both the yakshas and the rakshasas. All the immensely strong and man-eating rakshasas and pishachas assembled together and instated Dashanana as the king. Dashagriva could assume any form
at will and travel through the sky. Intoxicated with his strength, he attacked the daityas and the gods and robbed
them of their jewels. Because he made the worlds scream, he came to be known as Ravana.60 Dashagriva, with
strength at will, caused fear among the gods.”’
557(260)

‘Markandeya said, “Then all the brahmarshis, siddhas and devarshis, with Agni leading them, went and sought
refuge with Brahma. Agni said, ‘O lord! Vishrava’s son, Dashagriva, is immensely strong and cannot be killed, because you have earlier granted him a boon. The immensely strong one is oppressing all beings with injurious acts.

O lord! Save us from him. There is no one else who can save us.’ Brahma replied, ‘O Vibhavasu!61 The gods and
the asuras cannot defeat him in battle. What must be done to subdue him has already been ordained. For that purpose, at my request, the four-armed Vishnu, foremost among brave ones, has already descended on earth. He will
accomplish this task.’ The grandfather addressed these words to them. ‘With the masses of gods, all of you take
births on earth. To aid Vishnu, all of you beget brave sons on monkeys and bears, strong and capable of assuming
any form at will.’ At this, all the gods, the gandharvas and serpents happily descended on earth, with respective
parts from their own bodies. In their presence, the god who is the granter of boons,62 instructed a gandharva lady
named Dundubhi so that the task of the gods might be accomplished. On hearing the grandfather’s words, the
gandharvi Dundubhi took the form of Manthara in the world of men. She was hunchbacked. All the foremost
among the gods, with Shakra at the forefront, begot sons on the chief women among monkeys and bears. All of
them were like their fathers, in fame and strength. They could shatter the peaks of mountains. Their weapons were
shala and tala, trees and rocks. All their bodies were capable of withstanding the vajra. They were endowed with
great strength. They could assume strength and valour at will. They were skilled in ﬁghting. Each possessed the
strength of ten thousand elephants. They had the speed of the wind. Some of them lived where they wished. Others
lived in the forest. Having thus decreed everything, the illustrious one, the creator of the worlds, instructed Manthara about what she should do and how she should go about it. On hearing his words, she carried them out with
the speed of the mind. She went here and there, bent on creating enmity.”’
558(261)

‘Yudhishthira asked, “O illustrious one! You have separately related the births of Rama and each of the others. O
brahmana! Now I wish to hear about the reasons for their exile. Please recount it. O brahmana! Why were
Dasharatha’s brave sons, Rama and Lakshmana, and the famous Maithili63 exiled to the forest?”
‘Markandeya said, “King Dasharatha was delighted at sons being born. He was devoted to rites and to the practice of dharma. He always served his superiors. In course of time, his sons grew and became greatly energetic.
They became learned in the Vedas and their secrets and were skilled in the use of weapons. O king! When they had
completed the period of brahmacharya, they got married. At each such time, Dasharatha was pleased and happy.
Among them, the eldest was Rama and he was known thus because he pleased the subjects.64 He was charming
and wise and was the delight of his father’s heart. Then the king thought that he was too advanced in age. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He consulted his advisers and the priests, who were learned about dharma, about
instating Rama as the heir apparent.65 All of them, the best of advisers, thought that the appropriate time had arrived. His66 eyes were red. His arms were large. His gait was like that of a mad elephant. His arms were long. His
chest was broad. He was dark in complexion. His hair was curled. He was radiant, handsome and brave. He was
like Shakra in his strength. He was learned in all dharma. He was like Brihaspati in his intelligence. Everyone was
devoted to him. He was skilled in all forms of knowledge. He was in control of his senses. He was pleasant to behold, even to his enemies. He controlled those who were not virtuous. He protected those who followed dharma.
He had fortitude. He was unassailable. He was victorious. He could not be vanquished. O descendant of the Kuru
lineage! King Dasharatha looked at such a son, one who extended Kousalya’s67 joy, and was extremely delighted.
On thinking about the qualities of the valorous and immensely energetic Rama, he happily spoke to his priest. ‘O
fortunate one! O brahmana! There is an auspicious conjunction of Pushya nakshatra today. Let all the requirements
be gathered and let Rama be invited.’ Hearing these words of the king, Manthara went to Kaikeyi and spoke these
words at the appropriate time. ‘O Kaikeyi! The king has proclaimed your great misfortune today. O unfortunate
one! A ﬁerce, angry and virulent serpent is biting you. Kousalya is indeed the fortunate one, since her son will be
instated. Where is your good fortune if your son does not obtain a share of the kingdom?’ On hearing these words,
she68 adorned herself in all her ornaments. She was radiant in her supreme beauty, with a middle that was shaped
like an altar. She approached her husband secretly. Smiling charmingly, as if in love, the sweet-smiling one spoke
these honeyed words. ‘You are always truthful in your promises. O king! You had earlier promised me a wish.
Grant me that favour now and free yourself of the burden.’ The king replied, ‘I am ready to grant you the boon.

You will get what you desire. Is there anyone who must be killed today, though he does not deserve to be killed? Is
there any one imprisoned, who must be freed today? Who should be given riches today? Or is there anyone, from
whom it must be taken away? All the riches are mine, except those that belong to brahmanas.’ When she heard
these words, she bound the king to his promise. Knowing her own strength, she spoke these words. ‘Let Bharata be
instated with the ingredients that have been arranged for Rama. Let Raghava69 go to the forest.’ The king heard
these unpleasant and terrible worlds. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! He was so miserable that he could not
say anything. On learning what his father had said, the valorous Rama, with dharma in his soul, went to the forest,
so that the king might remain true to his promise. O fortunate one! He was followed by the prosperous Lakshmana,
with the bow in his hand, and his wife Vaidehi Sita, Janaka’s daughter.70
‘“When Rama had departed for the forest, following the due dharma of time, King Dasharatha gave up his body.
With Rama having left and the king having departed, the queen Kaikeyi had Bharata brought and spoke these
words to him.71 ‘Dasharatha has gone to heaven. Rama and Lakshmana have left for the forest. Accept this large
kingdom, without any obstacles, and with all its thorns removed.’ On hearing these words, the one with dharma in
his soul replied, ‘You have committed a violent deed. Out of avarice for riches, you have killed your husband and
destroyed this lineage. O mother! O destroyer of the lineage! You have brought ill fame on my head. Satisfy your
desire now.’ Speaking thus, he began to weep. Thus displaying his character before all the subjects, he left after his
brother Rama, desiring to bring him back. He placed Kousalya, Kaikeyi and Sumitra in vehicles at the back. Then
extremely miserably, he set out with Shatrughna, Vasishtha, Vamadeva, thousands of other brahmanas and residents of the city and the country, with the intention of bringing Rama back. He saw Rama and Lakshmana in Chitrakuta.72 He had a bow in his hand and was adorned in the ornaments of ascetics. But ﬁxed on making his father’s promise come true, Rama dismissed him. He ruled the kingdom from Nandigrama, with the sandals in
front.73 Rama was concerned that the inhabitants of the city and the country might return again. He entered the
great forest near the hermitage of Sharabhanga. He paid his respects to Sharabhanga and found refuge in Dandakaranya. He lived in the beautiful region along the banks of the river Godavari.
‘“While he lived there, because of Shurpanakha’s deeds, Rama had a great enmity with Khara, who used to reside in Janasthana. In order to protect the ascetics, Raghava, devoted to dharma, killed fourteen thousand rakshasas
on earth. By killing the immensely powerful Khara and Dushana,74 the wise Raghava brought safety to that forest
of dharma again. With those rakshasas slain, Shurpanakha, with her nose and lips sliced off,75 went to her brother’s abode in Lanka. Unconscious with grief, the rakshasi went to Ravana. With dried blood on her face, she fell
down at her brother’s feet. On seeing her so mutilated, Ravana became senseless with anger. He gnashed his teeth
in anger and jumped up from his seat. He dismissed his advisers and privately asked her, ‘O fortunate one! Who
has done this to you, without thinking of me and disrespecting me? Who has had a sharp spear pierced all over his
body? Who is sleeping securely and happily, having lit a ﬁre by his head? Who has kicked a terrible and virulent
serpent? Who has touched the teeth of a lion with manes?’ While he was speaking these words, sparks of ﬂame issued from the openings in his body, like from the hollows of a ﬂaming tree at night. Then his sister told him everything about Rama’s valour and the defeat of Khara and Dushana, accompanied by the other rakshasas. Having decided on what was to be done, having comforted his sister and having made due arrangements for the protection of
the city, the king76 rose up into the sky. He crossed the mountains Trikuta and Kala and saw the great and deep
ocean, the abode of makaras. Dashanana passed over it and went to Gokarna,77 the secure and beloved region of
the great-souled wielder of the trident. Dashanana went to Maricha, his former adviser. Because of his fear of
Rama, he had earlier become an ascetic.”’
559(262)

‘Markandeya said, “On seeing Ravana arrive, Maricha respectfully showed him homage and gave him fruits, roots
and other objects. When the rakshasa had rested and was appropriately seated, the one who was skilled with words
spoke these words to the one who was eloquent with words.78 ‘Your complexion is not in its natural state. Is
everything well in your city? Do all your subjects honour you, as they used to do earlier? O lord of the rakshasas!

What task has brought you here? Even if the task is difﬁcult to accomplish, know that it has already been done.’
Ravana told him everything about what Rama had done. After listening, Maricha brieﬂy told him, ‘You must not
provoke Rama. I am acquainted with his valour. Is there anyone who can withstand the force of the arrows of that
great-souled one? The bull among men is responsible for my leading the life of an ascetic. What evil-souled one
has directed you to this course of action that will take you to the mouth of destruction?’ On hearing this, Ravana
angrily berated him. ‘If you do not act in accordance with my words, it is certain that you will meet with death.’
Maricha then thought to himself, ‘It is better to die at the hands of a superior being. Since death is certain, I will do
what he wants me to.’ Maricha then replied to the lord of the rakshasas. ‘What help can I render you? I will do it
even if I am not capable.’ Then Dashagriva told him, ‘Go and tempt Sita. Become a deer with jewels on its antlers
and with a skin that is adorned with gems. It is certain that on seeing you, Sita will send Rama after you. With
Kakutstha79 gone, Sita will be in my powers. I will then abduct her. The evil-minded one will cease to exist because of separation from his wife. Render this help to me.’ Having been thus addressed, Maricha performed the
rites with water for himself.80 Extremely miserable, he followed Ravana, who led the way. The two went to the
hermitage of Rama, the one whose deeds were unsullied. They acted exactly as they had planned it earlier. Ravana
assumed the form of an ascetic, with his head shaven and with a three-poled staff in his hand.81 Maricha assumed
the form of a deer and they went to that spot. Maricha showed himself to Vaidehi, in the form of a deer. Prompted
by destiny, she sent Rama after him.
‘“With a view to please her, Rama swiftly grasped his bow. He entrusted Lakshmana with the task of protecting
her and went after the deer. He had his bow and had tied his quiver. He had his sword and guards for his arms and
ﬁngers. Rama followed the deer, like Rudra after the deer that is a star.82 The rakshasa appeared before him and
disappeared again, taking him far away. Rama knew him to be who he really was. Knowing him to be a traveller of
the night,83 the wise Raghava grasped an unfailing arrow and killed him, in the form of a deer. Struck by Rama’s
arrow, he imitated Rama’s voice and called out, in a piteous voice, ‘Alas, Sita! Lakshmana!’ When Vaidehi heard
those piteous words, she was about to run in the direction of the words. But Lakshmana spoke to her. ‘O timid one!
Do not be anxious. Who can strike Rama? O sweet-smiling one! You will see Rama return in a short while.’ She
was weeping. At these words, because of the tendency of women, she suspected her younger brother-in-law,
though his pure character was his adornment. The chaste and faithful wife uttered harsh words. ‘O stupid one! This
is not the time for satisfying the desire in your heart. I would rather take a sword and kill myself, or throw myself
from the peak of a mountain, or enter the ﬁre, rather than abandon my husband Rama and serve a mean one like
you, like a tigress waiting on a jackal.’ Lakshmana loved Raghava and was always virtuous. On hearing these
words, he covered up his ears and left for where Raghava was. He grasped a bow and followed Rama’s footsteps.
‘“Meanwhile, rakshasa Ravana made his appearance. Though he was wicked, he assumed a gentle form, like a
ﬁre hidden under ashes. He disguised himself as an ascetic, because he desired to abduct that unblemished one. On
seeing him arrive, Janaka’s virtuous daughter invited him, with fruits, roots, a seat and other things. But the bull
among rakshasas ignored all this and assuming his own form, sought to appease Vaidehi. ‘O Sita! I am the king of
the rakshasas, famous as Ravana. My beautiful city of Lanka is located on the other side of the great ocean.
Among the beautiful women who are there, you will shine with me. O one with the beautiful hips! Become my
wife and abandon the ascetic Raghava.’ When Janaki Sita heard words like these, the one with the beautiful hips
covered up her ears and said, ‘Do not speak such words. The sky may fall with its stars. The earth may be shattered. The ﬁre may become cold. But I will not desert the descendant of the Raghu lineage. Can a she-elephant, after serving a giant elephant that is in musth and ranges the forest, touch a hog? How can a lady who has drunk
choice liquor84 and drunk nectar made out of honey, be attracted by the juice of the jujube tree?’ Having spoken
these words, she entered the hermitage again. Ravana followed the one with the beautiful hips and restrained her.
Censured by his harsh words, she lost her senses. But he grasped her by the hair on her head and rose up into the
sky. A vulture named Jatayu, who lived on a mountain, saw the ascetic lady being abducted, lamenting, ‘Rama!
Rama!’”’
560(263)

‘Markandeya said, “The immensely valorous king of the vultures, Jatayu, was the son of Aruna and the brother of
Sampati and was a friend of Dasharatha’s. When the bird saw his85 daughter-in-law in Ravana’s arms, he angrily
rushed at the lord of the rakshasas. The vulture told him, ‘O traveller in the night! Let her go. Let Maithili go. How
can you carry her off as long as I am alive? If you do not give up the daughter-in-law, you will not escape with
your life.’ Saying this, he powerfully attacked the Indra among rakshasas with his talons. He struck him with his
wings and beak and lacerated him in many ways and large quantities of blood began to gush out,86 like a mountain
spring. Thus struck by the vulture, who wished to do that which would bring Rama pleasure, he grasped his sword
and sliced off the wings of the bird. Having killed the king of the vultures, and looking like a mountain through
scattered clouds, the rakshasa grasped Sita in his arms and rose up into the sky. Whenever Vaidehi saw a circle of
hermitages, a pond, a river or a well, she loosened and ﬂung down her ornaments. On the slopes of a mountain, she
saw ﬁve bulls among monkeys. The intelligent one ﬂung down an expensive and celestial garment there. Driven by
the wind, the beautiful yellow garment fell down in the midst of those Indras among monkeys, like lightning in a
cloud.
‘“While Vaidehi was thus being carried away, the wise Rama had killed the great deer. While he was returning,
he saw his brother Lakshmana. On seeing his brother, he rebuked him. ‘How could you leave Vaidehi in a forest
infested with rakshasas?’ He thought about his being drawn away by a rakshasa in the form of a deer and of his
brother’s arrival and was tormented by thoughts. Having rebuked him, Rama swiftly approached and said, ‘O Lakshmana! Is Vaidehi still alive? I might not see her again.’ Lakshmana then reported everything that Sita had told
him, including the words that Vaidehi had spoken later. With a burning heart, Rama went towards the hermitage
and saw the fallen vulture, like a mountain. Fearing him to be a rakshasa, Kakutstha drew his powerful bow and
rushed towards him, together with Lakshmana. The energetic one then spoke to Rama and Lakshmana. ‘I am the
king of the vultures. O fortunate ones! I am a friend of Dasharatha’s.’ On hearing these words, they put aside their
bright bows and asked, ‘Who is this who is mentioning our father by name?’ Then they saw that the wings of the
bird had been sliced off. The vulture told them how Ravana had killed him, for Sita’s sake. Raghava then asked the
vulture for the direction in which Ravana had gone. Indicating this with a nod of his head, the vulture passed away.
Kakutstha understood the sign of the gesture to mean the south. He performed the last rites in honour of his father’s friend. They saw the hermitage, with its cushions and vessels scattered and its pots broken. The place was
deserted and infested with an army of jackals. Overcome with unhappiness and grief at Vaidehi’s abduction, the
scorchers of enemies headed south, towards Dandakaranya. In that great forest, Rama, together with Soumitri,87
saw many herds of deer running in different directions. They heard the terrible cries of many creatures, increasingly roaring like a forest ﬁre.
‘“In a short while, they saw Kabandha,88 terrible in form. He was like a cloud or a mountain. His shoulders
were as extensive as a shala tree. He had large arms. His large eye was located on his chest. He had a giant mouth
on a giant belly. With great ease, the rakshasa grasped Lakshmana in his arms. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Soumitri was instantly overcome by despair. Then, glancing towards Rama, he dragged him89 towards his
mouth, and afﬂicted with despair, he90 told Rama, ‘Look at my state. Vaidehi has been abducted. I am in this dire
state. You have been dislodged from your kingdom. Our father is dead. Together with Vaidehi, I will not witness
your return to Kosala and your instatement in the earthly kingdom of our fathers and grandfathers. Fortunate are
those who will see you consecrated with kusha grass, parched rice and shami91 wood, with a face like the moon
amidst scattered clouds.’ In this way, the wise Lakshmana lamented in various ways. Undaunted in the midst of
this calamity, Kakutstha told him, ‘O tiger among men! Do not be immersed in sorrow in this fashion. While I am
here, there is nothing he can do. Slice off his right arm, and I will sever the left.’ While he was speaking, Rama cut
off his left arm with his extremely sharp sword, as if it was branch of sesamum. On seeing his brother Raghava
standing there, the powerful Soumitri hacked the right arm with his sword. Lakshmana repeatedly smote the rakshasa on his side and losing his life, the gigantic Kabandha fell down on the ground. Then a divine-looking being
was seen to emerge from his body. He was stationed in the sky, like the resplendent sun in the sky. The eloquent
Rama asked him, ‘Who are you? I am asking you. Tell me. How did this happen? It seems to me to be extraordinary.’ He replied, ‘O king! I am the gandharva Vishvavasu. Because of Brahma’s curse, I had to be born in

the womb of a rakshasa. Sita has been abducted by King Ravana, who resides in Lanka. Go to Sugriva and he will
help you. Lake Pampa is near Mount Rishyamukha. It has pure water and teems with swans and ducks. Sugriva
lives there with four advisers. He is the brother of Vali, the king of the monkeys who wears a golden garland. I can
tell you this much. You will see Janaki again. It is certain that the king of the monkeys knows about Ravana’s
abode.’ Having said this, to the amazement of the brave Rama and Lakshmana, the extremely radiant celestial being disappeared.”’
561(264)

‘Markandeya said, “Miserable at Sita’s abduction, Rama then went to Lake Pampa, which was a short distance
away. It was full of lotuses and blue lotuses.92 The wind was pleasant and cool and the forest was redolent with
the pleasant fragrance of amrita. There, his mind turned to his beloved. That Indra among kings remembered his
beloved and lamented, tormented by the arrows of love. Soumitri told him, ‘O one who honours those who are
worthy! Such sentiments should not touch you, like a self-controlled man should not be tainted by disease or the
conduct of the aged. You have obtained information about Vaidehi and Ravana. Now use manliness and intelligence to recover her. Let us go to Sugriva, the bull among monkeys in the mountain. Be comforted, since I, your
disciple, servant and aide, am with you.’ At these many different words of Lakshmana, Raghava recovered his natural state and thought about what should be done next. The brave brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, bathed in the
waters of Pampa. After rendering offerings to the ancestors, they departed. They reached Mount Rishyamukha, full
of many roots and fruits. The brave ones saw the ﬁve monkeys on the peak. Sugriva sent his wise adviser, the monkey Hanuman, who was as tall as a mountain, to them. Having ﬁrst conversed with him, they went to Sugriva. O
king! Rama then had an agreement of friendship with the king of the monkeys. When the monkeys were told about
what had to be done, they displayed the garment that Sita had dropped while she was being abducted. Having thus
obtained assurance, Rama himself instated Sugriva, the lord of the monkeys, as the king of all the monkeys on
earth. Kakutstha also promised to kill Vali in battle. O king! Sugriva promised to bring Sita back.
‘“Having thus concluded an agreement and having reposed trust in each other, all of them went to Kishkindha
and based themselves there, desirous of doing battle. Having reached Kishkindha, Sugriva let out a giant roar, like
the noise of a ﬂood. Vali could not tolerate this. But Tara93 restrained him and said, ‘From the manner in which
the mighty monkey Sugriva is roaring, I think that he has obtained a protector. You should not go out.’ At that, the
eloquent Vali, adorned in a golden garland, the king of the monkeys, told Tara, whose face was like the lord of the
stars,94 ‘You are familiar with the voices of all beings and you possess intelligence. See and ﬁnd out whose protection this fake brother of mine has obtained.’ Tara, with radiance like the lord of the stars, thought for an instant.
Then the wise one spoke to her husband. ‘O lord of the monkeys! Listen to everything. The immensely powerful
Rama is Dasharatha’s son and has lost his wife. That great archer has contracted an agreement of friendship with
Sugriva, with one’s enemy regarded as the other’s too. His brother is unvanquished, mighty-armed and wise
Soumitri Lakshmana, who stands by him for accomplishing the task. Mainda, Dvivida, the wind-god’s son Hanuman and Jambavan, the king of the bears, are Sugriva’s advisers and stand by him. All these great-souled ones are
immensely strong and intelligent. Resorting to Rama’s valour, they are enough for your destruction.’ But the lord
of the monkeys disregarded her words, which would have ensured his welfare. He was full of jealousy and suspected that her mind was attracted towards Sugriva. Having spoken harshly to Tara, he emerged from the mouth of
his cave. He went to Sugriva, who was stationed near Malyavan and said, ‘O foolish you! You are fond of life. But
you have been defeated by me many times earlier. Considering our relationship, I have freed you earlier. Why do
you wish to rush to your death again?’ Thus addressed, Sugriva, the destroyer of enemies, spoke to his brother for
a reason, as if to indicate to Rama that the time had come. ‘O king! Know that I have been robbed of my wife,95
and robbed of my kingdom, by you. What is the purpose of being alive? That is the reason I have approached you.’
Speaking to each other in these and many other ways, Vali and Sugriva engaged in a ﬁght, with shala trees, tala
trees and rocks as weapons. They smote each other and ﬂung each other down on the ground. Both of them moved
wonderfully and struck each other with ﬁsts. Both of them dripped with blood, lacerated by nails and teeth. Those
brave ones resembled blossoming kimshukas. No difference could be detected between the two ﬁghters. Then

Hanuman placed a garland around Sugriva’s neck.96 With that garland round his neck, the brave one was as radiant and handsome as Mount Malaya with a garland of clouds. Recognizing Sugriva through that mark, the great
archer Rama drew his giant bow and chose Vali as a target. The twang of the bow was like the sound of a machine.
Pierced in the heart through the arrow, Vali fell down. With his heart pierced and wounded, he began to vomit
blood through his mouth. He saw Rama standing there, together with Soumitri. He rebuked Kakutstha and fell
down unconscious on the ground. Tara saw him on the ground, like a dislodged lord of the stars. With Vali slain,
Sugriva obtained Kishkindha back and also Tara, with a face like the lord of the stars, now that her lord had fallen.
Worshipped by Sugriva, the wise Rama lived on the beautiful slopes of Malyavan for four months.
‘“Having arrived at his city of Lanka, Ravana was overcome by the force of desire. He instated Sita in a house
that was like Nandana.97 It was located near a grove of ashoka trees and was like the hermitage of an asectic. She
wore the garb of an ascetic and thinking of her husband, became lean. She was devoted to fasting and austerities.
The large-eyed one lived there in misery, surviving on fruits and roots. To guard her, the lord of the rakshasas appointed rakshasis. They held lances, swords, spears, axes, clubs and ﬂaming brands. Some of them had two eyes,
others had three eyes. Some had eyes on the forehead. Some had long tongues, others had no tongue. Some had
three breasts and one leg. Others had three heads of matted hair and one eye. These and others had ﬂaming eyes.
Their hair was as ugly as that of a young camel.98 Incessantly, night and day, they surrounded Sita. Those
pishachis were gruesome to look at and had terrible voices. They always scolded the black-eyed one in terrible and
harsh words. ‘Let us eat her. Let us tear her into shreds that are as small as sesamum. She lives here, but she disregards our lord.’ Thus did they censure and terrify her repeatedly. Afﬂicted with grief for her husband, she sighed
and replied, ‘O aryas! Eat me up swiftly. I have no desire to be alive, without the lotus-eyed one99 who has dark
and curly hair. Separated from my beloved, I would rather live without food and shrivel away my frame, like a serpent inside a tala tree. But for Raghava, I will not go to any other man. Know this to be the truth. And do what you
wish with me, thereafter.’ On hearing these words, the rakshasis, whose voices were grating, went and told the Indra of the rakshasas everything that had transpired.
‘“When all of them had left, a rakshasi named Trijata, who was learned about dharma and pleasant in speech,
comforted Vaidehi. ‘O Sita! I will tell you something. O friend! Have trust in me. Give up your fear. O one with
the beautiful thighs! Listen to my words. There is an intelligent and old bull among the rakshasas, by the name of
Avindhya. With Rama’s welfare in mind, and for your sake, he told me this. “Having comforted and assured Sita,
tell her these words of mine. Her husband Rama, with the powerful Lakshmana following him, are both well. For
your sake, the illustrious Raghava has become friends with the king of the monkeys, who is like Shakra in his energy. O timid one! Have no fear. Ravana is censured by the worlds. O unblemished one! You are protected by
Nalakubara’s curse. In earlier times, the evil one was cursed when he sought to obtain Rambha as his wife. This
one is not in control of his senses. But he is incapable of forcibly violating any woman. Protected by Sugriva, and
together with Soumitri, your wise husband will swiftly arrive here and will set you free. I have had an extremely
terrible dream, signifying terrible calamity and the destruction of the evil-minded one who has demolished the lineage of Pulastya. That evil-souled roamer of the night is the performer of mean deeds and is terrible. Because of
his nature and the taint of wicked conduct, he increases the fear of all beings. Having lost his senses because of
destiny, he challenges all the gods. In my dreams, I have seen all the portents of his destruction. Smeared in oil and
with his head shaven, Dashanana was immersed in mud. He was stationed on a chariot drawn by donkeys and was
dancing. I have seen Kumbhakarna and the others naked, with their heads fallen. They were decorated with red
garlands and ointments and were being dragged towards a southern direction.100 I have seen Vibhishana alone,
climbing up Mount Shveta, decorated with white garlands and ointments, crowned, and with a white umbrella over
his head. He and his four advisers, bedecked with white garlands and ointments, will climb Mount Shveta and be
freed from this great danger. The earth and the oceans will be made turbulent with Rama’s weapons. Your husband
will ﬁll the earth with his fame. I have seen Lakshmana, astride a collection of bones. He was eating honey and
payasa. He was glancing in all the directions. I have seen you protected by a tiger, weeping and with your body
covered in blood. You have repeatedly travelled in a northern direction. O Vaidehi! O Sita! You will soon be reunited with your husband Raghava, together with his brother, and will ﬁnd joy.”’ When the maiden with the eyes

of a young deer heard these words of Trijata, she became hopeful of again being reunited with her husband. When
those terrible and extremely fearsome pishachis returned, they saw her seated with Trijata, as she had been
earlier.”’
562(265)

‘Markandeya said, “She was sorrowful and miserable on account of her husband. She was attired in soiled garments and what remained of her gems and ornaments. She was devoted to her husband and was weeping. She was
seated on a slab of stone and was served by the rakshasis. Oppressed by the arrows of love, Ravana came to see
her. The gods, danavas, gandharvas, yakshas and kimpurushas had not managed to vanquish him in battle. Oppressed by Kandarpa,101 he went to the grove of ashoka trees. He was radiant and was attired in celestial garments. He had resplendent and jewelled earrings. He wore colourful garlands and a crown and was like spring personiﬁed. Having adorned himself carefully, he looked like kalpavriksha.102 But with all these adornments, he was
as terrible as a chaitya tree103 in a cremation ground. The traveller of the night approached the slender-waisted
one, and looked like the planet Saturn approaching Rohini. Having greeted the one with the beautiful hips and
struck by the arrows of the one who has the ﬂower as a banner,104 he spoke these words to the one who was as
terriﬁed as a doe. ‘O Sita! You have shown favours towards your husband for a long time. O one who is slender in
form! Show me your favours. You should be adorned. O one with the beautiful hips! Love me, adorned in expensive garments and ornaments. O beautiful one! Be the foremost among all my women. I have daughters of the gods
and the women of rajarshis. I have daughters of the danavas and the women of daityas. Fourteen crore105
pishachas await my word and double that number of rakshasas, the eaters of men and the performers of terrible
deeds. Three times that number of yakshas carry out my instructions. Only a few have sought refuge with my
brother, the lord of riches. O fortunate one! O one with the beautiful thighs. When I am in my drinking hall, gandharvas and apsaras always attend on me, as they attend on my brother. I am the son of the brahmana rishi, the sage
Vishrava himself. My fame is renowned as the ﬁfth guardian of the world.106 I eat celestial food and I have many
different kinds of drink. O beautiful one! Whatever the thirty gods have, I possess that. Let all the evils of your sojourn in the forest be gone. O one with the beautiful hips! Be my wife, like Mandodari.’107 Thus addressed,
Vaidehi, the one with the beautiful face, turned her face away.
‘“She thought of the traveller of the night as no more than a blade of grass and spoke to him, with inauspicious
tears from her eyes drenching her ﬁrm breasts and beautiful thighs. Accepting her husband to be a god, Vaidehi
spoke these words to the mean one. ‘O lord of the rakshasas! I am unfortunate that I have had to listen to such
words from you. I am miserable and unlucky that I have heard such words. O fortunate one! Be fortunate in your
happiness, but turn these thoughts away. I am another man’s wife and am always devoted to my husband. This
helpless woman cannot be an appropriate wife for you. What pleasure will you ﬁnd from violating a helpless
woman? Your father is a brahmana. He was born from Brahma and is the equal of Prajapati. If you are the equal of
a guardian of the world, how do you not follow dharma? Do you not have any shame at naming your brother, the
lord of riches and the king of the yakshas,108 the friend of the lord Maheshvara?’ Having said this, the heavybreasted Sita trembled and wept. The one who was slender in form covered her head and her face with her garment. Her hair was long and was braided well. Hanging from her head, it looked like a delicate and dark serpent.
The indignant one was weeping. On hearing those extremely cruel words spoken by Sita and being rejected, Ravana, whose intelligence was wicked, spoke again. ‘O Sita! Let the one with the makara on his banner burn my
limbs through desire.109 O one with the beautiful smile! O one with the beautiful hips! But I will not enjoy you
against your wishes. What can I possibly do? Even now, you are devoted to Rama, a human who is nothing but our
food.’ Thus addressing the one with the unblemished limbs, the lord of masses of rakshasas instantly disappeared
and went in whatever direction he desired. Surrounded by the rakshasis, Vaidehi was overcome by grief. Served by
Trijata, she resided there.”’
563(266)

‘Markandeya said, “When Raghava, together with Soumitri, lived under Sugriva’s protection on the slopes of
Malyavan, he saw the clear sky. In that clear sky, the destroyer of enemies saw the unblemished moon,110 the
planets, the nakshatras and the stars. The breeze was redolent with the fragrance of water lilies, blue lotuses and
lotuses.111 The dweller in that cool mountain was suddenly stirred. The one with dharma in his soul was distracted
at the thought of Sita captive in the rakshasa’s abode. One morning, he spoke to the brave Lakshmana. ‘O Lakshmana! Go to Kishkindha and seek out the lord of monkeys. He is intoxicated and ungrateful, follows the dharma of
the vulgar and is only learned about his own selﬁsh interests. That stupid one, the worst of the lineage, has been
instated by me in the kingdom and all the monkeys, apes112 and bears show him homage. O mighty-armed one! O
extender of Raghu’s lineage! With your aid, it is for his sake that I slew Vali in the forest of Kishkindha. I think
that worst of monkeys to be the most ungrateful on earth. O Lakshmana! That stupid one ignores me and does not
know me now. I think that, because of his ignorance, he does not know how to honour an agreement. He ignores
me, though I have performed a good deed for him. If he lazily indulges in the happiness of desires, you must send
him along the path followed by Vali, the destination of all beings. O Kakutstha! But if that bull among monkeys
acts to as to serve our purpose, quickly bring him here. Go without any delay.’ Lakshmana was always devoted to
the words of his elders. Thus addressed by his brother, he grasped his beautiful bow, arrows and the string of the
bow and departed.
‘“On reaching the gates of Kishkindha, he entered, without anyone stopping him. Thinking him to be angry, the
king of the monkeys went out to welcome him. With his wife, and humble in soul, Sugriva, the king of the monkeys, welcomed him and happily offered homage to the one who should be honoured. Without any fear, Soumitri
told him Rama’s words. O Indra among kings! On hearing all this, Sugriva, the lord of the monkeys, joined his
hands in salutation. With his servants and wives, he spoke these words to Lakshmana, elephant among men. ‘O
Lakshmana! I am not evil in intelligence. Nor am I ungrateful, or one without compassion. Listen to the efforts I
have made to ﬁnd Sita. Skilled monkeys have been sent by me in all the directions. One month has been decided
for all of them to return. O brave one! The entire earth, with its forests, mountains, villages, towns and mines, girded by the ocean, will be searched by them. That month will be complete in another ﬁve nights. Then, together with
Rama, you will learn about the great service I have rendered.’ Thus addressed by the wise Indra among monkeys,
Lakshmana happily discarded his anger and returned the homage to Sugriva. Accompanied by Sugriva, he returned
to Rama, who was on the slopes of Malyavan, and told him about what had been done towards their objective. As
had been said, the foremost among monkeys began to return in their thousands, those who had gone in the three
directions, other than towards the south. They told Rama, ‘We have searched the entire earth, with the ocean as a
girdle. But we have not been able to see Vaidehi or Ravana.’ Though his heart was grief-stricken at this, Kakutstha
was still hopeful and waited for the bulls among the monkeys who had gone in a southern direction.
‘“When two months had passed, some monkeys hurriedly approached Sugriva and told him these words. ‘O
foremost among monkeys! O king! The great and extensive grove of Madhuvana was always protected by Vali. It
is now being enjoyed by the son of the wind,113 Vali’s son Angada and other bulls among monkeys whom you
had sent out in a southern direction.’ Such acts were only possible by servants who had accomplished their duties.
On hearing of this conduct, he114 thought that they must have been successful. The wise bull among monkeys
went to Rama and told him this. Rama also thought that Maithili must have been seen. When those monkeys, with
Hanuman at the forefront, had rested, they approached the king of the monkeys, who was with Rama and Lakshmana. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On observing Hanuman’s gait and the complexion of his face, Rama
was convinced that Sita must have been seen. The monkeys, with Hanuman at the forefront, were successful in
their objective. They prostrated themselves before Rama, Sugriva and Lakshmana.
‘“Rama picked up his bow and arrows and spoke to the ones who had arrived. ‘Will you give me my life? Have
you been successful? Having killed my enemies in battle and having recovered Janaka’s daughter, will I again rule
the kingdom of Ayodhya? I have been robbed of my wife and honour. As long as Vaidehi is not freed and my enemies are not killed in battle, I have no desire to be alive.’ When Rama had spoken thus, the son of the wind replied.
‘O Rama! My news is pleasant. Janaki has been seen by me. After searching the southern direction, with its mountains, forests and mines, we were exhausted. After some time, we saw a giant cave. We entered it and it was many

yojanas long. It was dark, forested, deep and infested with insects. We traversed a long way through it and then we
saw the splendour of the sun and a celestial palace nearby. O Raghava! That residence belonged to the daitya
Maya. A lady ascetic named Prabhavati was engaged in austerities there. She gave us many objects to eat and
drink. When we had regained our strength after eating, we proceeded along the road that she had pointed out.
Emerging,115 we saw the salty ocean and near it, the great mountains Sahya, Malaya and Dardura. Ascending
Malaya, we beheld Varuna’s abode and were extremely miserable, dejected and tired. We gave up all hope of life.
We thought about this great ocean, which was many hundreds of yojanas wide. It was the abode of whales, crocodiles and large ﬁsh and we were extremely distressed. We decided to sit there and fast to death. In the course of our
conversation, we began to talk about the vulture Jatayu. We then saw a terrible and fearsome bird that was as large
as the peak of a mountain. It looked like another son of Vinata.116 Desirous of eating us, it approached us and
asked, “Who is it that is talking about my brother Jatayu? I am his elder brother Sampati and am the king of the
birds. In a contest with each other, we rose up towards the seat of the sun. As a consequence of this, my wings
were burnt, but not those of Jatayu. That was the last time I saw my beloved brother, the king of the vultures. My
wings having been burnt, I fell down on this giant mountain.” When he told us this, we told him about his brother
being slain. We brieﬂy told him about the calamity that had befallen you. O king! On hearing this, Sampati was extremely miserable. O destroyer of enemies! In a dejected frame of mind, he again asked us, “Who is Rama? Who is
Sita? How was Jatayu killed? O supreme among monkeys! I wish to hear everything about all this.” I then told him
everything about the misfortune that had befallen you and the reason for our deciding to fast to death. But that king
of birds made us arise with his words. “I know Ravana and his great city of Lanka. I have seen it across the ocean,
in a valley of Mount Trikuta. Vaidehi must be there. I have no doubt on this score.” Hearing him speak these
words, we swiftly arose. O scorcher of enemies! We consulted about how one might cross the ocean. But no one
had the courage to jump across the ocean. I invoked the energy of my father. With that, I jumped across the great
ocean, a hundred yojanas, after having killed a water-dwelling rakshasi.117 I then saw the faithful Sita in Ravana’s
inner quarters. Eager to see her husband, she was fasting and engaged in austerities. Her hair was matted and her
body was caked with dirt. She was lean, wretched and an ascetic. Knowing her to be Sita through these various
signs, I approached her and spoke to her in private. “O Sita! I am a monkey who is the son of the wind-god. I am
Rama’s messenger. Travelling through the sky, I have come here, hoping to see you. The brothers and princes,
Rama and Lakshmana, are well. They are under the protection of Sugriva, the Indra of all the monkeys. O Sita!
Rama, together with Soumitri, has asked about your welfare. Because of his sentiments of friendship, Sugriva has
also asked about your welfare. Your husband will soon arrive here, with all the monkeys. O goddess! Have trust in
me. I am a monkey and not a rakshasa.” Thinking for an instant about what I had said, Sita replied, “From what
Avindhya has said, I know you to be Hanuman. Avindhya is a mighty-armed rakshasa, revered by the elders. He
told me that Sugriva is surrounded by advisers like you. Go now.” Having said this, Sita gave me this jewel. The
unblemished Vaidehi has worn it for a long time. Janaki also told me these words, so that you have your trust in
me. O tiger among men! While dwelling on that great mountain of Chitrakuta, you hurled a straw at a crow. From
this, you should believe.118 Hearing this, I myself burnt down that city.’ Rama then honoured the one who had
brought such pleasant news.”’
564(267)

‘Markandeya said, “While Rama was seated there with them, on Sugriva’s instructions, the foremost among the
monkeys began to assemble there. Surrounded by one thousand crores of swift monkeys, Sushena, Vali’s illustrious father-in-law, came to Rama. Surrounded by one crore of monkeys, Gaja and Gavaya, the immensely valorous
Indras among monkeys, separately made their appearance. O great king! Gavaksha was terrible to look at and had
the tail of a cow. He arrived with sixty thousand crore. The famous Gandhamadana lived in Gandhamadana. He
brought one thousand crore of awesome monkeys. The intelligent monkey, Panasa, was immensely strong. He
brought ten, twelve and thirty-ﬁve crore. The brave and aged monkey, by the name of Dadhimukha, was illustrious. He brought a great army of monkeys that were awesome in energy. Jambavan brought a hundred thousand
crore of bears. They were dark and terrible in their deeds. Their foreheads were lined. There were many other lead-

ers of herds of monkeys. O great king! Innumerable numbers assembled for the sake of Rama. They roared like lions, with the complexion of shirisha blossoms. As they ran around, a tumultuous sound was heard. Some were like
the peaks of mountains. Others were like buffaloes. Some were like clouds in autumn. Others had faces that were
like vermilion. The monkeys jumped up and fell down. They leapt up and raised dust. Monkeys arrived from all
the directions. The large army of monkeys was like the ocean when it is full. On Sugriva’s instructions, they set up
their residences there. When all the Indras among monkeys had assembled from all the directions, when the lunar
day was auspicious and so was the nakshatra, the illustrious Raghava marched out with Sugriva at the appointed
hour. As if to shatter the world, the army was arranged in battle formations. Hanuman, the son of the wind-god,
was in the front of the army. Soumitri, who was without any fear, protected the rear. The two Raghavas, with
guards for the arms and the ﬁngers, and surrounded by those foremost among monkeys, looked like the sun and the
moon amidst the planets. That army of monkeys was armed with shala and tala trees and rocks as weapons. It
looked like an extensive ﬁeld of rice at the time of sunrise.
‘“Protected by Nala, Nila, Angada, Kratha, Mainda and Dvivida, the extremely large army marched, for the sake
of accomplishing Raghava’s objective. Without any obstructions, it duly passed through extensive areas with a lot
of roots and fruit, with an abundance of honey and meat and full of pure water and camped on the ridges of mountains. That army of monkeys then arrived at the salty ocean. That force, with its many pennants, looked like a second ocean. It went to the forest along the shore and began to reside there. Then, in the midst of the chiefs among
the monkeys, Dasharatha’s illustrious son told Sugriva words that were appropriate for the occasion. ‘What do you
think is the way to cross over the ocean? This army is large and the ocean is difﬁcult to cross.’ Some monkeys,
who thought of themselves as learned, thought that the monkeys were capable of jumping over the ocean. Others
thought of boats and other means of crossing. But having comforted all of them, Rama replied, ‘No. O brave ones!
All the monkeys are not capable of leaping over this expanse of one hundred yojanas. Therefore, this cannot be a
ﬁrm view. There are not enough boats to bear this army. Besides, the interests of trade should not suffer because of
us. Our army is vast and the enemy will look for weak spots.119 The idea of leaping, or using boats, does not appeal to me. No. I will attack this treasure of water through some means and the one who lives below120 will then
show me a way. If he does not show me a path, I will burn him up with great and unassailable weapons that ﬂame
with the ﬁre and the wind.’ Having said this, Raghava, together with Soumitri, touched the water, and basing themselves on an expanse of kusha grass, repulsed the ocean. Then the god of the ocean, the illustrious lord of male and
female rivers, showed himself in a dream to Raghava, surrounded by masses of aquatic creatures. Surrounded by
hundreds of stores of gems, he addressed him in sweet words. ‘O son of Kousalya! O bull among men! Tell me
what I can do to help you.’ Rama told him, ‘I am of the Ikshvaku lineage and can therefore be regarded as your relative.121 O lord of the male and female rivers! I desire that you show me a path for my army, so that I can go and
kill Dashagriva, the wretch of the Poulastya lineage. If you do not give me the path that I am asking for, I will dry
you up with arrows that have been invoked with mantras to make them celestial weapons.’ On hearing Rama’s
words, Varuna’s abode122 was extremely aggrieved and stood there, hands joined in salutation. It spoke these
words. ‘I do not wish to obstruct you, or create any obstacles. O Rama! Listen to my words. Having heard, decide
on your course of action. If I grant a passage for your marching army at your request, others will use the strength
of their bows to also command me. There is a monkey named Nala who is venerated by the artisans. He is the
powerful son of the god Vishvakarma Tvashtra.123 I will bear whatever he throws into me—wood, straw or stone,
and that will become a bridge.’ Having said this, he disappeared.
‘“Rama told Nala, ‘Build a bridge across the ocean. It is my view that you are capable of doing this.’ Through
this means, Kakutstha had a bridge constructed. It was ten yojanas wide and a hundred yojanas long. Even today,
that is famous on earth as Nala’s bridge. It was created on Rama’s instructions and is established like a mountain.
Vibhishana, the brother of the Indra of the rakshasas and with dharma in his soul, met Rama there, with his advisers, and the great-souled one welcomed him. Sugriva had his misgivings that he might be a spy. But Raghava satisﬁed himself about the truth through his actions, gestures and conduct and showed him the honours. He instated
Vibhishana as the king of all the rakshasas and made him Lakshmana’s adviser and well-wisher. O lord of men! In
accordance with Vibhishana’s instructions, within a month, he, together with his army, crossed the ocean over the

bridge. Then, having reached Lanka, he caused its many and large gardens to be ravaged by the monkeys. Ravana
had two rakshasa advisers named Shuka and Sarana. They disguised themselves as monkeys and came as spies, but
Vibhishana had them caught. When those roamers of the night revealed their real forms of rakshasas, Rama had
then shown to his army. Later, he let them go. Having set up the quarters for his army in a grove in the city, the
brave one sent the wise monkey Angada as his messenger to Ravana.”’
565(268)

‘Markandeya said, “That forest was full of many roots and fruits and had plentiful supplies of water. Kakutstha
made his army live there and protected it appropriately. Following the sacred texts, Ravana fortiﬁed Lanka. It was
naturally unassailable and had ﬁrm walls and turrets. There were seven moats ﬁlled with deep water, infested with
ﬁsh and crocodiles. While these were invincible, they were bolstered with stakes made out of khadira.124 It was
difﬁcult to attach because of catapults,125 watchtowers and rocks. The soldiers had pots that were full of venomous snakes and resin powder. They were armed with clubs, ﬁrebrands, iron spikes, spears, swords and axes.
There were shataghnis126 and maces dipped in beeswax.127 All the gates to the city were guarded by mobile and
stationary posts. There were large numbers of infantry and many horses and elephants.
‘“Arriving at Lanka’s gate, Angada made himself known to the Indra of the rakshasas and entered fearlessly. In
the midst of many crores of rakshasas, the immensely strong one was as radiant as the sun, surrounded by garlands
of clouds. Having approached Poulastya, who was surrounded by his advisers, the eloquent one delivered Rama’s
message. ‘O king! The immensely famous Indra of Kosala, Raghava, has sent you words that are appropriate to the
occasion. Listen to them and act accordingly. Countries and cities that obtain kings who are unreﬁned in their souls
and are the performers of injurious acts, are themselves injured and destroyed. You alone are guilty of forcibly abducting Sita. But this will lead to the destruction of others who are innocent. Intoxicated by strength and insolence,
you have earlier injured many rishis who lived in the forest and have insulted the gods. You have killed rajarshis
and abducted their weeping wives. The time has now come for the fruits of your evil deeds to be reaped. I will kill
you, together with your advisers. Be a man on the ﬁeld of battle. O stalker of the night! Though I am a mere human, you will witness the valour of my bow. Free Sita Janaki. If you do not release her, with my sharp arrows, I
will rid the world of all rakshasas.’ Hearing the harsh words of the messenger, King Ravana could not tolerate
them and became senseless with rage.
‘“At the signs of their lord, four stalkers of the night seized him128 by his four limbs, like birds against a tiger.
Angada leapt up onto a terrace of the palace, with the roamers of the night hanging onto his limbs. The force of his
jump made the roamers of the night fall down on the ground, their hearts shattered from the blow. He again leapt
and descended from the top of the palace. He jumped over the city of Lanka and returned to his army. The energetic monkey then went to the Indra of Kosala and told him everything. Praised by Raghava, he then rested. Then
the descendant of the Raghu lineage, with the efforts of all the monkeys, who were as swift as the wind, had the
walls of Lanka breached. With Lakshmana leading the way, Vibhishana and the lord of the bears129 demolished
the impregnable southern gate of the city. He130 then invaded Lanka with a hundred thousand crore of monkeys.
They were skilled in battle and their complexions were as red as that of young camels.131 The monkeys leapt up
and jumped down and moved sideways. As a result of the dust that was raised, the sun became invisible and its
light was dimmed. O king! In every direction, the rakshasas, with their wives and their elders, were amazed. They
saw the walls turn tawny because of the monkeys, which seemed to be like shoots of rice, with the complexion of
shirisha blossoms, like the rising sun and as white as reeds. They destroyed the pillars made of jewels and the turrets of the catapults. They shattered, broke and ﬂung away the implements of war. With great strength, they
grasped the shataghnis, chakras, iron bars and rocks, and with the force of their arms, hurled them into the middle
of Lanka. Attacked by hundreds of monkeys, the masses of travellers in the night who were stationed on the turrets, ran away.
‘“Then, on the instructions of their king, hundreds and thousands of rakshasas issued out. They could assume
any form at will and their shapes were distorted. With a shower of arrows, they drove away the forest dwellers.
Resorting to supreme valour, they established themselves on the walls. Those terrible-looking stalkers of the night

cleared the walls of the monkeys and hung on there, like masses of ﬂesh. Pierced by lances, many bulls among the
monkeys fell down. Many stalkers of the night also fell down, crushed by broken pillars and ramparts. Thus the
battle raged on between rakshasas and monkeys, as the brave ones pulled each other by the hair and fought and devoured with nails and teeth. The monkeys and rakshasas were struck, died and fell down on the ground there, but
they did not let go of each other. Like clouds, Rama rained down a net of arrows. Having reached Lanka, those
killed the stalkers of the night. The indefatigable and ﬁrm-bowed Soumitri sought out rakshasas who were stationed on the fortiﬁcations and killed them with iron arrows. With Lanka breached and the objective towards victory having been attained, on Raghava’s orders, the army then withdrew.”’
566(269)

‘Markandeya said, “When those soldiers were quartered, some groups of Ravana’s followers, pishachas and rakshasas, attacked them—Parvana, Putana, Jambha, Khara, Krodhavasha, Hari, Praruja, Aruja, Praghhasa and others.
Remaining invisible, those evil-souled ones entered. But knowing this, Vibhishana removed their powers of invisibility. O king! On being seen, all of them were killed by the powerful monkeys, who could leap long distances, and
fell down on the ground. Unable to tolerate this, Ravana marched out with his army. He erected a battle formation
known as ushanas132 and attacked the monkeys. On seeing Dashanana’s army advance, Raghava also emerged
and attacked the stalker of the night with a battle formation recommended by Brihaspati.133 A battle then started
between Rama and Ravana. Lakshmana fought with Indrajit, Sugriva with Virupaksha, Nikharvata with Tara, Nala
with Tunda and Patusha with Panasa. On that ﬁeld of battle, using the strength of one’s arms, everyone fought with
another whom he considered to be a match. That terrible battle made one’s body hair stand up, it was like the ancient one between the gods and the asuras. It kept on extending, increasing the fear of those who were cowards.
Ravana attacked Rama with a shower of spears, lances and swords. Raghava attacked Ravana with sharp iron arrows. In a similar way, Lakshmana pierced Indrajit’s heart. Indrajit pierced Soumitri with many arrows. Without
hesitation, Vibhishana discharged at Prahasta, and Prahasta at Vibhishana, showers of sharp arrows that had the
plumes of birds on the shafts. There was an encounter between powerful and great weapons. It afﬂicted all the
three worlds and everything that was mobile and immobile.”’
567(270)

‘Markandeya said, “Then Prahasta suddenly rushed at Vibhishana. He was harsh in battle and struck him with a
mace. Though struck by the mace with a terrible force, the intelligent and mighty-armed one did not stagger and
stood ﬁrm like the Himalayas. Then Vibhishana grasped a gigantic and large spear that had a hundred bells attached to it. Invoking it with a mantra, he ﬂung it at the other one’s head. With the speed of the vajra, it descended
with great force and sliced off the rakshasa’s head. He was seen to fall down, like a tree struck by the wind. On
seeing Prahasta, stalker of the night, killed in battle, Dhumraksha rushed at the monkeys with great speed. On seeing his terrible army, which was like a cloud, the bulls among the monkeys suddenly lost their heart in battle. On
seeing the bulls among the monkeys suddenly lose their heart, Hanuman, tiger among monkeys and son of the
wind-god, rallied them. O king! On seeing that the son of the wind was ﬁrmly established in battle, all the monkeys swiftly returned. There arose a great and tumultuous roar that made the body hair stand up. The soldiers of
Rama and Ravana rushed at each other. In that terrible battle, which made the ground muddy with blood, Dhumraksha used his arrows to make the army of monkeys ﬂee. But Hanuman, son of the wind-god and victorious over
his enemies, swiftly grasped that mighty rakshasa. An awesome duel raged between the monkey and the brave rakshasa as they tried to kill each other, like that between Indra and Prahlada. The rakshasa struck the monkey with
clubs and maces. The monkey struck the rakshasa with trees, complete with trunks and branches. Then the gigantic
and intelligent Hanuman, son of the wind-god, killed Dhumraksha, with his horses, chariot and charioteer. On seeing the supreme rakshasa Dhumraksha killed, reassurance returned to the monkeys and they attacked and killed the
soldiers. Thus slaughtered by the powerful and victorious monkeys, the rakshasas lost their resolution and ﬂed towards Lanka in fear. The shattered remnants of the stalkers of the night retreated and returned to the city. On returning, they told King Ravana everything that had transpired.

‘“On hearing that Prahasta and the mighty archer Dhumraksha, together with their soldiers, had been killed in
battle by the bulls among monkeys, Ravana sighed deeply and arose from his excellent seat. He said, ‘The time has
come for Kumbhakarna to act.’ Saying this, he used many musical instruments, loud in their sounds, to awaken
Kumbhakarna from his deep and prolonged sleep. He awoke him with a great deal of effort. When Kumbhakarna
was no longer asleep and was comfortably seated, Dashagriva, the lord of the rakshasas, spoke these words to him.
‘O Kumbhakarna! You are fortunate that you can sleep in this way. You do not know of the terrible and great fear
that has arisen. Rama, with his monkeys, has crossed the ocean over a bridge. Ignoring all of us, he is engaged in a
great slaughter. I have abducted his wife, Sita Janaki. So as to recover her, he had a bridge constructed over the
great ocean. He has killed Prahasta and many of our relatives. O destroyer of enemies! No one other than you is
capable of killing him. O supreme among strong ones! March out now. O tormentor of enemies! Kill Rama and all
the others in battle. Accompanied by a large army, Dushana’s younger brothers, Vajravega and Pramathi, will follow you.’ Having thus spoken to the mighty Kumbhakarna, the lord of the rakshasas gave instructions to Vajravega
and Pramathi about what they should do. Those two brave ones, Dushana’s younger brothers, agreed to Ravana’s
instructions. With Kumbhakarna at the forefront, they marched out from the city.”’
568(271)

‘Markandeya said, “When Kumbhakarna marched out from the city with his followers, he saw stationed before
him that army of monkeys, ﬂush with victory. The monkeys came up to him and surrounded him from all sides.
They struck him with many gigantic trees. Discarding their fear, others struck at him with their nails and teeth.
Many monkeys, engaged in the path of battle, used different means of ﬁghting and different weapons to attack the
terrible Indra among rakshasas. Thus struck, he only laughed and began to devour the monkeys, like Panasa,
Gavaksha and the monkey Vajrabahu. On witnessing the harrowing deed of the rakshasa Kumbhakarna, Tara and
the others were extremely frightened and let out a large lament. Hearing Tara’s cries and those of other chiefs
among monkeys, Sugriva fearlessly rushed at Kumbhakarna. With great force, the high-minded elephant among
monkeys arrived before Kumbhakarna and powerfully struck him on the head with a shala tree. Though the greatsouled one struck Kumbhakarna on the head with great force, the shala tree hurled by the monkey Sugriva only
broke and did not hurt him. It was as if he was suddenly awakened at the touch of the shala tree. Kumbhakarna
laughed and roared and seized Sugriva with great force. On seeing Sugriva grasped by the rakshasa Kumbhakarna,
the brave Soumitri, the delight of his friends, rushed forward. Lakshmana, the destroyer of enemy warriors, unleashed an extremely swift and extremely large arrow, with golden tufts, at Kumbhakarna. That arrow pierced
through his body armour and body. Covered with blood, it then penetrated the earth. With his heart shattered, the
great archer Kumbhakarna released the lord of the monkeys. Grasping a rock as a weapon, he aimed that large rock
and rushed at Soumitri. While he was advancing, he134 sliced off two of those upraised arms with arrows that
were sharp like razors and he135 then became four-armed. But Soumitri sliced off all those arms, which held rocks
as weapons, with arrows that were like razors. The body now assumed a gigantic size, with many legs, heads and
arms and looked like a mass of rocks. Soumitri burnt it down with brahmastra. Struck by that celestial weapon, the
immensely valorous one fell down in battle, like a tree that has been burnt and uprooted by a stroke of lightning.
‘“On seeing the swift Kumbhakarna, who was like Vritra, fall down lifeless on the ground, the rakshasas ﬂed in
fear. On seeing the warriors run away, Dushana’s younger brothers restrained them and angrily attacked Soumitri.
On seeing Vajravega and Pramathi wrathfully advance towards him, Soumitri attacked them with feathered shafts.
O Partha! A terrible battle raged between Dushana’s younger brothers and the intelligent Lakshmana and it made
the body hair stand up. He enveloped the rakshasas with a large shower of arrows. Those two brave ones also angrily rained down on him. That extremely terrible battle between Vajravega and Pramathi and the mighty-armed
Soumitri lasted only for a short instant. The Hanuman, son of the wind-god, grasped the peak of a mountain and
attacked Vajravega, taking away his life. The immensely strong monkey, Nila, rushed at Dushana’s younger brother Pramathi and crushed him with a large rock. There was again a terrible battle between the forces of Rama and
those of Ravana, as they attacked each other. The forest-dwelling ones killed rakshasas by the hundreds and rakshasas killed the forest-dwelling ones.136 But the number of rakshasas killed was more than that of monkeys.”’

569(272)

‘Markandeya said, “On hearing that Kumbhakarna with his followers, the great archer Prahasta and the immensely
energetic Dhumraksha had been killed in battle, Ravana spoke to his son, the brave Indrajit. ‘O destroyer of enemies! Kill Rama, Sugriva and Lakshmana. O good son! You have earned a blazing renown for me by vanquishing
in battle Shachi’s consort, the thousand-eyed one and the wielder of the vajra.137 O destroyer of enemies! O
supreme among those who wield weapons! Remain invisible or visible. Use the divine weapons obtained as boons.
Kill my enemies. O unblemished one! Not to speak of the others, even Rama, Lakshmana and Sugriva are incapable of withstanding the touch of your arrows. O unblemished one! O mighty-armed one! Even Prahasta and
Kumbhakarna could not complete the task of avenging Khara. Go and accomplish that in battle. Using your sharp
arrows, kill my enemies and their soldiers today. O son! Increase my delight, as you have done in the past by making Vasava captive.’ O king! Having heard these words, Indrajit agreed. He donned his armour and mounted on his
chariot, made his way towards the battleﬁeld.
‘“The bull among rakshasas then announced his name and challenged Lakshmana, who bore auspicious signs, to
a duel. Lakshmana grasped his bow and arrows and slapping the palms of his hands, rushed forward, creating terror, like a lion among small animals. A terrible and ﬁerce battle started between those two, both of whom desired
victory, were skilled in use of divine weapons and deﬁed each other in prowess. When Ravana’s son, supreme
among strong ones, could not get the better of his adversary through arrows, he tried harder. With great force, he
hurled many javelins at him. But Soumitri sliced those down with his sharp arrows. Cut down with those sharp arrows, they fell down on the ground. Then Vali’s illustrious son, Angada, uprooted a tree and rushing at Indrajit
with great force, struck him on the head with it. However, the brave Indrajit was unperturbed. He grasped a lance
and hurled it at his chest. But Lakshmana cut it down. The brave Angada was near him and Ravana’s son struck
the bull among monkeys on the side with a club. Vali’s brave son ignored the blow. The one who was victorious
over his enemies wrathfully hurled the trunk of a shala tree at Indrajit. O Partha! That tree, angrily hurled for the
purpose of killing Indrajit, destroyed his chariot, together with the horses and the charioteer. With the horses and
the charioteer dead, he jumped down from the chariot. O king! Ravana’s son instantly disappeared through the use
of maya. Knowing that the rakshasa was skilled in many forms of maya and could become invisible, Rama arrived
at that spot to protect his army. He then aimed his arrows, obtained through boons, at Rama and pierced the immensely strong Lakshmana all over his body. The brave Rama and Lakshmana fought with Ravana’s son, who remained invisible through the use of maya and fought them with his arrows. In great anger, he unleashed hundreds
and thousands of arrows at all the limbs of those lions among men. On seeing that he was invisible while showering down arrows, the monkeys grasped large rocks and took to the sky. However, the rakshasa was invisible. Ravana’s brave son used maya and oppressed them severely with his arrows. Struck by the arrows, the two brave
brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, fell down from the sky to the ground, like the sun and the moon.”’
570(273)

‘Markandeya said, “When he saw that the inﬁnitely energetic brothers had fallen down, Ravana’s son bound them
down with arrows obtained through a boon. Those brave ones, tigers among men, were bound down by Indrajit’s
arrows in battle, like birds trapped in a cage. On seeing them fallen down on the ground, covered in hundreds of
arrows, Sugriva, the king of the monkeys, stood around them with all the other monkeys—Sushena, Mainda,
Dvivida, Kumuda, Angada, Hanuman, Nila, Tara and Nala. Vibhishana, accomplished in his deeds, arrived at the
spot. He brought the brave ones back to consciousness with the weapon known as prajna.138 Using the great herb
vishalya,139 invoked with a divine mantra, Sugriva removed the thorns of arrows from their bodies. With the arrows removed from their bodies, those foremost among men recovered their senses. In a short while, the maharathas were freed from pain and fatigue. O Partha! Seeing that Rama was freed of his fever, Vibhishana joined
his hands in salutation and told the descendant of the Ikshvaku lineage, ‘O destroyer of enemies! This guhyaka has
arrived here from Mount Shveta. He has brought this water on the instructions of the king of the yakshas.140 O
scorcher of enemies! The great king Kubera has sent this water so that you are able to see invisible beings. When
this water has touched your eyes, you, and whoever else you give the water to, will be able to see all beings that

are invisible.’ Having agreed to this, Rama accepted the consecrated water and puriﬁed his eyes with it. So did the
great-minded Lakshmana, Sugriva, Jambavan, Hanuman, Angada, Mainda, Dvivida, Nila and almost all the chiefs
among monkeys.
‘“Having accomplished his task, Indrajit went and told his father what he had done. Having told him this, he returned to the ﬁeld of battle. Desirous of battle, he angrily advanced again. With Vibhishana’s advice, Soumitri attacked him. He was ﬂush with victory and had not yet performed his daily rites.141 Having recovered his senses,
Lakshmana was desirous of killing the enemy and angrily assailed him with arrows. Each warrior wished to vanquish the other and a battle began between them. It was extremely extraordinary, like that between Shakra and
Prahlada. Indrajit pierced Soumitri with sharp arrows that penetrated the heart. Soumitri wounded Ravana’s son
with arrows that were like ﬁre to the touch. Touched by Soumitri’s arrows, Ravana’s son was senseless with rage.
He discharged eight arrows at Lakshmana, virulent as serpents. But listen carefully as I tell you how the brave
Soumitri killed the other one with three feathered arrows that were like ﬁre to the touch. Through one of these, he
sliced off the arm that wielded the bow from the body. With the second one, he dropped the arm that held the iron
arrows on the ground. The third arrow was lustrous and wide. With this, he cut off the head, which had a beautiful
nose and was adorned with earrings. Severed of the head and the arms, the torso looked terrible. Having killed
him, the supreme among strong ones, killed his charioteer with arrows. The horses dragged the chariot to Lanka
and Ravana saw the chariot, bereft of his son. Knowing that his son had been killed, Ravana was overcome by
grief and his eyes widened in fear. He was about to kill Vaidehi. She was in the ashoka grove, yearning to see
Rama. The evil-souled one grasped a sword and rushed to her. Listen. Seeing that the one with evil intelligence
had decided on this evil act, Avindhya calmed down the enraged one, giving him these reasons. ‘You are established as a great king. You should not kill a woman. This woman is captive in your house and is already dead. In
my view, she will not be killed through the destruction of her body. Kill her husband. When he is dead, she will be
dead. Shatakratu is not your equal in valour. In battle, you have frightened Indra and the thirty gods several times.’
With these and similar words, Avindhya paciﬁed the angry Ravana and he accepted the advice. The stalker of the
night resolved to march out himself. Having sheathed his sword, he instructed that his chariot should be
prepared.”’
571(274)

‘Markandeya said, “Angry at the death of his beloved son, Dashagriva ascended his chariot and marched out,
adorned in gold and gems. He was surrounded by terrible rakshasas, with many weapons in their hands. He scattered the foremost among monkeys and advanced towards Rama. While he was angrily advancing, Mainda, Nila,
Nala, Angada, Hanuman and Jambavan, together with their soldiers, surrounded him. In Dashagriva’s sight, those
bulls among bears and monkeys destroyed his soldiers with trees. When he saw that his soldiers were being annihilated by the enemy, Ravana, the lord of the rakshasas and skilled in maya, resorted to maya. Hundreds and thousands of rakshasas were seen to emerge from his body. They held arrows, lances and swords in their hands. But
Rama destroyed all those rakshasas with his divine weapons. The lord of the rakshasas then resorted to maya
again. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dashanana created forms that looked like Rama and Lakshmana and
they rushed towards Rama and Lakshmana. O king! On reaching Rama and Lakshmana, those stalkers of the night
descended on them, with long bows in their hands. On witnessing the maya of the Indra among rakshasas, the
dauntless Soumitri, the descendant of the Ikshvaku lineage, spoke these words to Rama. ‘Kill those evil-souled
rakshasas, who have forms like yours.’ Rama then slew the ones who looked like him.
‘“Then, in that ﬁeld of battle, Shakra’s charioteer, Matali, arrived before Rama in a chariot that was as radiant as
the sun and was yoked to tawny horses. Matali said, ‘This is the supreme chariot that belongs to Maghavan himself. It is named Jaitra and is yoked to tawny horses. O Kakutstha! O tiger among men! Shakra used this splendid
chariot in the war against daityas and danavas and killed hundreds. O tiger among men! Swiftly ascend this chariot, driven by me in battle. Defeat Ravana in battle. Do not delay.’ When he heard Matali’s words, Raghava was
suspicious, thinking that this might be more maya on the part of the rakshasa. But Vibhishana told him, ‘O tiger
among men! This is not the maya of the evil-souled Ravana. O immensely radiant one! Therefore, swiftly mount
Indra’s chariot. Delighted, Kakutstha told Vibhishana that he would act accordingly. He mounted the chariot and

angrily advanced towards Dashagriva. When Ravana advanced towards him, all the beings began to lament. The
gods roared like lions in heaven and sounded drums. The stalker of the night hurled an extremely terrible javelin at
Rama, like Indra’s vajra and like Brahma’s raised staff. Rama cut that javelin down with sharp arrows. On witnessing that difﬁcult deed, Ravana was overcome by fear. Dashagriva was angered and released thousands and tens of
thousands of sharp arrows and other kinds of weapons at Rama—bhushundis,142 javelins, clubs, axes, different
kinds of spears, shataghnis and arrows sharp as razors. On seeing the distorted maya created by the rakshasa
Dashagriva, all the monkeys were scared and ﬂed in all the directions. At that, Kakutstha took a supreme arrow out
of his quiver. It was excellent in the head and in the shaft and had a golden shaft. He invoked it with brahmastra
and ﬁxed it to his bow. When Rama invoked that excellent arrow with the mantra of brahmastra, on witnessing
that, all the gods and the gandharvas, with Indra at the forefront, rejoiced. With the invocation of brahmastra, all
the gods, gandharvas and kinnaras thought that the rakshasa only had a short span of life left now. Rama then released the arrow, unmatched in its energy. It was terrible and resembled Brahma’s raised staff, destined to kill Ravana. It enveloped the foremost among rakshasas, with his chariot, horses and charioteer, in a great mass of blazing
ﬂames. The thirty gods, together with the gandharvas and the charanas, were delighted to see that Ravana had been
killed by Rama, whose deeds were unsullied. The ﬁve elements departed from the immensely fortunate Ravana.
Through the energy of brahmastra, he was deprived of all the worlds. The ingredients of his body, together with his
ﬂesh and blood, were burnt so much by the brahmastra that even the ashes could not be seen.”’
572(275)

‘Markandeya said, “Having killed the mean Ravana, the Indra of the rakshasas and enemy of the gods, Rama, together with Soumitri, was extremely delighted. Dashagriva having been slain, the gods, with the rishis at the forefront, praised the mighty-armed one and pronounced benedictions of victory over him. All the gods praised the lotus-eyed Rama, as did the gandharvas and residents of heaven, and showered down ﬂowers and words of praise.
Having thus honoured Rama, they returned to where they had come from. O one without decay! It was as if a great
festival was being held in heaven.
‘“Having killed Dashagriva, the immensely famous lord Rama, the destroyer of enemy cities, handed Lanka
over to Vibhishana. The immensely wise and aged adviser Avindhya emerged, with Sita at the forefront, and with
Vibhishana leading the way. With great humility, he told the great-souled Kakutstha, ‘O great-souled one! Accept
this goddess. Janaki is of good conduct.’ Hearing these words, the descendant of the Ikshvaku lineage descended
from his supreme chariot. He looked at Sita, who was enveloped in tears. Her limbs were beautiful and she was
seated on a vehicle, oppressed by grief. All her limbs were covered with dirt. Her hair was matted. She was attired
in a black garment. On seeing her, Rama was concerned that Vaidehi had been touched by another. He told her, ‘O
Vaidehi! You are free. Go. I have done my duty. O fortunate one! You once had me as a husband and therefore, I
did not think that you should grow old in the house of that rakshasa. Hence, I killed the stalker of the night. How
can a man like me, who knows the ways of dharma, accept a woman, even for an instant, who has been held in another man’s arms? O Maithili! Whether you are of good conduct or evil conduct, I no longer have any interest in
enjoying you now. You are like oblations that have been licked by a dog.’ On hearing these terrible words, the
young goddess suddenly fell down on the ground, like a severed plantain tree. Her face had been ﬂush with delight. But that disappeared in an instant, like breath on a mirror. Hearing these words spoken by Rama, all the monkeys, together with Lakshmana, stood around motionless, as if they were dead.
‘“Then the pure-souled and four-faced god, the grandfather and the creator of the world,143 descended from a
celestial chariot and appeared before Raghava, as did Shakra, Agni, Vayu, Yama, Varuna, the illustrious lord of the
yakshas and the unblemished saptarshis. King Dasharatha arrived in a radiant and divine form, astride an extremely expensive celestial chariot that was resplendent and was drawn by swans. The ﬁrmament was then crowded with
all the gods and gandharvas. It was as beautiful as the autumn sky, studded with stars. The illustrious Vaidehi arose
in their midst and the beautiful one spoke these words to Rama, whose chest was wide. ‘O prince! I do not blame
you, because I know the ways of women and of men. But listen to these words of mine. The air that is inside beings is always in motion. If I have committed an evil act, let it free my breath of life. If I have committed an evil

act, let ﬁre, water, space, earth and air144 free my breath of life.’ Then a sacred voice spoke from the ﬁrmament. It
echoed in all the directions and gladdened the great-souled monkeys. Vayu said, ‘O Raghava! This is the truth. I
am the wind that is always in motion. O king! Maithili is without taint. Unite with your wife.’ Agni said, ‘O descendant of the Raghu lineage! I am the wind that resides in the bodies of all beings. O Kakutstha! Maithili has not
committed a crime, even in the slightest way.’ Varuna said, ‘O Raghava! The juices in the bodies of beings owe
their existence to me. I am asking you to accept Maithili back.’ Brahma said, ‘O son! This action on your part is
not surprising. You are acquainted with the dharma of rajarshis. You are virtuous and follow the path of good conduct. Listen to these words of mine. O brave one! You have brought down the enemy of the gods, the gandharvas,
the serpents, the yakshas, the danavas and the maharshis. Through my favours, he had earlier become invincible to
all beings. For a speciﬁc reason, I ignored that evil one for some length of time. It was for the sake of his own
death that the evil-souled one abducted Sita. But I protected her through Nalakubara’s curse. He had earlier been
cursed by him145 that if he forced himself on any woman against her wishes, his head was certain to shatter into a
hundred fragments as a consequence. O immensely radiant one! You should not have any doubt on this. You are
the equal of the gods and the immortals and you have performed a great deed.’ Dasharatha said, ‘O son! O fortunate one! I am pleased with you. I am your father Dasharatha. O supreme among men! I grant you permission to
rule the kingdom.’ Rama replied, ‘O Indra among kings! I bow down before you, if you are indeed my father. On
your instructions, I will go to the lovely city of Ayodhya.’ O lord of men! On hearing these words, his father was
delighted and said, ‘O Rama! O one with the red eyes! Go and rule Ayodhya.’ Bowing to the gods and worshipped
by his well-wishers, he was united with his wife, like the great Indra with Poulomi.146 The scorcher of enemies
then granted a boon to Avindhya and honoured and gave riches to the rakshasi Trijata. Brahma and all the gods,
with Shakra at the forefront, then told him, ‘O son of Kousalya! What boons that you desire shall we grant you today?’ Rama chose devotion to dharma, victory over enemies and revival of the monkeys who had been killed by
the rakshasas. O great king! When Brahma pronounced words granting this, all the monkeys regained their senses
and arose. The immensely fortunate Sita granted a boon to Hanuman and said, ‘O son! You will live for as long as
Rama’s fame lasts. O Hanuman! O one with the yellow eyes! Through my favours, divine delicacies will always
be present before you.’ Then, while all those with unsullied deeds watched, the gods, with Shakra leading the way,
vanished.
‘“On seeing Rama united with Janaki, Shakra’s charioteer was extremely delighted and, in the midst of his wellwishers, spoke these words. ‘O one for whom truth is valour! You have removed the misery of the gods, the gandharvas, the yakshas, men, asuras and serpents. Therefore, all the worlds, with the gods, the asuras, the gandharvas,
the yakshas, the rakshasas and the serpents will speak of your deeds as long as the earth exists.’ Speaking these
words to Rama, supreme among all wielders of weapons, he147 took his leave and having honoured him, departed
in the chariot that was as resplendent as the sun. With Sita at the forefront, together with Soumitri, together with all
the monkeys, with Sugriva leading the way, Rama arranged for the protection of Lanka. With Vibhishana at the
forefront, he again crossed the bridge over the abode of sharks.148 Surrounded by his chief advisers who followed
him, he used the Pushpaka vimana, which travelled through the sky and could go wherever it willed.149 With all
the monkeys, the king with dharma in his soul stayed for a while on the shores of the ocean, where he had slept
earlier. When the time was right, Raghava assembled them and honoured them. He satisﬁed them with gems and
gave them leave to depart. When the chiefs among monkeys, the monkeys with tails like cows and the bears had
left, Rama returned to Kishkindha with Sugriva. With Vibhishana following and with Sugriva, from Pushpaka vimana, he showed Vaidehi the forest. Having arrived at Kishkindha, Rama, foremost among warriors, instated Angada, who had accomplished his appointed tasks, as the heir apparent.150 Together with them, and with Soumitri,
Rama followed the same road151 towards his city. Having reached Ayodhya, the lord of the kingdom sent Hanuman as a messenger to Bharata and he152 observed the signs and told him153 all the pleasant news. When Vayu’s
son had returned, he154 went again to Nandigrama. He saw Bharata there, his limbs covered with dirt and attired
in garments made of bark, seated on his seat, with Rama’s sandals before him. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
Having been united again with Bharata and Shatrughna, valorous Raghava, together with Soumitri, rejoiced. On

being reunited with their elder and on seeing Vaidehi, Bharata and Shatrughna were delighted. Having held the
kingdom as a honoured trust, Bharata was extremely happy and returned it to the one who had come back. On an
auspicious day, under the nakshatra Vaishnava,155 Vasishtha and Vamadeva consecrated the brave one. Having
been consecrated, he granted leave to his well-wishers to depart for their homes—Sugriva, foremost among monkeys, and Vibhishana, the son of Pulastya. He honoured them with all kinds of jewels and they were extremely
happy and rejoiced. Having done his duty, he unhappily gave them permission to go. Having shown homage to
Pushpaka vimana, Raghava, the descendant of the Raghu lineage, happily returned it to Vaishravana.156 Assisted
by the devarshis, he performed ten horse sacriﬁces, without any obstructions, on the banks of the Gomati, where
three times the normal stipends were given.”’157
573(276)

‘Markandeya said, “Thus did the mighty-armed Rama, whose energy was inﬁnite, confront misfortune and live in
the forest in earlier times. O tiger among men! Do not grieve. O scorcher of enemies! You are a kshatriya. On the
basis of the valour of your arms, you are traversing a road that is blazing in its resolution. Not even the slightest bit
of sin is to be found in you. Even Indra, and the gods and the asuras, may become despondent along this path. Together with the Maruts, the wielder of the vajra killed Vritra, the invincible Namuchi and the rakshasi
Dirghajihva.158 Everything in this world stays with those who have aides. Who cannot be overcome in battle by
someone who has Dhananjaya as his brother? Bhima is terrible in his valour and is foremost among strong ones.
Madri’s two twin sons are young and great archers. O scorcher of enemies! With such aides, why do you grieve?
With such aides, you can vanquish the soldiers of the wielder of the vajra, together with the Maruts. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! With such great archers as aides, who are the equals of the gods, you will vanquish all your
enemies in battle. Look at Droupadi Krishna. She was abducted forcibly by the evil-souled Saindhava, who was
intoxicated with his valour. But these great-souled ones accomplished the difﬁcult task of obtaining her back, after
vanquishing and subjugating King Jayadratha. Rama got Vaidehi back without any such allies. Through his terrible
valour, he killed the rakshasa Dashagriva in battle. O king! Use your own intelligence to think about this. Monkeys
and black-faced bears were his allies, creatures from a different species. O best of the Kurus! O bull among the
Bharata lineage! Therefore, do not sorrow. O scorcher of enemies! Great-souled ones like you do not sorrow.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Thus consoled by the intelligent Markandeya, the king discarded his weakness of spirit
and spoke again.’
574(277)

‘Yudhishthira asked, “O great sage! I do not grieve for myself, or for my brothers, or for the loss of the kingdom,
but for Drupada’s daughter. When we were oppressed by those evil-souled ones at the game of dice, we were saved
by Krishna. But she was again forcibly abducted from the forest by Jayadratha. Have you ever seen, or heard of, a
woman as immensely fortunate and as devoted to her husbands as Drupada’s daughter?”
‘Markandeya said, “O king! O Yudhishthira! Hear about the great fortune of a lady born in a high lineage. The
princess Savitri obtained everything. There was a king in the land of Madra. He had dharma in his soul and was
extremely devoted to dharma. The great-souled one was devoted to brahmanas, was united with the truth and had
conquered his senses. That king had the name of Ashvapati. He performed sacriﬁces, was generous in giving and
was skilled. He was the beloved of the citizens and the inhabitants of the countryside. He was engaged in the welfare of all beings. He was forgiving and truthful and had conquered his senses. He had no offspring. Because he
was advancing in years, he was concerned. In order to obtain offspring, he resorted to severe rites. When it was
time to eat, he restricted his food. He became a brahmachari and conquered his senses. O supreme among kings!
He offered a hundred thousand oblations to Savitri.159 He ate in limited quantities and skipped every sixth meal.
He lived with these rules for eighteen years. When eighteen years were over, Savitri was pleased. O king! She
arose from the agnihotra,160 and with great delight, showed herself to the king. The one who grants boons then
spoke these words to the king. ‘O king! I am satisﬁed with your brahmacharya, purity, self-control, rituals and your
wholehearted devotion. O Ashvapati! O king of Madra! Ask for whatever boon you desire. But do not make the

mistake of disregarding dharma.’ Ashvapati replied, ‘I am desirous of dharma and have observed these rites because I desire offspring. O goddess! May I have many sons who extend my lineage. O goddess! If you are pleased
with me, then I ask for this boon. The brahmanas have told me that obtaining offspring is the supreme dharma.’
Savitri said, ‘O king! Knowing of your intentions in advance, I have already spoken about your objective of obtaining sons to the grandfather.161 O pleasant one! Through the favours granted to you on earth by the self-creating one, an energetic daughter will soon be born to you. You need not make any reply to this.162 I am delighted
and am telling you this on behalf of the grandfather.’ The king acknowledged Savitri’s words and requested that,
through her favours, this might occur soon. When Savitri had disappeared, the king returned to his own house. He
lived happily in his kingdom and protected the subjects according to dharma.
‘“Some time passed. The king, who was regulated in his vows, impregnated the womb of his eldest queen, who
was devoted to dharma. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The embryo in the womb of the princess of Malava
grew,163 like the lord of the stars164 in the sky during shuklapaksha. At the right time, she gave birth to a daughter who had eyes like a lotus. The king happily performed the rites for her. Because she had been given by Savitri
when oblations with savitri165 had been rendered, the brahmanas and her father gave her the name of Savitri. The
king’s daughter grew, like Shri166 personiﬁed. In due course of time, the girl became a maiden. Her waist was
slender and her hips were broad. She was like a golden image. On seeing her, people thought that they had obtained a celestial maiden. Her eyes were like the petals of a lotus, blazing in their energy. On seeing that energy, no
one dared to marry her. On an auspicious day, having washed her hair and having fasted, she approached the gods
and offered oblations into the ﬁre, according to the prescribed rites and accompanied with recitations by brahmanas. When this was over, the goddess who was like Shri in her form, took the remaining ﬂowers and went to her
great-souled father. Bowing at her father’s feet, she ﬁrst offered the remnants to him. Then, joining her hands in
salutation, the one with the beautiful hips stood by the side of the king. On seeing that his daughter had grown up
and looked like a goddess, the king was unhappy that no one had wished to marry her yet.
‘“The king said, ‘O daughter! The time to give you away has arrived. But no one is asking me. Therefore, you
yourself look for a husband, with qualities that are like your own. If you desire a man, tell me about him. Marry
whom you wish. After deliberations, I will give you away. O fortunate one! I have heard what brahmanas have recited from the sacred texts. Listen to these words, as I recount them. “A father who does not give his daughter
away is condemned. A husband who does not cohabit at the right time is condemned. A son, who does not protect
his mother when her husband is dead, is condemned.” On hearing my words, swiftly go and look for a husband.
Act in a way so that we are not condemned by the gods.’”
‘Markandeya said, “Thus addressing his daughter, he assigned aged ministers to her, for the arrangements, and
asked her to go. Having learnt of her father’s instructions, the intelligent one bowed bashfully at her father’s feet
and departed without any hesitation. She was seated on a golden chariot and was surrounded by the aged advisers.
She went to the beautiful hermitages of the rajarshis. She showed her homage at the feet of the revered elders who
were there. O son! She visited all the forests, one after another. At all the tirthas, the king’s daughter gave away
riches to the foremost among brahmanas and went from one region to another.”’
575(278)

‘Markandeya said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On one occasion, Narada visited the king of Madra and
was seated in the midst of the assembly hall, conversing with him. At that time, after visiting all the tirthas and all
the hermitages, Savitri, together with the ministers, returned to her father’s abode. On seeing her father seated with
Narada, the beautiful one lowered her head at their feet.
‘“Narada asked, ‘O king! Where did your daughter go and where has she returned from? Why do you not give
this maiden away to a husband?’
‘“Ashvapati replied, ‘I sent her out on that task and she has returned now. O devarshi! Now hear from her whom
she has chosen as a husband.’”
‘Markandeya said, “The beautiful one was instructed by her father to recount everything in detail. She obeyed,
and driven by destiny, spoke these words. ‘There is a kshatriya king in the land of Shalva and he has dharma in his

soul. He is famous by the name of Dyumatsena. Later, he became blind. The intelligent one lost his eyesight and
his son was still young. Because of old enmity, a neighbour spotted the weakness and seized the kingdom. With his
young son and wife, he left for the forest. Having left for the great forest, great in his vows, he performed austerities there. His son was born in the city, but grew up in the hermitage. His name is Satyavan and in my mind, I have
accepted him as my husband.’ Narada replied, ‘O king! In her ignorance, Savitri has committed a grave error, by
choosing the virtuous Satyavan. His father speaks the truth. His mother speaks the truth. Therefore, brahmanas
gave him the name of Satyavan.167 When he was young, he loved horses and fashioned them out of clay, painting
them. He was therefore known as Chitrashva.’168 The king asked, ‘Is the king’s son energetic and intelligent? Is
he forgiving and brave? Is he truthful and devoted to his father?’ Narada replied, ‘He is as energetic as the sun-god
and as intelligent as Brihaspati. He is as brave as the great Indra and as forgiving as the earth.’ Ashvapati asked, ‘Is
the king’s son, Satyavan, generous towards brahmanas? Is he handsome and large-hearted? Is his appearance
pleasant?’ Narada replied, ‘According to his own ability, in generosity, he is the equal of Rantideva, the son of
Samkriti.169 In devotion to brahmanas and truthfulness, he is like Shibi, the son of Ushinara.170 He is like Yayati
in his generosity.171 He is as pleasant to behold as the moon. Dyumatsena’s powerful son is as handsome as one
of the Ashvins. He is self-controlled, mild, brave, truthful and in control of his senses. He is friendly, without malice, modest and forbearing. To state it brieﬂy, those who have grown old in austerities and conduct always say that
he is established in uprightness and righteousness.’ Ashvapati asked, ‘O illustrious one! You have spoken to me
about all his qualities. Now tell me about his faults, if he has any.’ Narada replied, ‘He has only one blemish. His
life is short. One year from now, Satyavan will give up his body.’
‘“The king said, ‘O Savitri! O beautiful one! Go and choose another one as your husband. This is a great blemish that overshadows all his qualities. The illustrious Narada is worshipped by the gods and he has told me that his
life is short. He will give up his body within a year.’
‘“Savitri said, ‘The die is cast only once. The daughter is given away only once. “I give her away,” is pronounced only once. All these three occur only once. Whether his life is long or short, whether he possesses qualities or is without qualities, I have chosen him as my husband once and will not choose a second one. Having made
up my mind, I have voiced it in words. The act occurs thereafter. My mind has been made up.’
‘“Narada said, ‘O best of men! Your daughter Savitri’s mind is ﬁrmly made up. It is impossible to dislodge her
from the way of dharma. The qualities that Satyavan possesses do not exist in any other man. Therefore, it seems
to me that your daughter should be given to him.’
‘“The king said, ‘O illustrious one! The words that you have spoken are true and should not be disregarded. O
illustrious one! Since you are my preceptor, I will do as you say.’
‘“Narada said, ‘May your daughter Savitri be given away without any impediments. I will have to go away now.
May all of you be fortunate.’”
‘Markandeya said, “Having said this, Narada soared up into the sky and went to the region of the thirty gods.
The king began to make arrangements for his daughter’s marriage.”’
576(279)

‘Markandeya said, “The king reﬂected about the objectives behind the bestowal of his daughter and began to make
all the arrangements for the marriage. On an auspicious lunar day, he invited all the brahmanas, all the ofﬁciating
priests172 and all the priests, and set out with his daughter. The king went to Dyumatsena’s hermitage in the sacred
forest, and accompanied by the brahmanas, approached the rajarshi on foot. He saw the immensely fortunate and
blind king seated there, on a mat of kusha grass, under a shala tree. In accordance with what is prescribed, the king
worshipped the rajarshi and introduced himself with a few restrained words. The king who was learned in dharma
offered the king173 an arghya,174 a seat and a cow, and asked him why he had come. He175 then told him everything about his wishes and intended course of action and about Satyavan. Ashvapati said, ‘O rajarshi! This is my
beautiful daughter, named Savitri. O one learned in dharma! In accordance with your own dharma, accept her as
your daughter-in-law.’ Dyumatsena replied, ‘Dislodged from our kingdom, we have resorted to living in the
woods. We are controlled and practise the dharma of ascetics. Your daughter does not deserve a state of living in

the forest. How will she be able to bear that hardship?’ Ashavapati said, ‘Both My daughter and I know that happiness and unhappiness may exist or they may not exist.176 Therefore, you should not utter such words to someone
like me. O king! I have come here after making up my mind. I have honoured you affectionately as a well-wisher
and you should not kill my hopes. Since I have come here out of love, you should not refuse me. In this alliance,
you are my equal and I am yours. Therefore, accept my daughter as your daughter-in-law and as Satyavan’s wife.’
Dyumatsena replied, ‘Earlier, I had desired to have an alliance with you. But dislodged from my kingdom, I did
not think about it again. Let my cherished desire be accomplished today itself. You are a guest that I have wished
for.’ Then the two kings summoned all the brahmanas who lived in the hermitage and in accordance with the rites,
arranged for the wedding.
‘“Having given his daughter away in the appropriate fashion,177 with garments, Ashvapati happily returned to
his own house. Having obtained a wife who possessed all the good qualities, Satyavan was delighted. She was also
happy at having obtained the husband her heart had wanted. When her father had departed, she gave up all her ornaments. She donned bark and garments that were red.178 Through her servitude, qualities, affection and self-control and attending to all the wishes, she satisﬁed everyone. By tending to her body and all her garments and other
objects, she satisﬁed her mother-in-law. Through her restrained words and worship of the gods, she satisﬁed her
father-in-law. In a similar way, through her pleasant words, skilfulness, equanimity and tending to him in private,
she satisﬁed her husband. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those virtuous ones lived in that hermitage for
some time and performed austerities. But whether lying down or standing, during day and at night, in her mind,
Savitri kept thinking about the words that Narada had spoken.”’
577(280)

‘Markandeya said, “O king! After a long period of many days had elapsed, the time of Satyavan’s death arrived.
Savitri counted every day that passed and Narada’s words were always present in her heart. Having determined
that his death would occur on the fourth day, for three nights, the beautiful one observed a vow of fasting and remained standing, day and night. Hearing about this difﬁcult vow, the king was unhappy. He arose and consoled
Savitri with these words. ‘O daughter of a king! The vow that you have adopted is extremely severe. It is extremely difﬁcult to remain standing for three nights.’ Savitri replied, ‘O father! Do not grieve over this act. I will complete the vow, which has been adopted with resolution. Resolution is the cause.’179 Dyumatsena said, ‘Under no
circumstances can I ask you to give up your vow. Those like us should speak to you so that you complete it.’ Having said this, the great-souled Dyumatsena refrained. Savitri remained standing, as if she had been made of wood.
O bull among the Bharata lineage! Thinking that her husband would die the next day,180 Savitri remained standing and the day passed in misery. ‘Today is the day.’ Thinking this, she offered oblations into the blazing ﬁre. She
performed her morning rites when the sun had arisen four measures.181 She bowed down before all the aged brahmanas and her mother-in-law and father-in-law, in due order, and restrained, stood standing before them with
hands joined in salutation. For the sake of Savitri’s welfare, all the residents of the hermitage and all the holy ascetics pronounced the benediction that she might never become a widow. Savitri, who was immersed in the yoga
of meditation, wished in her mind that it might be this way and silently accepted the words of the ascetics. The
king’s daughter waited for the hour and the moment, thinking grievously about the words that Narada had spoken.
O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The king’s daughter was standing alone and her mother-in-law and fatherin-law affectionately told her, ‘You have perfectly completed the vow, as has been prescribed. It is now time to eat.
After that, do whatever else remains to be done.’ Savitri replied, ‘I will eat when the sun has set and I have accomplished my desire. This is the resolution I have made in my mind about the time.’ When Savitri was conversing in
this way about food, Satyavan grasped an axe. He placed it over his shoulder and proceeded to leave for the forest.
‘“Savitri told her husband, ‘You should not go alone. I will go with you. I am disinclined to be separated from
you.’ Satyavan replied, ‘O beautiful one! You have never gone to the forest earlier. The road is difﬁcult. You are
thin from the vow and fasting. How will you be able to walk?’ Savitri said, ‘I am not weak from the fasting and I
do not feel exhausted. I have made up my mind to go. You should not restrain me.’ Satyavan replied, ‘Since you
have made up your mind to go, I will do what you desire. But ﬁrst take leave of the elders, so that sin does not

touch me.’ The one who was great in her vows went to her mother-in-law and father-in-law and said, ‘My husband
is going to the great forest to collect fruit as food. I seek arya’s182 and father-in-law’s permission to go with him. I
cannot bear to be separated from him. Your son is going for the sake of agnihotra and for his elders. He cannot be
restrained. He could have been restrained had he gone to the forest for any other reason. I have not ventured out of
the hermitage for almost a year. I have great curiosity to see the forest in bloom.’ Dyumatsena replied, ‘From the
day Savitri’s father gave her to me as a daughter-in-law, I do not remember her having ever requested me for anything. Let the daughter-in-law’s desires be satisﬁed. O daughter! But along the way, see that Satyavan does not get
distracted from his task.’ With the permission of both, the famous one departed with her husband. She seemed to
be laughing, but her heart was miserable. The large-eyed one saw colourful and beautiful woods in every direction,
resounding with the cries of peacocks. Satyavan spoke these sweet words to Savitri. ‘Behold these rivers full of
sacred waters and these supreme trees in blossom.’ The unblemished one always watched over her husband. Remembering the words of the sage, she thought that he was already dead. Walking gently, she followed her husband.
Her heart was cleft in two and she waited for the time.”’
578(281)

‘Markandeya said, “Accompanied by his wife, the valorous one collected fruit and ﬁlled his vessel. Then he began
to chop the wood. While he was chopping the wood, he began to sweat. Because of his exertions, he developed an
ache in his head. Overcome with exhaustion, he went to his beloved wife and spoke these words. ‘I have developed an ache in my head because of these exertions. O Savitri! My limbs and my heart seem to be afﬂicted. O one
whose words are restrained! I feel the signs that I am not well. I feel as if my head is being pierced with spikes. O
fortunate one! I wish to sleep. I do not have the strength to stand.’ At that, Savitri came up to her husband and embraced him. She sat down on the ground and placed his head on her lap. Remembering Narada’s words, the ascetic
one began to calculate the muhurta,183 the kshana,184 the hour and the day. In a short while, she saw a man who
was attired in a yellow garment. He was crowned and handsome, with an energy that was like that of the sun. His
complexion was smooth and dark and his eyes were red. With a noose in his hand, he looked terrible. He stood
next to Satyavan and began to look at him.
‘“On seeing him, she gently placed her husband’s head on the ground and arose. With a trembling heart, she
spoke miserably to him. ‘From your superhuman appearance, I know that you are a god. O god! If it pleases you,
tell me who you are and what you desire here.’ Yama replied, ‘O Savitri! You are devoted to your husband and
have the power of austerities. It is for that reason that I will reply to you. O fortunate one! Know me to be Yama.
The life of Satyavan, your husband and the son of a king, has run out. I will bind him and take him. That is my intention.’ Having said this, in order to please her, the illustrious lord of the ancestors revealed everything about his
wishes and said, ‘This handsome one is an ocean of qualities and is united with dharma. That is the reason I have
come myself and have not sent one of my servants to take him.’ Then Yama forcibly took out from Satyavan’s
body a being that was as long as a thumb and binding him with the noose, controlled him. With the life being taken
out, the body faded and lost its breath. The body became motionless and was unpleasant to behold. Binding him
thus, Yama proceeded in a southern direction.185
‘“Distressed, Savitri followed Yama. The immensely fortunate one was restrained in her vows and faithful to her
husband. Yama said, ‘O Savitri! Go back. Perform the last rites for your husband. Your debt to your husband has
been discharged. You have come as far as you possibly can.’ Savitri replied, ‘I must go wherever my husband is
going, of his own volition, or if he is being taken. That is the eternal dharma. Because of austerities, devotion to
elders, love towards my husband, vows and your favours, nothing will be able to obstruct my path. The learned
ones, enlightened about the truth, have said that friendship is established by walking seven steps with another.186
Placing this friendship at the forefront, I will tell you something. Listen. Those who are not in control of their souls
do not observe dharma, right abode and right endeavour, even when they live in the forest. Those who are learned
about dharma, extol it. Therefore, the learned say that dharma is the most important. By following the single dharma identiﬁed by the learned, we attain all the different paths. I do not wish for a second or a third mode. Hence, the
learned have said that dharma is the most important.’ Yama said, ‘Go back. I am delighted with the words you

have spoken. They have the right vowels and consonants and are full of reason. Ask for a boon, other than his life.
O unblemished one! I will grant you any boon that you desire.’ Savitri replied, ‘My father-in-law has been dislodged from his kingdom and dwells in the forest. His eyes have been destroyed and he is in a hermitage. Through
your favours, let the king regain his sight and become strong, resplendent like the sun and the ﬁre.’ Yama said, ‘O
unblemished one! I will grant you those boons, exactly as you have asked. I notice that you are tired from the journey. Refrain and go back. Otherwise, you will become exhausted.’ Savitri replied, ‘How can there be exhaustion
when I am with my husband? I must certainly follow the path that my husband takes. I must go where my husband
is being taken. O lord of the gods! Listen again to my words. It is said that a meeting with the virtuous is desirable.
It is said that friendship with them is even better. Communion with the virtuous is never fruitless. Therefore, one
should always associate with the virtuous.’ Yama said, ‘The words spoken by you are favourable and extend the
intelligence of the intelligent. Your words ensure welfare. O beautiful one! Other than Satyavan becoming alive,
ask for a second boon.’ Savitri replied, ‘My wise father-in-law has been robbed of his own kingdom earlier. May
the king get it back. May that elder of mine never stray from his own dharma. That is the second boon that I ask
from you.’ Yama said, ‘He will soon obtain his own kingdom back. The king will never deviate from his own
dharma. O daughter of a king! Your desire has now been satisﬁed. Refrain and go back. Otherwise, you will become exhausted.’ Savitri replied, ‘You control all the beings through your rules. You follow the rules, and not your
own caprices. Therefore, you are famous as the god Yama.187 Now listen again to my words. The eternal dharma
of the righteous is non-violence towards all beings in deeds, thoughts and words and kindness and benevolence. In
this world, men are usually kind only up to their capacity. The righteous exhibit compassion even when their illwishers arrive.’ Yama said, ‘Your words are as satisfying as water to one who is thirsty. O beautiful one! Other
than Satyavan’s life, ask again for any boon that you desire.’ Savitri replied, ‘My father, the king, is without any
sons. Let my father have a hundred sons as my brothers. Let them extend his lineage. That is the third boon that I
crave from you.’ Yama said, ‘O beautiful one! Your father will have a hundred radiant sons who will extend the
lineage. O daughter of a king! Your desire has now been satisﬁed. Return. You have come too far along the road.’
Savitri replied, ‘Since I am with my husband, it has not seemed like a long distance to me. My mind travels a
greater distance. As you travel, listen to my words. Listen again to the words that I will speak. You are Vivasvat’s
powerful son.188 The wise therefore call you Vaivasvata. You please and control all beings through dharma. O
lord! That is the reason you are the king of dharma. One does not trust oneself as much as one trusts the virtuous.
Therefore, people are especially affectionate towards those who are virtuous. Friendship towards all beings engenders trust. That is the reason people are especially trustful towards those who are virtuous.’
‘“Yama said, ‘O beautiful one! O fortunate one! I have never heard words, from anyone else, like the ones that
you have spoken. I am extremely pleased. Other than his life, ask for a fourth boon. And then, go.’ Savitri replied,
‘Let me have one hundred strong, brave and righteous sons through Satyavan’s loins, so that they please us and extend the lineage. This is the fourth boon that I choose from you.’ Yama said, ‘O beautiful one! You will have one
hundred strong, brave and righteous sons and they will please you. O daughter of a king! Do not get exhausted.
Return. You have come too far along the path.’ Savitri replied, ‘The virtuous are always devoted to dharma. The
virtuous do not tremble. Nor do they suffer. A union between the pious and the virtuous is always fruitful. The virtuous do not have any fear from the virtuous. The virtuous make the sun move through their truth. Through their
austerities, the virtuous bear up the earth. O king! The virtuous determine the past and the future. The virtuous
have no lassitude when they are in the midst of the virtuous. This is known to be the eternal conduct practised by
aryas. The virtuous work for each other, without any expectations. Favours done by virtuous men are never fruitless. They do not destroy the objective, or honour. Since the virtuous always display such conduct, the virtuous are
always the protectors.’ Yama said, ‘The more you speak, the more your words are full of dharma, pleasant to the
mind, well articulated and full of deep meaning. O excellent one! The more am I inclined towards respecting you.
O one controlled in vows! Ask for an unmatched boon.’ Savitri replied, ‘O one who gives respect! You have not
made an exception to your favours, as you did with the other boons.189 Therefore, I ask for the boon that Satyavan
should live. Without my husband, I am like one who is dead. Without my husband, I do not desire any happiness.
Without my husband, I do not desire heaven. Without my husband, I do not desire prosperity. Without my husband,
I do not desire life. You have granted me the boon that I will have one hundred sons. Despite that, you are taking

my husband away. I ask for the boon that Satyavan should live. It is then that your words will come true.’ Then
Vaivasvata Dharmaraja Yama agreed to this and freed the noose. He cheerfully told Savitri, ‘O fortunate one! O
one who delights your lineage! Look. I have freed your husband. Take him with you. He is free from disease and
will be successful in his objectives. Together with you, he will live for four hundred years. Through his rites, sacriﬁces and dharma, he will attain fame in the world. Satyavan will beget one hundred sons on you. All of those kshatriyas will be kings, together with their sons and grandsons. Your names will be eternally famous on earth. Your
father will beget a hundred sons on your mother Malavi. Their sons and grandsons will be eternally famous as the
Malavas. Like your kshatriya brothers, they will be the equals of the thirty gods.’ Having bestowed those boons on
her, the powerful Dharmaraja made Savitri return and left for his own abode.
‘“When Yama had left, having obtained her husband back, Savitri returned to the spot where her husband’s
corpse was lying. On seeing her husband lying down on the ground, she approached him and embraced him. She
sat down on the ground and raised his head onto her lap. Having regained his consciousness, he repeatedly looked
at her with great love, as if having returned from a journey. Satyavan told Savitri, ‘I have slept for a long time.
Why did you not wake me up? Where is the dark-complexioned man who was dragging me away?’ Savitri replied,
‘O bull among men! You have indeed slept for a long time on my lap. The illustrious god Yama, the controller of
all beings, has departed. O immensely fortunate one! O son of a king! You are rested and have awoken from sleep.
If you can, arise. Look. The night is now deep.’ Having regained consciousness, Satyavan arose, as if from pleasant slumber. Glancing at the woods in all the directions, Satyavan said, ‘O slender-waisted one! I set out with you,
to gather fruits as food. Then, as I was chopping wood, I suffered from a headache. Tormented by the pain in my
head, I could no longer stand up and lay down on your lap and slept. O beautiful one! I remember all this. In your
embrace, sleep overcame my mind. I then saw a terrible and dark being, with great energy. O slender-waisted one!
If you know, tell me if that was a dream. Or was it reality?’ At that, Savitri told him, ‘O son of a king! The night is
deepening. Tomorrow, I will tell you everything, exactly as it happened. O fortunate one! Arise. Arise. O one good
in your vows. See your parents. The night is deep now and the sun has gone down. The ones who wander around
in the night are happily roaming around, with harsh voices. The sounds of leaves can he heard, as animals roam
around in the forest. Stationing themselves in the south-west direction, jackals are howling terribly. They are making my heart tremble.’ Satyavan said, ‘The forest is covered with a terrible darkness and looks fearsome. Therefore, you will not be able to determine the path that we should follow.’ Savitri replied, ‘The forest has been burnt
down. There is a dry tree that is still blazing. The ﬂames fanned by the wind can be seen here and there. Bringing
some ﬁre from there, I will light a ﬁre in all the directions. There is plenty of wood here. So remove all anxiety
from your heart. I can see that your head is aching. You will not be able to determine the path in this forest enveloped in darkness. If you are unable to go, with your permission, we will go tomorrow morning, when the forest
is visible. O unblemished one! If it so pleases you, we will spend the night here.’
‘“Satyavan said, ‘My headache has gone and I can see that my limbs are ﬁne. If it pleases you, I wish to go and
see my mother and my father. Earlier, I have never returned to the hermitage at the wrong time. My mother restricts me, even before evening has set in. My elders are anxious, even when I go out during the day. With all the
other residents of the hermitage, my father will be looking for me. On several occasions before this, my mother
and father have been unhappy and have rebuked me, saying that I have been out too long. Thinking about me, I
wonder about the state they will be in now. On not seeing me, they must be sorely afﬂicted. One night, some time
ago, the aged ones were extremely miserable on my account. With great love, they told me in a ﬂood of tears, “O
son! Without you, we cannot be alive for an instant. O son! We can certainly bear life as long as you are alive. You
are the crutch for these aged and blind ones. Our lineage is based in you. Our funeral oblations, our fame and our
offspring are established in you.” My mother is old. My father is old. I am their crutch. What state will they be reduced to, if they do not see me tonight? I blame that sleep. It is responsible for my father and my mother being
anxious on my account, fearing harm and that I am in danger and a calamity confronts me. I have no interest in living without my mother and my father. I am sure that my blind father, who has the sight of wisdom, is anxious and
despondent. He is asking all the residents of the hermitage about me. O beautiful one! I am not sorrowing on account of my own self. I am thinking about my father and my weak mother, who is devoted to him. They will now
be in supreme distress because of me. I will live if they live, and they must be supported by me. I know that I must

only perform tasks that bring them pleasure.’ Having said this, the one with dharma in his soul, devoted to his elders and loved by his elders, raised his arms in grief and began to lament loudly. Savitri followed the course of
dharma. On seeing that her husband was overcome with grief after speaking in this way, she wiped the tears from
his eyes and said, ‘If I have observed austerities, if I have offered oblations, this night will be safe for my motherin-law, my father-in-law and my husband. I do not remember having spoken a falsehood, even in jest. By virtue of
that truth, let my parents-in-law remain alive today.’ Satyavan said, ‘O Savitri! I wish to see my parents. Let us
start, without any delay. O one with the beautiful hips! If I see that something unpleasant has happened to my
mother and my father, I swear truthfully that I will no longer be alive. If your intelligence is devoted to dharma, if
you wish to see me alive, if you wish to do that which ensures my pleasure, let us return to the hermitage.’ Then
the beautiful Savitri arose and tidied her hair. She grasped her husband by the arms and made him arise. Having
arisen, Satyavan wiped his limbs with his hand.
‘“He looked in all the directions and saw his vessel.190 Savitri told him, ‘Collect fruit tomorrow. I will carry the
axe, for the sake of obtaining that which you want.’ She hung the vessel from the branch of a tree. Grasping the
axe, she returned to her husband. The one with the beautiful thighs then placed her husband’s left hand on her
shoulder. Embracing him with her right hand, the one whose gait was gentle, began to walk. Satyavan said, ‘O
timid one! I come here often and the paths are known to me. Besides, through the moonlight shining between the
trees, I can make out. O beautiful one! Without any hesitation, walk along the path we came by in the morning, to
gather fruit. The road branches into two near that palasha clump. Swiftly follow the path that heads in a northern
direction. I am well. I am strong. I wish to see my parents.’ Having said this, he quickly proceeded towards the
hermitage.”’
579(282)

‘Markandeya said, “Meanwhile, the immensely strong Dyumatsena had regained his eyesight. He was happy in his
heart and could see everything. O bull among men! He went to all the hermitages with his wife Shaibya and was
extremely afﬂicted because of his son. The couple of them went to all the hermitages, rivers, forests and lakes and
searched in all those regions. They looked up whenever they heard a sound, thinking that it was their son and
rushed there, saying, ‘Satyavan is coming with Savitri.’ Their feet became split and rough, wounded, bleeding and
pierced. Their limbs were sore from kusha grass and thorns. They ran around, as if mad. All the brahmanas who
lived in the hermitages came to them, comforting and surrounding them. They brought them back to their own hermitage. There, the aged ones rich in austerities surrounded him, together with his wife. They comforted him, recounting wonderful tales about former kings. The aged ones, desirous of seeing their son, were comforted. But
they remembered accounts of their son when he was young and were extremely miserable.
‘“Oppressed by grief, they again began to lament in piteous tones and weep. ‘Alas, son! Alas, faithful daughterin-law! Where are you? Where are you?’ Suvarcha said, ‘Satyavan must be alive. His wife Savitri has austerities,
self-control and conduct.’ Goutama said, ‘I have studied the Vedas, together with their branches, and I have accumulated great austerities. I have practised brahmacharya when young. I have satisﬁed my superiors and the ﬁre.
With self-control, I have observed all the vows. I have lived on the wind and have fasted. I have done everything
that ensures welfare. Because of those austerities, I know everything that has been intended. Know this to be the
truth. Satyavan is alive.’ The disciple191 said, ‘The words that have emerged from the mouth of my preceptor can
never be false. Therefore, Satyavan must be alive.’ The rishis said, ‘Savitri is a wife who bears all the auspicious
marks. She has no signs of widowhood. Therefore, Satyavan must be alive.’ Bharadvaja said, ‘His wife Savitri is
endowed with austerities, self-control and conduct. Therefore, Satyavan must be alive.’ Dalbhya said, ‘Since you
have regained your eyesight and since Savitri completed her vow without partaking of food, Satyavan must be
alive.’ Mandavya said, ‘From the way animals and birds are speaking in the tranquil directions and from the way
you conduct yourself as a king, Satyavan must be alive.’ Dhoumya said, ‘Your son is loved by the people and has
all the qualities. He has all the signs of a long life. Satyavan must be alive.’ Thus comforted by those truthful and
eloquent ascetics and reﬂecting about what they had said, he192 remained there.

‘“In a short while, Savitri, accompanied by her husband Satyavan, returned to the hermitage in the night and entered it cheerfully. The brahmanas said, ‘O lord of the earth! We have seen you reunited with your son. You have
regained your eyesight. The reunion with your son, the sight of Savitri and the regaining of your eyesight—these
three blessings will extend your prosperity. It will certainly happen as we have said. We are repeatedly saying that
you will swiftly extend in prosperity.’ O Partha! All the brahmanas then kindled a ﬁre and took their seats around
King Dyumatsena. Shaibya, Satyavan and Savitri were standing to one side. But with the permission of everyone,
they happily seated themselves. O Partha! Then all the residents of the forest, who were seated with the king, were
driven by curiosity and asked the king’s son, ‘O illustrious one! Why did you not return home with your wife earlier? Why have you returned so late in the night? What obstacle stood in the way? O son of a king! Your father and
mother were tormented and so were we. There must have been a reason for this. Therefore, tell us everything.’
Satyavan replied, ‘With my father’s permission, I went out with Savitri. When chopping down wood in the forest,
my head started to ache. I know that, afﬂicted with pain, I slept for a long time. Never before have I slept for such
a long time. Thinking that all of you might be tormented on my account, I returned so late in the night. That is the
reason and there is no other.’ Goutama said, ‘Your father Dyumatsena’s eyesight was restored suddenly. You do
not know the reason for that. Therefore, Savitri must speak. O Savitri! We wish to hear. You know the entire truth.
I know you Savitri. You are like Savitri193 in your energy. You know the reason behind everything. Therefore,
speak the truth. If there is nothing that is a secret from you, tell us everything.’
‘“Savitri said, ‘It is exactly the way you know it to be. There is nothing that is beyond your thoughts. There is
nothing that is a secret from me. Therefore, hear the truth. The great-souled Narada had foretold the death of my
husband. Since today was the appointed time, I did not leave his side. When he fell asleep, Yama himself arrived
with his attendants. Having bound him, he headed in the direction inhabited by the ancestors. I then began to satisfy the illustrious god with truthful words. He granted me ﬁve boons and listen to what they were. I obtained two
boons for my father-in-law, the return of his eyesight and his kingdom. I obtained a hundred sons for my father and
a hundred sons for myself. My husband Satyavan obtained a life of four hundred years. I steadfastly observed the
vow for the sake of my husband’s life. I have now described to you all the reasons in detail, exactly as they occurred and how that great misery of mine has ended in happiness.’
‘“The rishis said, ‘The king’s lineage was immersed in calamity, in a pond full of darkness. O virtuous one! You
are of good conduct. You have borne up the sacred dharma. You were born in a noble lineage and you have raised
it up again.’”
‘Markandeya said, “The assembled rishis honoured and praised that best of women. They took their leave of that
Indra among kings and his son. Then they returned to their own abodes through auspicious routes.”’
580(283)

‘Markandeya said, “The night ended. The sun’s disc arose. Having performed their morning rites, all the ones rich
in austerities reassembled. The maharshis did not tire of recounting repeatedly to Dyumatsena everything about
Savitri’s great glory. O king! Then all the subjects arrived from the land of Shalva and told the king about how his
enemy had been slain by his own adviser. On learning that he had been killed by his minister, with his aides and
well-wishers, they came and recounted everything that had happened. The soldiers of the enemy had run away. In
unison, all the subjects had decided that he194 should be their king. Irrespective of whether he possessed sight or
did not have eyesight, he should be the king. They said that they had been dispatched to the king because of this
decision. The vehicles had come and so had the four kinds of forces.195 Therefore, now that his victory had been
proclaimed in the city, they asked the fortunate king to leave, so that he might occupy the seat of his father and
grandfathers for many nights. On seeing that the king now had sight and was healthy, all of them bowed their
heads in subjugation, their eyes dilated with wonder.
‘“The king then greeted all the aged brahmanas who lived in the hermitage. All of them honoured him and he
left for the city. Shaibya left, in Savitri’s company. They were in a decorated and radiant palanquin that was pulled
by men and was surrounded by soldiers. The priests happily instated Dyumatsena and instated his great-souled son
as the heir apparent.196 Over a long period of time, Savitri gave birth to a hundred sons. They were brave, never

retreated from battle and extended her fame. She also had one hundred extremely powerful brothers. They were
begotten by Ashvapati, king of the Madras, on Malavi. Thus Savitri saved all of them from the misfortune that had
arisen—herself, her father, her mother, her mother-in-law, her father-in-law, her husband and the entire lineage. In
that fashion, the fortunate Droupadi, honoured because of her good conduct, will deliver all of you, like Savitri,
born from a noble lineage.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! Thus instructed by that great-souled one,197 the Pandavas lost their sorrow and
their fever and continued to live in Kamyaka.’

Section Forty-Three
Kundala-aharana Parva
This parva has 294 shlokas and eleven chapters.
Chapter 581(284): 39 shlokas
Chapter 582(285): 17 shlokas
Chapter 583(286): 20 shlokas
Chapter 584(287): 29 shlokas
Chapter 585(288): 19 shlokas
Chapter 586(289): 23 shlokas
Chapter 587(290): 26 shlokas
Chapter 588(291): 28 shlokas
Chapter 589(292): 27 shlokas
Chapter 590(293): 23 shlokas
Chapter 591(294): 43 shlokas
Kundala is an earring and Karna was naturally born with kundalas. Aharana means seizing or taking. Pritha (Kunti) serves Durvasa and obtains a boon. Through this, she invokes Surya and Karna is born. When she abandons Karna, he is adopted and raised by a charioteer. Karna
is born with natural armour and earrings that make him invincible. Indra asks for these, and in return, gives Karna an invincible spear.
581(284)

Janamejaya asked, ‘O great brahmana! When Lomasha conveyed Indra’s message to Pandu’s son, Yudhishthira, he
spoke these words. “When Savyasachi has gone from here,1 I will remove the terrible fear that you do not talk
about.” O foremost among learned ones! What was that great fear concerning Karna? Why did the great-souled
one2 not talk about it to anyone?’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O tiger among kings! Since you have asked, I will tell you about it. O best of the Bharata
lineage! Listen to my words. When twelve years were over and the thirteenth year had started, Shakra wished to
ensure the welfare of the Pandavas and went begging to Karna. O great king! But learning about the intentions of
the great Indra concerning the earrings, Vibhavasu Surya went to Karna.3 The brave and truthful one, devoted to
brahmanas, was lying down on an expensive bed that was covered with admirable spreads. O Indra among kings!
The one with the rays showed himself in the night, at the end of a dream. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He
was driven by great compassion and love for his son. Through his powers of yoga, Surya assumed the form of a
handsome brahmana, learned in the Vedas. For the sake of Karna’s welfare, he spoke these comforting words to
him. “O Karna! O son! O foremost among those who speak the truth! Listen to my words. O mighty-armed one!
Out of affection towards you, I will now speak words that are for your welfare. O Karna! To ensure the welfare of
the Pandavas, Shakra will approach you in the form of a brahmana, so that he can take away your earrings. It is
known in the entire world that your conduct is such that when righteous ones beg you for something, you give and
do not wish anything in return. O son! You give to brahmanas whatever riches and other things they ask for. You
do not refuse. Knowing this to be the case, the chastiser of Paka4 will arrive himself. He will beg you for your earrings and armour.5 When he asks for the earrings, you must not give them to him. Entreat him as best as you can,
because that will ensure your supreme welfare. O son! When he talks to you about the earrings, you must again
and again refuse him by citing many different kinds of reasons. Offer him other riches. Appease Purandara, who

desires the earrings, through gems, women, objects of desire, riches of different kinds and by citing examples. O
Karna! If you give away the beautiful earrings that you were naturally born with, your life will be shortened and
you will come under the power of death. O one who is reverent! Arrayed in your armour and earrings, you cannot
be slain by your enemies in battle. Remember these words. These two treasures arose from amrita. O Karna! If you
desire to live, they must therefore be carefully protected by you.” Karna asked, “Who are you, who have shown
yourself to me as my supreme well-wisher? O illustrious one! If you wish, tell me who you are, dressed in the attire of a brahmana.” The brahmana said, “O son! I am the one with the thousand rays. I have given you this advice
as your well-wisher. Act in accordance with my words. That will be supremely beneﬁcial for you.”
‘Karna said, “It is certainly in my best interests that the illustrious lord of the cows6 is speaking to me today for
my welfare. Listen to my words. O granter of boons! I am propitiating you and am speaking these words to you out
of affection. If I am dear to you, you should not restrain me from observing this vow. O Vibhavasu! The entire
world knows about this vow of mine. It is certain that I will give my life away to the foremost among brahmanas.
O supreme among those who travel the skies! O foremost among the gods! If Shakra comes to me in the disguise
of a brahmana and begs my excellent earrings and armour for the welfare of the sons of Pandu, I will give them to
him. Then my deeds, famous in the three worlds, will not be destroyed. For those like us, ill fame, even if it saves
one’s life, is not appropriate. A glorious death that is approved of by the world is appropriate. Therefore, I will
give the earrings, together with the armour, to Indra. If the slayer of Bala and Vritra7 comes to me and begs for the
earrings to ensure the welfare of the sons of Pandu, it will extend my fame in the world and increase his ill fame. O
radiant one! Even at the expense of my life, I desire for fame in this world. The famous one attains heaven. The
one with ill fame is destroyed. Like a mother, fame ensures the life of a man in this world. Even if the body is
alive, ill fame destroys life. O Vibhavasu! O lord of the world! The creator himself has recited an ancient shloka
about how fame is life itself. ‘In the next world, fame ensures the supreme objective for a man. In this world, pure
fame extends a man’s life.’ By giving away these objects that are natural to my body, I will obtain eternal fame, by
giving them as gifts to brahmanas in accordance with the prescribed rites. By offering my body in battle, by performing this difﬁcult deed and by vanquishing my enemies, I will obtain nothing but fame. O destroyer of Svarbhanu!8 By offering protection to those who are terriﬁed in battle and seek to save their lives, by freeing the aged,
the young and brahmanas from great danger, I will obtain supreme fame in this world. Know that my vow is to
protect fame, even at the expense of my life. O god! By giving this supreme gift to Maghavan, in the disguise of a
brahmana, I will traverse along the supreme path in this world.”’
582(285)

‘Surya said, “O Karna! Do not act against your own interests, or those of your well-wishers, sons, wives, mother
and father. O supreme among those who live! Seek to obtain fame in this world and continued fame in heaven
without sacriﬁcing your life. There is no doubt that the eternal fame that you wish for, will disappear, if it is at the
cost of your own life. O bull among men! In this world, as long as one is alive, one can perform tasks for the father, the mother, the sons and other relatives. O tiger among men! Learn from me that kings perform virile deeds
the same way. O immensely radiant one! Men have fame when they are alive. When the body has been reduced to
ashes, what use does fame serve one who is dead? It is not the dead, but living ones that know fame. The fame of a
dead human is like a garland on one who has lost his life. It is because you are devoted to me that I am telling you
this for the sake of your own welfare. This is for the reason that all my devotees should be protected by me. O
mighty-armed one! I know that this one here is my greatest devotee and is devoted towards me. Therefore, act in
accordance with my words. There is something supreme in you, created by a god. It is because of this that I am addressing you in this way and act without hesitation. O bull among men! This is a secret even to the gods and you
cannot know this. Therefore, I cannot recount this secret to you. In due course of time, you will know it. O Radheya!9 I am telling you this again. Listen to my words. When the wielder of the vajra begs for the earrings, you
should not give them to him. O immensely radiant one! With your beautiful earrings, you will be as resplendent as
the azure moon in the sky, in the midst of the two Vishakhas.10 Know that fame is useful to a man as long as he is
alive. O son! Therefore, you should refuse Purandara when he comes for the earrings. O unblemished one! You

will be able to repulse the desire of the king of the gods for the earrings with many kinds of words and by citing
reasons again and again. O Karna! Use sweetly adorned words to repulse Purandara’s design, reinforced by intelligent arguments. O tiger among men! You are Savyasachi’s challenger. And Savyasachi, brave in battle, is your
challenger. As long as you possess the beautiful earrings, Arjuna cannot vanquish you in battle, even if Indra himself becomes his arrows. O Karna! Therefore, if you desire to defeat Arjuna in combat, do not give your beautiful
earrings to Shakra.”’
583(286)

‘Karna said, “O illustrious one! O lord of the cows! O one with the extremely ﬁerce rays! You know that there is
no other god to whom I am as devoted as to you. O lord of the cows! My affection towards you has always been
greater than that towards my wife, my sons, my own self and my well-wishers. O one who spreads light! You
know that there is no doubt that great-souled ones desire to return the love and devotion of their devotees and worshippers. Since your illustrious self knows that Karna loves you like no other god in heaven, you have spoken
about my welfare. I repeatedly bow my head before you and seek your favours again and again. O one with the
sharp rays! I am telling you this. Please pardon me. I am not frightened of death as much as I am of falsehood. Especially for all the brahmanas and all the righteous ones, I am ready to give up my life, without any hesitation. O
god! O one who spreads light! In so far as the words about Pandava Phalguna are concerned, remove all torment
and misery from your mind. Concerning Arjuna and me, I will vanquish Arjuna in battle. O god! You know about
the great strength of weapons I have obtained from Jamadagni’s son11 and from the great-souled Drona. O foremost among the gods! Grant me permission to observe my vow. If the wielder of the vajra comes and begs for my
own life, I will give it to him.”
‘Surya replied, “O son! O immensely strong one! If you wish to give your beautiful earrings to the wielder of
the vajra, you should speak to him so that your victory is ensured. Because of your rule, you will have to give your
earrings to Shatakratu. But as long as the earrings adorn you, you cannot be slain by any beings. O son! Therefore,
the slayer of the danavas12 wishes to ensure your destruction at the hands of Arjuna in battle and seeks to rob your
earrings. With good and true words, you should propitiate Purandara, lord of the gods, who never deviates from his
objective, again and again and tell him, ‘O one with the thousand eyes! I will give you my earrings and my excellent armour if you give me an invincible spear13 that will destroy all my enemies.’ O Karna! It is only under this
rule that you should give Shakra your earrings. With the spear, you will be able to kill your enemies in battle. O
mighty-armed one! The spear of the king of the gods is such that, without killing hundreds and thousands of enemies, it does not return to the hand.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Saying this, the one with the thousand rays suddenly disappeared. After he had meditated,
Karna told Surya about his dream.14 Vrisha15 then recounted to him everything in detail, all that he had witnessed
and the conversation that had taken place between them in the night. On hearing this, the illustrious god Surya
Bhanu, the destroyer of Svarbhanu, smiled and told Karna that this was all true. On knowing this to be true, Radheya, the destroyer of enemy warriors, waited for Vasava’s arrival, hoping to obtain the spear.’
584(287)

Janamejaya asked, ‘What was the secret that the one with the strong rays did not tell Karna? What were the earrings like? What was the armour like? O excellent one! Where did the earrings and the armour come from? O one
rich in austerities! I wish to hear all this. Tell me.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! I will tell you about Vibhavasu’s secret, about what the earrings were like and
about what the armour was like. O king! In earlier times, a brahmana presented himself before Kuntibhoja.16 He
was terrible in energy and extremely tall. He had a beard and matted hair and held a staff in his hand. He was
agreeable to look at and his limbs were ﬂawless. He seemed to be ablaze in his energy. His complexion was the
colour of honey and he was sweet in his speech. He adorned himself with austerities and studying.

‘The immensely ascetic one told King Kuntibhoja, “Without being refused, I wish to beg for a meal in your
house. O unblemished one! If you so desire, I will dwell in your house, provided that you or your followers do not
cross me in any way. I will come and go as I desire. O king! No one should insult me about my bed or my seat.”
Kuntibhoja replied to him in pleasant words. “It shall be that way, and more than that.” He told him again, “O great
brahmana! My daughter, by the name of Pritha, is famous. That beautiful one has good conduct and is virtuous.
She is self-controlled and honourable. She will wait on you and worship you, without showing you disrespect. You
will be satisﬁed with her conduct and virtue.” Having spoken in this way and having worshipped the brahmana in
accordance with the prescribed rites, he spoke to his daughter Pritha, whose eyes were wide with wonder when she
arrived. “O daughter! This immensely fortunate brahmana wishes to reside here. I have promised him that he can
live in my house. O daughter! I have conﬁdently told him that you know how to satisfy a brahmana. Act in a way
so that my words are not falsiﬁed. The illustrious brahmana is an ascetic and is devoted to studying. Whatever the
immensely ascetic one asks for, should be given without any hesitation. Brahmanas are supreme energy. Brahmanas are supreme austerities. It is because of the worship of brahmanas that the sun shines in the sky. Disrespecting those who deserve to be honoured, the great asura Vatapi and Talajangha were killed through the curse of a
brahmana.17 O daughter! A great burden is being placed on you. With self-control, always seek to satisfy the brahmana. O one who increases my joy! I know that from childhood, you have been attentive to brahmanas, all the elders, all the servants, friends, kin, mothers and me myself, in the appropriate way and with due honour. O one with
the ﬂawless limbs! There is no one among the subjects, in the city, in the inner quarters or among the servants, who
is dissatisﬁed with you. I therefore think that you can handle this brahmana, who is prone to anger. O Pritha! You
became my daughter in your childhood. You were born in the lineage of the Vrishnis and are Shura’s beloved
daughter. Earlier, when you were still a child, your father affectionately handed you over to me.18 You are Vasudeva’s sister and the foremost among my daughters. You became my daughter because he19 promised his ﬁrstborn
child to me. You were born in such a lineage and raised in such a lineage. You have moved from one kind of happiness to another kind of happiness. You are like a lotus that has moved from one pond to another. O beautiful one!
Those who are born in low lineages, even if they are kept under check when they are children, often become deviants later. O Pritha! You have been born in the lineage of a king and possess extraordinary beauty. O beautiful
one! You have all the qualities. O beautiful one! Discard your pride, insolence and vanity. O Pritha! Worship the
brahmana, the granter of boons. That will ensure your welfare. O fortunate one! O unblemished one! Through this,
you are certain to obtain good fortune. But if you anger the foremost among brahmanas, he will burn down my entire lineage.”’
585(288)

‘Kunti said, “O king! I will restrain myself and honour and worship the brahmana, just as you have promised. O
Indra among kings! I do not lie. It is my nature to worship brahmanas. The performance of a pleasant task for you
is my supreme bliss. Whether the illustrious one arrives in the evening, the morning, at night or in the middle of
the night, he will not be angry with me. O Indra among kings! O supreme among men! The worship of brahmanas
is for my own gain. I will follow your instructions and do that which ensures welfare. O Indra among kings! Be
assured that the foremost among brahmanas will not be slighted while he resides in your house. I am telling you
this truthfully. O unblemished one! I will pay particular attention towards what is pleasing to the brahmana and ensures your welfare. O king! Therefore, banish all fever from your mind. O lord of the earth! The brahmanas are immensely fortunate. When worshipped, they are capable of saving. When it is the opposite, they can kill. I have this
knowledge and I will satisfy the foremost among brahmanas. O king! You will not suffer grief from that excellent
of brahmanas on my account. O Indra among kings! When brahmanas are disrespected, they can cause the downfall of kings, like Chyavana, because of Sukanya’s deeds in earlier times.20 O Indra among men! Just as you have
instructed and told the brahmana, I will serve that best of brahmanas with all restraint.”
‘The king said, “O fortunate one! O daughter! For my sake, for my welfare, for the welfare of the lineage and
for your own sake, you must act in this way, without any hesitation.”’

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having said this, the immensely famous Kuntibhoja, devoted towards his children, handed over his daughter Pritha to the brahmana, saying, “O brahmana! This is my young daughter. She has been
brought up in comfort. Do not take it to heart if she commits an act that is wrong. Immensely fortunate brahmanas
are usually not angry towards the aged, the young and ascetics, even if the transgression is regular. Brahmanas
should forgive even a great transgression. O foremost among brahmanas! Therefore, accept the homage that she
renders to the best of her ability.” The brahmana said that it would be this way. In a happy frame of mind, the king
gave him a house that was as white as a swan or a beam of the moon. He arranged for a radiant seat in the place
where the ﬁre was maintained. He also gave him food and every other object. The princess cast aside her laziness
and pride. With great effort, she devoted herself to worshipping and serving the brahmana. Pritha concentrated on
puriﬁcation and went to the brahmana. She served and satisﬁed him in the appropriate way, as if he were a god.’
586(289)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O great king! The maiden, good in her vows, tended to the brahmana, rigid in his vows. She
satisﬁed him, with a pure mind. O Indra among kings! The foremost among brahmanas sometimes said that he
would return in the morning, but would return in the evening or at night. But at all hours, and always, the maiden
worshipped him with food and shelter and gave him more and more. Day by day, her hospitality about food, other
objects, beds and seats, increased and never decreased. O king! Even if the brahmana censured her, found fault
with her or spoke unpleasant words, Pritha never did anything that displeased him. On several occasions, the brahmana returned when the time had passed, or did not return at all. He asked her to serve food when it was difﬁcult
to obtain. But she always said that everything was ready and served him. She was self-restrained, like a disciple, a
son or a sister. O Indra among kings! That unblemished gem of a maiden created affection in that foremost among
brahmanas, tending to his wishes. The supreme among brahmanas was satisﬁed with her character and conduct and
with her many supreme efforts, she continued to serve him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Her father used
to ask her in the morning and the evening. “O daughter! Is the brahmana satisﬁed with your service?” The famous
one would reply that he was supremely satisﬁed. The great-souled Kuntibhoja felt great joy.
‘When one year had passed, the foremost among those who meditate had detected no misdeeds on Pritha’s part
and had become her well-wisher. Delighted, the brahmana told her, “O fortunate one! O beautiful one! I am completely satisﬁed with your service. O fortunate one! Ask for a boon that is difﬁcult for humans to obtain, so that
you are able to surpass all women in your fame.” Kunti replied, “O foremost among those who are learned in the
Vedas! All my desires have already been satisﬁed, since you and my father are pleased with me. O brahmana!
What purpose will boons serve me?” The brahmana said, “O fortunate one! O one with the sweet smiles! If you do
not wish for a boon from me, accept this mantra. Through it, you can summon the gods. O fortunate one! Whichever god you invoke through this mantra will be under your control. Whether willing or unwilling, the god will be
under your control, paciﬁed by the mantra, and will be like your servant.” O king! The unblemished one wasn’t
capable of refusing a second time. She was scared that the foremost among brahmanas might curse her. O king!
The brahmana instructed the one with the ﬂawless limbs about the sequence of mantras, located towards the beginning of the sacred Atharva texts.21 O Indra among kings! Having thus bestowed it, he told Kuntibhoja, “O king! I
have lived happily in your house, satisﬁed by your daughter. She has always pleased me and honoured me. It is
over.” Having said this, he disappeared. The king was overcome with wonder at seeing the brahmana vanish on the
spot. He honoured Pritha.’
587(290)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When that foremost among brahmanas had departed and some time had passed, the maiden
began to think about the strength and weakness of that sequence of mantras. “What is this sequence of mantras that
the great-souled one has given me? I will soon ﬁnd out its strength.” While thinking in this fashion, the young girl
noticed that with puberty, her menses had arrived and she was ashamed. Pritha saw that the one with the thousand
rays was blazing. On seeing the beauty of Bhanu in the morning, she was not satisﬁed. She became gifted with divine eyesight and she saw the god whose form was celestial, clad in armour and adorned with earrings. O lord of

men! She became curious about the mantra. The beautiful one invoked the god. Having performed pranayama, she
summoned the sun-god. O king! The sun-god swiftly appeared before her. His complexion was as yellow as honey.
He was mighty-armed. His neck was like a conch shell. He seemed to be smiling. He wore bracelets on his upper
arms and a diadem. He seemed to set the directions on ﬁre. Resorting to yoga, he divided himself into two. While
one heated from the sky, the other arrived before Kunti and spoke to her in sweet words. “O fortunate one! I have
appeared here because I am under your control, thanks to the strength of the mantra. O queen! Now that I am under
your control, what do you wish me to do? I will do whatever you ask me to.” Kunti replied, “O illustrious one! Return to the place you arrived from. O illustrious one! I summoned you out of curiosity. Please be gracious.”
‘The sun said, “O slender-waisted one! I will go as you have asked me to. But having invoked a god, it is not
proper to send him away in vain. O extremely fortunate one! Your desire is to have a son through Surya. He will be
unrivalled in this world in valour and he will wear armour and earrings. O one whose gait is like that of an elephant! Give yourself to me. O beautiful one! I will beget a son, like the one that you desire. O fortunate one! O
sweet-smiling one! I will depart after having united with you. Else, I will leave in anger and will curse that brahmana22 and your father. There is no doubt that I will consume them because of what you have done. Though he
does not know about this offence, your father is stupid. That brahmana gave you this mantra without knowing
about your character and conduct and I will impose extreme humility on him. O beautiful one! All the gods in
heaven, with Purandara at the forefront, have seen how you have deceived me and seem to be smiling. Behold
those masses of gods through your divine eyesight. I gave that to you earlier, so that you could see me.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘The princess then saw the thirty gods, all stationed in the sky in their respective places, as
resplendent and beautiful as the great and dazzling Aditya. On seeing them, the maiden was overcome with shame.
Terriﬁed, the goddess spoke these words to Surya. “O lord of the cows! Leave in your vimana. I am a maiden and
this conduct of yours is causing me unhappiness. My father, my mother and other elders are the only ones who
have the power to give the body away. In this world, preserving the body is honoured as the greatest dharma of
women. O Vibhavasu! I summoned you to learn about the strength of the mantra. O lord! I have done this out of
childish folly. Please pardon me.” Surya replied, “It is because you are a child that I am requesting you. Others do
not obtain this from me. O Kunti! O maiden! Give yourself to me. O timid one! You will then obtain peace. You
have invoked me and I cannot depart in vain. O one with the unblemished limbs! If I go away, the world will laugh
at me. O beautiful one! All the gods will speak about me in jest. Therefore, unite with me and obtain a son who
will be like me. O beautiful one! There is no doubt that he will be special in all the worlds.”’
588(291)

Vaishampayana said, ‘The intelligent maiden spoke many sweet words and entreated the one with the thousand
rays, but did not succeed. O king! When the maiden could not dissuade the dispeller of darkness, she was afraid of
the curse and thought for a long period of time. “My father is innocent. How can I prevent the angry Vibhavasu
from cursing him and that brahmana because of what I have done? Though energy and austerities destroy sin,
those who are young can be deluded and should not draw near them. Because of my folly, I am now extremely terriﬁed and have been grasped by the arm. How can I perform the task of giving myself up on my own?” Terriﬁed of
the curse, she thought about this in many ways. Though she kept smiling repeatedly, her limbs were suffering from
delusion. O supreme among kings! She was frightened of the curse and for her relatives. O lord of the earth! Confounded by shame, she spoke these words to the god. Kunti said, “O god! My father is alive, and so are my mother
and other relatives. Since they are alive, this violation of the rules should not happen. O god! If I unite with you,
disregarding the rules, because of my deeds, the fame of this lineage will be destroyed in this world. O foremost
among those who provide heat! But if you think that this is in accordance with dharma, I will comply with your
desire, without being given away by my relatives. O irresistible one! I will remain virtuous even after giving myself to you. Dharma, fame, deeds and the lives of beings are manifest in you.”
‘Surya said, “O one with the beautiful smiles! O one with the beautiful hips! O fortunate one! Your father, your
mother and your elders are not capable of bestowing you. Listen to my words. O beautiful one! O one with the
beautiful complexion! O one with the beautiful buttocks! A completely free girl is known as kanya in this world,

from the root kan, because she can desire everyone.23 O beautiful one! You will not commit any adharma. How
can I, with the welfare of the world in mind, commit adharma? O one with the beautiful complexion! It is natural
in this world that all women and men should be without restraints.24 Anything that is against this is a distortion.
Having united with me, you will again become a virgin. You will have a mighty-armed and immensely famous
son.”
‘Kunti said, “O dispeller of everything that is dark! If I obtain a son through you, may he have earrings and armour. May he be mighty-armed, brave and immensely strong.”
‘Surya replied, “He will be mighty-armed and possess earrings. O fortunate one! He will be clad in divine armour and both25 of these will originate in amrita.”
‘Kunti said, “If my son’s earrings and the excellent armour are created out of amrita, as you have said, you may
beget him on me. O god! O illustrious one! Then I will unite with you. May he have valour, beauty and energy and
be united with dharma, like you.”
‘Surya replied, “O queen! O one who has been excited! O timid one! Aditi26 herself gave me these earrings. I
will give them to him, together with this excellent armour.”
‘Pritha said, “O illustrious god! O god! O lord of the cows! If my son is going to be as you have said, I will happily unite with you.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having told Kunti that it would be this way, the traveller in the sky and the enemy of
Svarbhanu, used the self he had created through yoga to enter her and touched her on the navel.27 The maiden was
overwhelmed with Surya’s energy. The goddess fell down on her bed, bereft of her senses. Surya said, “O one with
the beautiful buttocks! I have now ﬁnished. You will give birth to a son who will be the foremost among all wielders of weapons, but you will become a virgin.” O Indra among kings! Overcome with shame, the maiden requested
Surya that it might be this way and the one who was rich in resplendence disappeared. Thus the daughter of the
king of Kunti28 was promised and bashfully asked for the sun-god. She fell down on that auspicious bed, overcome with confusion, like a broken creeper. Having confounded her with his ﬁerce rays and having inserted himself in her through yoga, Bhanu did not taint her. The young maiden again recovered her senses.’
589(292)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O lord of the earth! In shuklapaksha of the tenth month, like the lord of the stars29 in the
sky, a child was conceived in Pritha’s womb. The maiden with the beautiful buttocks was concerned that her relatives would censure her if they got to know about the conception. But people did not get to know. The young maiden lived in the inner quarters and was skilled at protecting herself. No one other than her nurse got to know. In due
course of time, through the favours of the god, the maiden, who was excellent in her complexion, gave birth to a
son. He was as radiant as the immortals. He was attired in armour and was adorned in golden and brilliant earrings.
His eyes were tawny and he had the shoulders of a bull, like his father. As soon as the son was born, the beautiful
one consulted the nurse. She placed the child in a basket that was prepared well on all sides. It was comfortable
and soft, with covers, and lined with beeswax.30 With tears in her eyes, she set it aﬂoat on the waters of the river
Ashva. O Indra among kings! Though she knew that it was improper for an unmarried maiden to have a child, out
of affection for her son, she lamented piteously. She cast away the basket in the waters of the river Ashva.
‘Having done this, Kunti wept and spoke these words. Listen to them. “O son! May you be safe from all the beings in the sky, the earth and heaven and from those that roam the water. May your paths be auspicious and may
you be free from obstructions. O son! May those who meet you have no enmity in their minds. May King Varuna,
lord of the waters, protect you in the water. May the wind-god, who travels everywhere, protect you in the sky.
May your father, foremost among those who provide heat, protect you everywhere. O son! Driven by destiny, he is
the one who has given you to me. The Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Sadhyas, Vishvadevas, the Maruts, together with
Indra, the directions and the lords of the directions and all the gods must protect you, in terrain that is smooth and
rough. Even if you are in a different region, I will get to know you through your armour. O son! Your father, the
god Bhanu Vibhavasu is fortunate. Through his divine eyesight, he will see you ﬂowing down the river. Blessed is

the woman who will adopt you as her son. You are the son of a god and when you are thirsty, you will drink milk
at her breast. What kind of a dream must the woman, who will adopt you, have had? You are like Aditya in your
radiance. You are clad in divine armour. You are adorned in divine earrings. Your eyes are long and wide, like a
lotus. Your palms are coppery red, like a lotus. You have a beautiful forehead and beautiful hair. O son! Fortunate
are the ones who will see you crawling around on the ground, uttering inarticulate words and covered in dust. O
son! Fortunate are those who will see you become a youth, like a lion with a mane, in the forests of the
Himalayas.” O king! Thus did Pritha piteously lament, in many ways, as she consigned the basket to the waters of
the river Ashva, in the company of her nurse and at night. Overcome with grief for her son, the lotus-eyed one
wept. Pritha yearned to see her son. She cast away the basket and returned again to the palace, overcome with
grief, but frightened that her father might get to know.
‘The basket ﬂowed from the river Ashva to the river Charmanvati, from Charmanvati to Yamuna and from
there, it went to Ganga. The waves of the Ganga bore the son and the basket to the city of Champa, the habitation
of charioteers. With divine armour and earrings that were created from amrita, the son was protected by the gods,
because of what had been ordained by destiny.’
590(293)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Dhritarashtra had a friend and he was a suta named Adhiratha. At that time, he went to the
Jahnavi,31 together with his wife. O king! His wife was unrivalled on earth in her beauty. The immensely fortunate
one was named Radha and she had no son, though she had undertaken special efforts to obtain offspring. She saw
the basket ﬂoating along, as it willed. It was protected well and was beautiful with ribbons and a handle. The
waves of the Jahnavi carried it near her. Driven by curiosity, the beautiful one grasped it. Then she told suta Adhiratha about this. He took the basket out of the water and used instruments to pry it open. Then he saw the boy
there. With golden armour, he was as radiant as the morning sun. He had a beautiful face, adorned with radiant earrings. The suta, together with his wife, gazed, their eyes wide with wonder. He then took the boy onto his lap and
spoke these words to his wife. “O timid one! O beautiful one! Since I have been born, I have not witnessed such a
wonder. I think that a son of the gods has come to us. Since I have no offspring, I am certain that the gods have
given me a son.” O lord of the earth! Speaking thus, he handed over the son to Radha. Radha then accepted that
divine-looking son in accordance with the prescribed rites. This son of a god was beautiful and as splendid as the
cup of a lotus.
‘She reared him appropriately and he grew up. He was brave. Since that time, she also gave birth to other sons.
The boy was clad in expensive armour and wore golden earrings. On seeing this, the brahmanas gave him the
name of Vasushena.32 Thus the inﬁnitely valorous one came to be the son of a suta and was known by the name of
Vasushena. The lord was also known as Vrisha. The suta’s eldest son grew up to be powerful in his limbs. Through
a spy, Pritha got to know that he was clad in celestial armour. In due course, when suta Adhiratha saw that his son
had grown up, he sent him to the city of Varanasahrya.33 There, he went to Drona to learn about weapons. The
brave one became Duryodhana’s friend. Having obtained the four kinds of weapons from Drona, Kripa and Rama,
he became famous in the world as a great archer.34 Having allied himself with Dhritarashtra’s son, he was engaged
in enmity towards the Parthas. He always desired to ﬁght with the great-souled Phalguna.35 O lord of the earth!
Ever since they ﬁrst saw each other, he competed with Arjuna and Arjuna competed with Karna. On seeing that he
possessed earrings and was clad in armour, Yudhishthira thought that he was invincible in battle and was miserable. O Indra among kings! At noon, Karna used to worship the radiant sun, standing in the water and with his
hands joined in salutation. Brahmanas who desired riches approached him then. At that time, there was nothing
that he would refuse to brahmanas. Indra assumed the form of a brahmana and approached, saying, “Give me.”
“You are welcome,” replied Radheya.’
591(294)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On seeing the king of the gods disguised as a brahmana, Vrisha welcomed him, though he
did not know what his intentions were. Adhiratha’s son asked the brahmana, “Beautiful maidens with golden
throats or villages full of many enclosures of cattle—what will I give you?” The brahmana replied, “I do not wish
for beautiful women with golden throats, or any other objects that heighten pleasure. Give these to those who desire them. O unblemished one! I desire your natural armour and earrings. If you are true to your vows, slice these
off and give them to me. O scorcher of enemies! I desire that you give these to me swiftly. I think that this gain is
superior to all the other gains.” Karna said, “O brahmana! I will give you habitable land, women, cows and rice for
many years, but not my armour, together with the earrings.” O best of the Bharata lineage! Thus did Karna entreat
the brahmana, with many different kinds of words. But he did not desire any other boon. When that supreme
among brahmanas wished for no other boon, Radheya laughed and spoke to him again. “O brahmana! My natural
armour and earrings have been created from amrita. Because of them, I cannot be slain in all the worlds. I will not
part with them. O bull among brahmanas! Take this extensive kingdom on earth, peaceful and without any thorns.
Accept them in a happy frame of mind. O supreme among brahmanas! Without my earrings and natural armour, I
will become vulnerable before my enemies.” When the illustrious chastiser of Paka did not ask for any other boon,
Karna laughed and again addressed these words to him. “O lord! O lord of the gods! I know who you are. O
Shakra! It is not proper for me to give you a boon that will be in vain. You are the lord of the gods himself and it is
you who should give me a boon, since you are the lord of all other beings and the creator of all beings. O god! If I
give you my earrings and armour, I will be liable to be killed. O Shakra! You will become an object of ridicule. O
Shakra! Therefore, take my earrings and supreme armour, if you so wish. But take them in exchange. Otherwise, I
will not give them.” Shakra replied, “Ravi36 had earlier got to know about my intended arrival. There is no doubt
that he has told you everything. O son! O Karna! Therefore, ask for what you want. With the exception of my vajra, you can ask for whatever else you wish.” At that, Karna happily approached Vasava.
‘Content in his mind, he asked for the invincible shakti. Karna said, “O Vasava! In exchange for my armour and
earrings, give me the invincible shakti that kills large numbers of enemies on the ﬁeld of battle.” O protector of the
earth! For an instant, Vasava thought about this in his mind. With the spear in mind, he then spoke these words to
Karna. “Give me the earrings and the armour from your body. O Karna! Take the shakti from me, but on one condition. When I am ﬁghting with the daityas, this invincible shakti is released from my hand and having killed hundreds of enemies, returns again to my hand. O son of a suta! But in your hands, it will kill one powerful enemy
who roars and blazes. Then, it will return to my hand.” Karna replied, “I wish to kill only one enemy37 in a great
battle. He roars and blazes and is the source of fear for me.” Indra said, “You kill one roaring and powerful enemy
in battle. But the one you seek to kill is protected by a great-souled one who is known as the unvanquished boar,38
Hari and the inconceivable Narayana by those who are learned in the Vedas.” Karna replied, “O illustrious one!
Nevertheless, give me the invincible shakti, capable of slaying one brave person, so that I can kill the powerful
one. I will slice off the earrings and armour and give them to you. But after this, let my wounded limbs not look
loathsome.” Indra said, “O Karna! You will never look loathsome. You do not utter a falsehood and your body will
not be scarred. O supreme among eloquent ones! O Karna! You will again possess the complexion and energy of
your father. Your complexion will again become like his. But if you unleash this invincible weapon in a ﬁt of fury,
when you possess other weapons, there is no doubt that it will descend on you.” Karna replied, “O Shakra! As you
have told me, I will release Vasava’s weapon only when I confront supreme danger. I promise you this truthfully.”
O lord of the earth! He then accepted the ﬂaming shakti.
‘He grasped his sharp sword and began to cut up his entire body. On seeing Karna cut up his own body, the
gods, humans, danavas and masses of siddhas began to roar, because despite the pain, there were no distortions on
his face. Celestial drums were sounded and divine ﬂowers were showered down from above, at the sight of Karna,
the brave man, smiling repeatedly as he cut up his own body with the sword. Having sliced off the divine armour
from his body, while it was still wet, he gave it to Vasava. Then he sliced off and gave the earrings. Because of this
deed, Karna came to be known as Vaikartana.39 Shakra smiled at his deception, thinking that he had accomplished
the objective of the Pandavas, and subsequently, soared up to heaven. However, he ensured Karna obtained fame in
the world. Having heard that Karna had been deceived, all the sons of Dhritarashtra were miserable and their inso-

lence was shattered. But on learning about the state that the son of the suta had been reduced to, the Parthas were
happy in the forest.’
Janamejaya asked, ‘Where did the brave Pandavas reside? How did they learn about these glad tidings? What
did they do when the twelve years had passed? O illustrious one! Tell me everything about all this.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having defeated Saindhava40 and got Krishna back and having heard the ancient and detailed accounts about gods and rishis from Markandeya, they left Kamyaka hermitage with the brahmanas. With all
their chariots, servants, cooks and supervisors of the kitchen, the brave ones among men went to the sacred Dvaitavana, after having completed their entire dreadful stay in the forest.’

Section Forty-Four
Araneya Parva
This parva has 191 shlokas and ﬁve chapters.
Chapter 592(295): 17 shlokas
Chapter 593(296): 43 shlokas
Chapter 594(297): 74 shlokas
Chapter 595(298): 28 shlokas
Chapter 596(299): 29 shlokas
Arani means wood used for kindling and this parva is named after that. Requested by a brahmana whose kindling has been lost, the Pandavas pursue a deer. Failing to answer a yaksha’s questions, Nakula, Sahadeva, Arjuna and Bhima are killed, but are restored to life when
Yudhishthira answers the yaksha’s questions correctly.
592(295)

Janamejaya asked, ‘They experienced great sorrow when their wife was abducted. What did the Pandavas do when
they obtained Krishna back?’
Vaishampayana said, ‘They suffered supreme distress when Krishna was abducted. Together with his brothers,
the undecaying king1 left Kamyaka. Yudhishthira again went to beautiful Dvaitavana. They went towards
Markandeya’s beautiful hermitage, where there were succulent roots and fruit. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the Pandavas began to reside there with Krishna, controlled in their vows and living frugally on a diet of
fruit. While Kunti’s sons, King Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, Arjuna and the two Pandavas who were Madri’s sons
lived in Dvaitavana, those scorchers of enemies, with dharma in their souls, devoted to brahmanas and rigid in
their vows, experienced a great calamity that eventually ended in happiness. While Ajatashatru2 was seated with
his brothers in the forest, a brahmana swiftly approached and sorrowfully spoke these words to him. “I left my kindling and the churning rod3 against a tree. But they stuck to the antlers of a deer that rubbed itself against it. O
king! The great deer rushed away at great speed from the hermitage, using giant leaps. O king! Swiftly follow the
footprints of that great deer. O Pandavas! Bring those back to me, so that my agnihotra is not spoilt.” On hearing
the words of the brahmana, Yudhishthira felt sorry. Kounteya grasped his bow and left with his brothers. For the
sake of the brahmana, all those archers and bulls among men prepared themselves and swiftly dashed after the
deer. The Pandavas saw the deer at a short distance and hurled barbed arrows, hollow arrows and iron arrows at it.
But the maharathas could not pierce it. While they were trying in this way, the great deer disappeared. On seeing
the deer disappear, those intelligent ones were exhausted and sorry. In that dense forest, they sought shelter under
the cool shade of a banyan tree. Their limbs were sore with hunger and thirst and they seated themselves. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! When they were seated, Nakula spoke to his eldest brother, with a heavy heart and
lack of patience. “Dharma has never been given up in our lineage. Nor have objectives been lost through laziness.
We are superior to all beings. O king! Why has this disaster befallen us again?”’
593(296)

‘Yudhishthira said, “There are no limits to misfortune. Nor effects or causes. Dharma distributes it, depending on
merits and demerits.”
‘Bhima said, “The attendant dragged Krishna into the assembly hall like a servant. There is no doubt that we are
confronted with this calamity because I did not kill him then.”
‘Arjuna said, “I tolerated the extremely harsh words spoken by the suta’s son, which penetrated the bones. There
is no doubt that we are confronted with this calamity because of that.”
‘Sahadeva said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is no doubt that we are confronted with this
calamity because I did not kill Shakuni when he defeated you at the game of dice.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Then King Yudhishthira spoke these words to Nakula. “O Madri’s son! Climb a tree and
look in the ten directions. Look for water that is nearby, or trees that grow near water. O son!4 Your brothers are
exhausted and thirsty.” Following these words, Nakula swiftly climbed a tree. After looking in all the directions, he
told his eldest brother, “O king! I can see many trees that grow near water. I can hear the cries of cranes. There is
no doubt that there is water somewhere here.” Kunti’s son Yudhishthira, steadfast in his truth, then told him, “O
peaceful one! Swiftly go and fetch some water.” On his eldest brother’s instructions, Nakula agreed and quickly
rushed towards the place where the water was. He saw the crystal clear water, surrounded by cranes. Just as he was
about to drink it, a voice was heard from heaven. “O son!5 Do not be foolish enough to do this. I have obtained
possession of this earlier. O Madri’s son! Answer my question. You can then drink it and take it.” But Nakula was
very thirsty and ignored these words. He drank the cool water. Having drunk it, he collapsed and fell down. When
Nakula did not return for a long time, Kunti’s son Yudhishthira told his brave brother Sahadeva, the scorcher of enemies. “O Sahadeva! Your brother has been gone for a long time. He is your immediate elder. Go and fetch your
brother. Bring water too.” On hearing these words, Sahadeva proceeded in that direction. He saw his brother Nakula, lying down dead on the ground. He was sorely tormented at the sight of his brother. But he was oppressed by
thirst. He rushed towards the water and the voice spoke these words. “O son!6 Do not be foolish enough to do this.
I have obtained possession of this earlier. Answer my question. You can then drink it and take it, as you wish.” But
Sahadeva was very thirsty and ignored these words. He drank the cool water. Having drunk it, he collapsed and fell
down.
‘Then Kunti’s son Yudhishthira spoke to Vijaya.7 “O Bibhatsu! O destroyer of enemies! Your brothers have
been gone for a long time. O fortunate one! Go and bring them and the water.” At these words, Gudakesha grasped
his bow and arrows. The intelligent one grasped his unsheathed sword and proceeded towards the lake. Shvetavahana saw his brothers, the tigers among men who had gone to fetch water, lying down dead on the ground. On seeing them, as if asleep, Kounteya, lion among men, was extremely distressed. He raised his bow and looked around
in the forest. Savyasachi could not see any beings in that great forest. He was exhausted and rushed towards the
water. As he rushed towards it, the voice was heard from the sky. “Why are you approaching? You will not be able
to drink the water by force. O Kounteya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If you are able to answer my questions, you will be able to drink the water and take it.” Having been thus restrained, Partha said, “Show yourself and
then restrain me. You will not be able to speak again in this fashion when my arrows pierce you.” Saying this,
Partha invoked his arrows with mantras. He displayed his skill at shooting arrows targeted at sound, enveloping the
directions. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He unleashed many showers of barbed arrows, hollow arrows and
iron arrows towards the sky.
‘The yaksha said, “O Partha! What purpose do these exertions serve? Answer my questions and then drink. If
you do not answer the questions, you will cease to exist as soon as you drink.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘But having unleashed his invincible arrows, he was overcome by thirst. Ignoring the
words, he drank and collapsed and fell down. Kunti’s son Yudhishthira then spoke to Bhimasena. “O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Nakula, Sahadeva and the unvanquished Bibhatsu have been gone for a long time, having
gone to fetch water. O fortunate one! Go and fetch them and bring the water.” Having been thus addressed, Bhimasena left in the same direction, where his brothers, tigers among men, had fallen down. On seeing them, Bhima
was distressed and was oppressed by thirst. The mighty-armed one thought that this must have been the work of

yakshas or rakshasas. He thought, “I will certainly have to ﬁght today. But let me drink the water ﬁrst.” Partha
Vrikodara, bull among men, was thirsty and rushed towards the water.
‘The yaksha said, “O son!8 Do not be foolish enough to do this. I have obtained possession of this earlier. O
Kounteya! Answer my question. You can then drink it and take it.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Bhima ignored the words of the inﬁnitely energetic yaksha. He drank, collapsed and fell
down. O bull among men! At this, the king who was Kunti’s son began to think. Tormented in his mind, the
mighty-armed one arose. He entered the great forest, bereft of the sounds of people. It was infested with ruru deer,
boar and birds. There were dark, colourful and beautiful trees, abuzz with the sounds of bees and birds. The immensely fortunate one entered the forest and saw the beautiful pond, as it was covered with a net of gold. It seemed
to have been created by Vishvakarma.9 It was covered with a bed of lotuses, sindhuvaras,10 cane, ketakas,11 karaviras12 and pippalas.13 He was exhausted and approaching the lake, gazed at it with wonder.’
594(297)

Vaishampayana said, ‘He saw his dead brothers, as glorious as Shakra, like dislodged guardians of the world14
when the end of the yuga had arrived. He saw Arjuna dead, with his bow and arrows scattered and Bhimasena and
the twins, motionless and bereft of life. He shed tears of sorrow and breathed hot and deep sighs. Using his intelligence, he began to think. “Who has killed these brave ones? There are no marks of weapons on them. Nor are
there any signs of footprints. I think it must be a great being that has killed my brothers in this way. I must reﬂect
on this with concentration. Perhaps I will ﬁnd out after drinking the water. Perhaps this is a deed that has been undertaken by Duryodhana, who cannot differentiate between what should be done and what should not be done, in
secret, always aided by the wicked-minded king of Gandhara.15 No brave person can trust that evil one, whose
soul has not been perfected. Or perhaps that evil-souled one has employed secret servants.” Thus the mightyarmed one thought in many ways. But he did not think that the water was tainted through poison. He thought, “The
faces of my brothers are healthy in complexion. These men are excellent and each one of them is capable of withstanding the shock of a ﬂood of water. Who but Yama, the arbiter of destiny, can subjugate them?” Reﬂecting in
this way, he entered the water. As he entered, he heard these words from the sky.
‘The yaksha said, “I am a crane that lives on aquatic plants and ﬁsh. I have taken your younger brothers to the
land of the dead. O prince! If you do not answer my questions, you will be the ﬁfth. O son!16 Do not be foolish
enough to do this. I have obtained possession of this earlier. O Kounteya! Answer my questions. Then drink and
take the water.”
‘Yudhishthira said, “Are you the foremost among the Rudras, the Vasus or the Maruts? I am asking you. Which
god are you? This is not the task of a bird.17 Who is the greatly energetic one who has felled these four
mountains18—Himalaya, Pariyatra, Vindhya and Malaya? O supreme among those who are strong! You have performed an extremely great deed. The gods, the gandharvas, the asuras and the rakshasas are incapable of withstanding them in a great battle. You have accomplished something that is extraordinary. I do not know what you
are doing. Nor do I know your intentions. I am greatly curious, but I am also overwhelmed by fright. You are consuming my heart and have brought fever to my head. O illustrious one! I am asking you. Who are you, established
here?”
‘The yaksha replied, “I am a yaksha. I am not an aquatic bird. It is I who killed all your greatly energetic brothers.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! On hearing these inauspicious words spoken by the yaksha in a harsh voice, he
approached nearby and stood there. The bull among the Bharata lineage saw the yaksha, with malformed eyes and
gigantic in form, as tall as a tala tree. He was as ﬁery as the ﬁre and the sun and was invincible like a mountain.
The immensely strong one stood on a mound and censured him in a voice that was as deep as the roar of thunder.
The yaksha said, “O king! These brothers of yours were repeatedly restrained by me. But they tried to drink the
water by force and I killed them. O king! This water should not be drunk by someone who desires his life. O
Partha! Do not be foolish. I have obtained possession of this earlier. O Kounteya! Answer my questions. Then

drink and take.” Yudhishthira replied, “O yaksha! I do not desire what you have possessed earlier. Learned men
never praise such desires, nor should men praise themselves on their own. O lord! Ask me. I will answer according
to my wisdom.”
‘The yaksha asked, “What makes the sun rise and who are those near him? What makes him set and on what is
he established?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “Brahma makes the sun rise and the gods remain near him. Dharma makes him set and he
is established in truth.”
‘The yaksha asked, “How does one become learned? How does one attain greatness? O king! How does one obtain a second? How does one become intelligent?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “One becomes learned through the sacred texts.19 One attains greatness through austerities. One obtains a second through perseverance.20 One becomes intelligent by serving the elders.”
‘The yaksha asked, “What is the divine trait of brahmanas? What dharma of theirs is like that of the virtuous?
What are their human traits? Which of their traits are like that of those without virtue?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “The study of the Vedas is their divine trait. Austerities are like that of the virtuous. Mortality is their human trait. Slander is like the conduct of those without virtue.”
‘The yaksha asked, “What is the divine trait of kshatriyas? What dharma of theirs is like that of the virtuous?
What are their human traits? Which of their traits are like that of those without virtue?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “Arrows and weapons are their divine traits. Sacriﬁces are like that of the virtuous. Fear is
their human trait. Desertion is like the conduct of those without virtue.”
‘The yaksha asked, “Which is the single sacriﬁcial chant? What is the sacriﬁcial formula? What do sacriﬁces
need? And what can sacriﬁces not transgress?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “The breath of life21 is the single sacriﬁcial chant. The mind is the sacriﬁcial formula.
Sacriﬁces need speech. Sacriﬁces cannot transgress speech.”
‘The yaksha asked, “What is the best among those that descend? What is supreme among those that are sown?
What is the best among those that stand? What is supreme among those that speak?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “Rain is best among those that descend. Seeds are supreme among those that are sown.
Cows are best among those that stand. Sons are supreme among those that speak.”22
‘The yaksha asked, “Who experiences the objects of the senses, is intelligent, is worshipped by all the beings in
the world and breathes, but is not alive?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “A person who does not render offerings to the ﬁve—gods, guests, servants, ancestors and
himself—breathes, but is not alive.”
‘The yaksha asked, “What is heavier than the earth? What is higher than the sky? What is swifter than the wind?
What is more numerous than men?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “The mother is heavier than the earth. The father is higher than the sky. The mind is
swifter than the wind. Worries are more numerous than men.”23
‘The yaksha asked, “What does not close its eyes while asleep? What does not move when it is born? What has
no heart? What grows through speeding?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “A ﬁsh does not close its eyes while asleep. An egg does not move when it is born. A
stone has no heart. A river grows through speeding.”
‘The yaksha asked, “Who is a friend to one who is travelling? Who is a friend at home? Who is a friend to one
who is sick? Who is a friend to one who is about to die?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “A caravan is a friend to a traveller. A wife is a friend at home. A physician is a friend to
one who is sick. Charity is a friend to one who is about to die.”
‘The yaksha asked, “What travels alone? What is born again after birth? What is a cure for cold? What is the
greatest ﬁeld?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “The sun travels alone. The moon is born again after birth. Fire is the cure for cold. The
earth is the greatest ﬁeld.”

‘The yaksha asked, “In a single word, what is dharma? In a single word, what is fame? In a single word, what is
heaven? In a single word, what is happiness?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “In a single word, dexterity is dharma. In a single word, generosity is fame. In a single
word, truth is heaven. In a single word, conduct is happiness.”
‘The yaksha asked, ‘What is a man’s self? What is the friend given by destiny? What is the support of his life?
What is the best refuge?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “A son is a man’s self. The wife is the friend given by destiny. Rains are the support of his
life. Generosity is the best refuge.”
‘The yaksha asked, “What is supreme among objects that are lauded? What is supreme among riches? What is
the supreme gain? What is supreme happiness?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “Dexterity is supreme among objects that are lauded. Knowledge of the sacred texts is
supreme among riches. Health is the supreme gain. Satisfaction is supreme happiness.”
‘The yaksha asked, “What is supreme dharma in this world? What dharma always leads to fruits? What does not
grieve when it is controlled? What alliance never breaks?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “Non-violence is supreme dharma. The dharma of the three24 always leads to fruits. The
mind does not grieve when it is controlled. An alliance with the righteous never breaks.”
‘The yaksha asked, “If abandoned, what makes one pleasant? If abandoned, what does not lead to sorrow? If
abandoned, what ensures prosperity? If abandoned, what makes one happy?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “The abandoning of pride makes one pleasant. The abandoning of anger does not lead to
sorrow. The abandoning of desire ensures prosperity. The abandoning of desire makes one happy.”
‘The yaksha asked, “When is a man dead? When is a kingdom dead? When is a funeral ceremony dead? When
is a sacriﬁce dead?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “A poor man is dead. A kingdom without a king is dead. A funeral ceremony performed
without a learned brahmana is dead. A sacriﬁce without dakshina is dead.”
‘The yaksha asked, “What is the right direction? What is spoken of as water? O Partha! What is food and what
is poison? What is the right time for a funeral ceremony? Then you can drink and take.”25
‘Yudhishthira replied, “The virtuous are the right direction. The sky is water. The cow is food. A request is poison. A brahmana is the best time for a funeral sacriﬁce.26 O yaksha! What do you think?”
‘The yaksha said, “O scorcher of enemies! You have answered all my questions correctly. Tell me. Who is a
man? Which man possesses all riches?”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “The reputation of good deeds touches heaven and earth. As long as that reputation remains, one is said to be a man. One to whom the pleasant and the unpleasant, happiness and unhappiness and the
past and the future are equal, is a man who possesses all riches.”
‘The yaksha said, “O king! You have explained who is a man and which man possesses all riches. Therefore one
of your brothers, whichever one you wish, will live.”
Yudhishthira replied, “O yaksha! Nakula is dark, with red eyes, mighty arms and a broad chest. He is as tall as a
shala tree. He will live.”
‘The yaksha said, “You love Bhimasena and you depend on Arjuna. O king! Why do you then wish Nakula, who
is your stepbrother, to be alive? Bhima has strength equal to ten thousand elephants. Why do you discard him and
wish Nakula to live? People say that Bhimasena is your beloved. Out of what sentiments do you wish your stepbrother to live? All the Pandavas depend on the strength of Arjuna’s arms. But you discard him and wish Nakula to
live.”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “Non-violence is supreme dharma. It is my view that this is the supreme objective. I am
attracted to non-violence. O yaksha! Nakula shall live. Men know of me as a king who always follows dharma. I
will not deviate from my own dharma. O yaksha! Let Nakula live. Madri is like Kunti and I see no difference between the two. I wish the same for both my mothers. O yaksha! Let Nakula live.”
‘The yaksha replied, “O bull among the Bharata lineage! Since you think that non-violence is superior to artha
and kama, all of your brothers will be restored to life.”’

595(298)

Vaishampayana said, ‘At the yaksha’s words, the Pandavas stood up. All their hunger and thirst disappeared in an
instant.
‘Yudhishthira said, “Unvanquished, you are standing on one leg in the lake. I am asking you. Which god are
you. I do not think that you are a yaksha. Are you one of the Vasus or one of the Rudras? Are you the foremost
among the Maruts? Are you the wielder of the vajra, the lord of the thirty gods? Each of my brothers is capable of
ﬁghting hundreds and thousands. I do not see a means whereby all of them can be killed. I see that their senses
have been restored and they have awakened pleasantly. Are you our well-wisher or are you our father?”
‘The yaksha replied, “O son! O one whose valour is mild! I am your father Dharma. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! Know that I arrived with a desire to see you. Fame, truth, self-control, purity, uprightness, humility, steadfastness, charity, austerities and brahmacharya are my body. Know that non-violence, impartiality, peacefulness,
austerities, purity and lack of envy are gates towards me. You have always been dear to me. It is fortunate that you
are devoted to the ﬁve.27 It is fortunate that you have conquered the six states.28 Two occur early, two in the middle and two at the end, leading to the hereafter. I am Dharma. O fortunate one! I came here to test you and am satisﬁed with your non-violence. O unblemished one! I will grant you a boon. O Indra among kings! Ask for a boon.
O unblemished one! I will grant it to you. Men who are devoted to me never suffer from misfortune.”
‘Yudhishthira said, “The deer ran away with his29 kindling. May his ﬁres not be destroyed. That is the ﬁrst boon
I ask for.”
‘Dharma replied, “O lord! O Kounteya! In order to test you, I robbed the brahmana of his kindling in the form of
a deer.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘The illustrious one granted him that boon. Then he asked the fortunate one, who was like
an immortal, to ask for another boon.
‘Yudhishthira said, “The twelve years of dwelling in the forest have passed and the thirteenth has arrived. Wherever we may live, may people not be able to recognize us.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘The illustrious one granted him that boon. He again comforted Kounteya, for whom truth
was his valour. “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Even if you travel the earth in your own forms, no one in the
three worlds will be able to recognize you. O extender of the Kuru lineage! Through my favours, you will spend
the thirteenth year, hidden and undetected, in the city of Virata. Whatever form each of you desires to assume in
your mind, that will be the disguise you will adopt according to your wishes. Return the kindling to the brahmana,
because I stole it in the form of a deer to test you. O son! Ask for a third boon that is great and unmatched. O king!
You have been born from me and Vidura has also been born from a part of me.” Yudhishthira replied, “O eternal
god of the gods! It is sufﬁcient that I have set my eyes on your person. O father! I will happily accept whatever
boon you are satisﬁed to grant me. O lord! May I always be able to conquer avarice, delusion and anger. May my
mind always be inclined towards generosity, austerity and truth.” Dharma said, “O Pandava! You are naturally endowed with all the qualities. You are dharma yourself. But you will obtain what you ask for.” Having said this, the
illustrious Dharma, who sustains the worlds, disappeared. The intelligent Pandavas were reunited and slept happily. Freed from exhaustion, all the brave ones returned to the hermitage and gave the kindling to the ascetic brahmana. A self-controlled man who restrains his senses and reads this great account of the restoration and meeting of
the father and the son,30 an account that extends fame, lives for a hundred years with sons and grandsons. Men
who know of this good account are never inclined towards adharma and are not separated from their well-wishers.
They do not steal the possessions of others or violate other people’s wives. They never ﬁnd pleasure in vile
sentiments.’
596(299)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the Pandavas, for whom truth was their valour, had been granted leave by Dharma,
they were ready to spend the thirteenth year in hiding and in disguise. Rigid in their vows, the intelligent ones seated themselves. Hands joined in salutation, those great-souled and righteous ones spoke to the ascetics, who had
lived in the forest out of affection for them. The ones who had lived there, steady in their vows, sought their per-

mission.31 “All of you know everything about how the sons of Dhritarashtra have robbed us of our kingdom
through deceit and have injured us in many other ways. Amidst great hardship, we have lived in the forest for
twelve years. The thirteenth year, which must be spent undetected, still remains. We must spend that time in concealment and we seek your permission. The enemies who always resent us, the evil-souled Suyodhana and Karna
with Soubala,32 will try to create difﬁculties for us, our citizens and our relatives, should they manage to detect us.
Will we again be established in our own kingdom and country, together with all the brahmanas?” Having spoken
these words, King Yudhishthira, the pure son of Dharma, was oppressed by grief and with his voice choking with
tears, lost his senses. Then all the brahmanas and his brothers comforted him.
‘Dhoumya spoke these words, full of grave import, to the king. “O king! You are learned, self-controlled, true to
your promises and in control of your senses. Such men are not confounded when they confront a calamity. In times
of difﬁculty, even the great-souled gods have gone into hiding in many places, with the objective of subjugating
their enemies. To accomplish the task of subjugating the strength of his enemies, Indra went to a hermitage in the
land of the nishadhas, located on the slopes of a mountain, and hid there.33 To kill the daityas, Vishnu spent a long
time in hiding in Aditi’s womb and was then born as Hayashira.34 Disguising himself in the form of a dwarf, the
one whose form is that of the brahman, used his valour to rob Bali of his kingdom.35 You have heard about this. O
son! You have heard everything about how brahmarshi Ourva accomplished the objective of the worlds while hidden in a thigh.36 O one learned in dharma! You have heard how Hari hid himself in Shakra’s vajra so that Vritra
might be killed. You have heard everything about how Agni entered and concealed himself in the water to accomplish the task of the gods. O son! The supremely energetic Vivasvat lived in hiding in earth and later burnt up all
his enemies. Vishnu, terrible in his deeds, lived in Dasharatha’s house and in disguise, killed Dashagriva in
battle.37 Thus did the great-souled ones live in disguise. Then they conquered their enemies in battle and you will
also triumph in that way.” Yudhishthira was thus comforted by the words of Dhoumya, who knew about dharma,
and using his own intelligence and knowledge of the sacred texts, no longer wavered.
‘The mighty-armed and immensely strong Bhimasena, foremost among strong ones, spoke to the king and raised
his spirits. “O great king! Look at Gandivadhanva.38 Because of his devotion to dharma and because of his own
intelligence, he has not acted foolishly yet. Nakula and Sahadeva, terrible in their valour, are capable of slaying the
enemies, but have always been restrained by me. We will not deviate from whatever task you assign to us. You
must tell us what we should do and we will swiftly carry it out and vanquish our enemies.” When Bhimasena
spoke these words, the brahmanas pronounced supreme benedictions on them. Having bid farewell to the descendants of the Bharata lineage, all of them returned to their own houses. All those who were foremost in knowledge
of the Vedas, ascetics and sages, pronounced their blessings in the prescribed way and desired to see them again.
The ﬁve learned Pandavas arose with Dhoumya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The brave ones set out with
Krishna. After traversing the distance of a krosha, they seated themselves at a spot. Those tigers among men were
ready to begin their sojourn of concealment. Each of them was separately learned in the sacred texts. But all of
them were also skilled in consultations. They were knowledgeable about when it was a time for peace and when it
was a time for war. Before departing, they sat down and consulted each other.’
This ends Aranyaka Parva.

