Section Forty-Nine
Udyoga Parva
This section is also known as Udyoga Parva. It has 575 shlokas and twenty-one chapters.
Chapter 664(1): 25 shlokas
Chapter 665(2): 13 shlokas
Chapter 666(3): 23 shlokas
Chapter 667(4): 27 shlokas
Chapter 668(5): 18 shlokas
Chapter 669(6): 18 shlokas
Chapter 670(7): 36 shlokas
Chapter 671(8): 37 shlokas
Chapter 672(9): 52 shlokas
Chapter 673(10): 47 shlokas
Chapter 674(11): 22 shlokas
Chapter 675(12): 32 shlokas
Chapter 676(13): 25 shlokas
Chapter 677(14): 15 shlokas
Chapter 678(15): 32 shlokas
Chapter 679(16): 34 shlokas
Chapter 680(17): 20 shlokas
Chapter 681(18): 25 shlokas
Chapter 682(19): 32 shlokas
Chapter 683(20): 21 shlokas
Chapter 684(21): 21 shlokas
There are consultations in Drupada’s court about the next course of action. In preparation for war, the Kurus and the Pandavas send word to their
allies. However, Drupada’s priest is sent to the Kurus as a messenger. Duryodhana and Arjuna go to Krishna to seek his help. Arjuna opts for the
unarmed Krishna, who will not take part in the ﬁght and Duryodhana happily accepts Krishna’s large army. Balarama says that he will remain
neutral, while Kritavarma helps Duryodhana. Duryodhana persuades Shalya to switch to the Kourava side. However, Shalya promises Yudhishthira that he will distract Karna when Karna and Arjuna ﬁght. Shalya tells the Pandavas the story of Trishira, Vritra, Indra and Nahusha. The
Kouravas assemble eleven akshouhinis of soldiers, while the Pandavas assemble seven akshouhinis. Drupada’s priest delivers the message. Dhritarashtra promises to reﬂect on this and send Sanjaya back as a messenger.
664(1)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the foremost among the Kurus had happily celebrated Abhimanyu’s wedding with
their respective parties, they safely rested for four nights. Then they went to Virata’s assembly hall. The assembly
hall of the king of the Matsyas was prosperous. It was marvellous, decorated with the best of gems and jewels.
There were seats and fragrant garlands. Those aged among the lords of men arrived there. Virata and Drupada, the
two Indras among men, seated themselves on the seats that were at the front. There was also the grandfather of
Rama and Janardana, aged and revered by the lords of the earth.1 The foremost among the Shinis, together with
Rohini’s son, was seated near the king of Panchala.2 Janardana and Yudhishthira were seated near the king of Matsya. All the sons of King Drupada were seated there, Bhima, Arjuna and Madri’s two sons. There were Pradyumna
and Samba, brave in battle, and Virata’s son, together with Abhimanyu.3 Droupadi’s sons seated themselves, on
beautiful seats that were decorated with gold. They were the equals of their fathers in bravery. The maharathas
who were seated there dazzled in their colourful garments and brilliant jewels. With all the prosperous and assembled kings, it was as if the sky was covered with unblemished planets. As was proper, those brave ones among men

conversed with each other on various subjects. Then they reﬂected for some time and all the kings looked in
Krishna’s direction. Having ﬁnished their conversation, those lions among kings who had been assembled by Madhava, looked towards him. They listened to his words, of deep meaning and great signiﬁcance, about what should
be done regarding the Pandavas.
‘Krishna said, “It is known to all of you how Yudhishthira was defeated by Soubala4 in a deceitful game of dice
and lost his kingdom. He made an agreement that he would spend some time in exile. They are capable of swiftly
conquering the earth. But they stuck to their pledge and conducted themselves in accordance with it. The sons of
Pandu are foremost among the Bharatas. But they stuck to that terrible vow of six plus seven years. They spent the
terrible thirteenth year near you, but were undetected. They bore many hardships. All of you know everything
about that. With that over, think about what is best for the king who is Dharma’s son and for Duryodhana. Think
about what is best for the Kurus and the Pandavas, what is in accordance with dharma, is appropriate, and also ensures glory. Dharmaraja will not crave the kingdom of the gods, if that is not in accordance with dharma. He will
instead desire the lordship of a village, if that is in accordance with dharma and artha. It is known to all the kings
that he was robbed of his ancestral kingdom by Dhritarashtra’s sons through falsehood. They5 confronted great and
unbearable difﬁculties. Dhritarashtra’s sons did not vanquish the Parthas in battle, through their own energy. But
even then the king,6 together with his well-wishers, desires to see them healthy and happy. The sons of Kunti and
the sons of Madri are heroes among men. They only wish to obtain what the sons of Pandu won for themselves, by
conquering and subjugating the kings of the earth.7 You know everything about how they8 used different means to
kill these destroyers of enemies, even when they were children. They seized their kingdom through unholy and terrible means. Witness their increasing avarice and Yudhishthira’s devotion to dharma in his soul. Reﬂect on the relationship between them. Separately and collectively, decide on a course of action. They have always been devoted
to the truth and have faithfully completed the period of the covenant. Therefore, if they are not treated fairly now,
let them kill all the assembled sons of Dhritarashtra. On learning that the king9 is oppressing them,10 all their wellwishers will gather around them. Let them be brought down in battle. Those who wish to ﬁght will be slain. But if
it is your view that they11 are too feeble and too few to be able to defeat them, let all the well-wishers gather together and endeavour to destroy all of them.12 Duryodhana’s intentions are still not known now. Nor does one
know what he plans to do. With the intentions of the enemy not being known, how can one decide on an appropriate course of action? Therefore, let someone who is devoted to dharma go there, a man who is controlled, pure and
born of a noble lineage. Let the messenger try to persuade them that half of the kingdom should be returned to
Yudhishthira.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! On hearing Janardana’s sweet and calm words, full of dharma and artha, his elder
brother13 strongly welcomed and applauded those words and spoke these words of his own.’
665(2)

brother.14

‘Baladeva said, “You have heard Gada’s elder
These words are in conformity with dharma and artha.
These will ensure welfare for Ajatashatru15 and also ensure welfare for King Duryodhana. By giving up half of the
kingdom, the brave sons of Kunti are striving to ensure that which is good. Dhritarashtra’s son should also give up
half of the kingdom and happily spend his time with us. Provided that the rivals act in a similar fashion, by obtaining the kingdom,16 it is certain that the brave ones among men will be paciﬁed and will ﬁnd joy. Their paciﬁcation
will also ensure the welfare of the subjects. I will be happy if someone goes there to ascertain Duryodhana’s intentions and conveys to him Yudhishthira’s words, so that welfare is ensured for the Kurus and the Pandavas. Let him
meet Bhishma, foremost among the Kurus, Vichitravirya’s noble son,17 Drona and his son, Vidura, Kripa, the king
of Gandhara18 and the son of the suta,19 and also the other sons of Dhritarashtra, who are foremost among strong
ones and foremost among those who are learned. They are established in their own dharma. They are heroes in this
world and they are aged in learning and in years. When all these elders and citizens have collected and assembled
together, he must bow down and speak his words, so that the welfare of Kunti’s son is ensured. Under no circumstances should they be angered. They have ensured their welfare by resorting to their strength. Yudhishthira was
addicted to gambling and they approached him with affection. It was thus that he lost his kingdom. He was warned
by all his well-wishers, the brave ones among the Kurus, because he was not skilled in gambling.20 But

Ajamidha21 challenged the son of the king of Gandhara, who was skilled in gambling with the dice. There were
thousands of other gamblers whom Yudhishthira could have defeated with the dice. But he ignored them and challenged Soubala, who defeated him with the dice. He was defeated by the one who gambled against him and the
dice were always against him. Having commenced, he lost his head and was convincingly defeated. Therefore,
there is no crime that attaches to Shakuni. Thus, let him show obeisance to Vichitravirya’s son and speak many
words that are conciliatory. In this way, the man22 may be able to persuade Dhritarashtra’s son and bring him
around to what is in our interest.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘While the foremost among the Madhus23 was thus speaking, the foremost among the Shinis24 suddenly stood up. He censured his words and in great anger, spoke these words.’
666(3)

‘Satyaki said, “The way a man speaks, reﬂects the nature of his soul. The form of your words reﬂects the nature of
your soul. There are brave men and there are cowards. Both are ﬁrm distinctions and can be seen among men. A
eunuch and an extremely powerful man may be born in the same lineage, just as one branch of a tree yields fruit
and another one does not yield fruit. O one who bears the standard of a plough! I am not censuring the words that
you have spoken. O Madhava! I am censuring the ones who are listening to your words. In the midst of this assembly, without any fear, how can one speak the slightest evil about Dharmaraja? Those who were skilled with dice
challenged the great-souled one and defeated him. He was unskilled with dice and acted in accordance with faith.
How can this be a victory in accordance with dharma? Had they come to the house of Kunti’s son while he was
playing with his brothers and defeated him there, that would have been a victory in accordance with dharma.25
They challenged a king, who was always devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. Then they defeated him through deceit.26 Can there be anything more supremely sacred than that? Having observed the supreme covenant, why
should he approach in obeisance? Having been freed from that exile in the forest, he has obtained his ancestral
share. Even if Yudhishthira were to desire someone else’s property, it is not proper that he should ask for someone
else’s property. Are they27 acting in accordance with dharma, if they are not prepared to give up the kingdom? The
Kounteyas have passed the prescribed period of concealment. Though Bhishma and the great-souled Drona have
pleaded with them, they claim that they have been recognized.28 They are not prepared to give the sons of Pandu
their ancestral riches.
‘“I will use the force of sharp arrows and persuade them on the ﬁeld of battle. I will make them fall down at the
feet of the great-souled Kounteya. If they refuse to bow in obeisance before the wise one, they, together with their
advisers, will go to Yama’s abode. They will not be able to withstand an angry Yuyudhana29 who is eager to ﬁght.
Can the mountains withstand the force of a thunderbolt? Who can withstand the wielder of the Gandiva bow, the
one who uses the chakra in battle,30 me, or the unassailable Bhima? The twins wield ﬁrm bows and are extremely
radiant, the equals of Yama. If one wishes to live, can one approach Parshata Dhrishtadyumna,31 or the ﬁve Pandavas who have extended Droupadi’s glory? When they are intoxicated with pride, is there anyone who is equal to
the sons of Pandu in status or in valour? Soubhadra32 is a great archer and even the immortals ﬁnd it difﬁcult to
withstand him. Gada, Pradyumna and Samba are the equals of destiny, the thunderbolt and the ﬁre. After killing
Dhritarashtra’s son in battle, together with Shakuni and Karna, we will instate the Pandavas. There is no adharma
attached to killing an enemy who is an assassin.33 There is adharma and infamy in begging from enemies. Therefore, without any delay, let us satisfy the desires of his34 heart. The Pandavas must obtain the kingdom that was
given to them by Dhritarashtra. Let Pandu’s son, Yudhishthira, obtain his kingdom today, or let them all be killed
on the ﬁeld of battle and go to sleep on the ground.”’
667(4)

‘Drupada said, “O mighty-armed one! There is no doubt that it will be this way. Duryodhana will not hand back
the kingdom sweetly. Dhritarashtra loves his son and will follow him. So will Bhishma and Drona out of poverty,
and Radheya and Soubala out of folly.35 It is my view that Baladeva’s words were not appropriate, because they
apply to a man who wishes to act properly right from the beginning. Dhritarashtra’s son should never be addressed

through gentle words. I think that it is impossible to persuade that evil-minded one through gentleness. One exhibits gentleness towards a donkey and roughness towards a cow. Duryodhana, the one with evil intelligence, will
not pay any heed to gentle words. I think that if gentle words are used, that evil one will take the speaker to be
weak. If gentle words are used, that stupid one will think that he has triumphed. Let us do this. Let us make preparations here. Let us send word to our allies to collect forces for us. Let messengers who travel swiftly go to
Shalya,36 Dhrishtaketu,37 the lord Jayatsena38 and all the Kekayas. Duryodhana is certain to send messengers to all
of them also. But those who are righteous and have been allied to us earlier, will accept the ﬁrst request. Therefore,
let us make haste and let us request those Indras among men ﬁrst. It is my view that a great task is about to be
undertaken.
‘“Send word to Shalya quickly and to the kings who are under his suzerainty, and to King Bhagadatta, who
dwells by the eastern ocean. And to Amitouja, Ugra, Hardikya, Ahuka, the extremely wise Malla and the lord
Rochamana. Let Brihanta be brought and the King Senabindu, Papajit, Prativindhya, Chitravarma, Suvastuka,
Bahlika, Munjakesha, the lord of Chedi, Suparsha, Subahu, the maharatha Pourava, the kings who rule over the
Shakas, the Pahlavas and the Daradas, the Kambojas, the Rishikas, the western Anupakas, Jayatsena, the king of
Kashi, the kings of the ﬁve rivers,39 the unassailable son of Kratha, the kings of the mountainous regions, Janaki,
Susharma, Maniman, Poutimatsyaka, the king of the land of Pamshu, the valorous Dhrishtaketu, Oudra, Dandadhara, the valorous Brihatsena, Aparajita, Nishada, Shreniman, Vasuman, the immensely energetic Brihadbala,
Bahu the conqueror of enemy cities, King Samudrasena with his valorous son, Adari, Nadija, King Karnaveshta,
Samartha, Suvira, Marjara, Kanyaka, Mahavira, Kadru, Nikara, the terrible Kratha, Nila, Viradharma, the valorous
Bhumipala, Durjaya, Dantavakra, Rukmi, Janamejaya, Ashadha, Vayuvega, King Purvapali, Bhuriteja, Devaka,
Ekalavya’s son, the kings of Karushaka, the valorous Kshemadhurti, Uddhava, Kshemaka, King Vatadhana, Shrutayu, Dridhayu, Shalva’s valorous son and the lord of the Kalingas, Kumara, who is unassailable in battle. I think
that it is desirable that word should be sent to them as quickly as is possible. O king! This brahmana is my priest.
He should be swiftly sent to Dhritarashtra. Tell him the words that he should speak—how Duryodhana is to be addressed, and the king who is Shantanu’s son, how Dhritarashtra is to be addressed, and Drona, supreme among
learned ones.”’
668(5)

‘Vasudeva said, “These words are appropriate for the wise leader of the Somakas.40 They will ensure welfare and
success for the inﬁnitely energetic King Pandava. If we wish to act in accordance with right policy, this should indeed be the ﬁrst course of action. A man who acts contrary to this will be foolish. But our relationships with the
Kurus and the Pandavas are equal, though at the moment we happen to be with the Pandavas. Like all of you, we
have been brought here because of the wedding. With the marriage having been concluded, we will return happily
to our houses. You are the oldest among the kings in age and learning.41 There is no doubt that all of us are like
your pupils. Dhritarashtra has always shown you a great deal of honour. You are a friend to the preceptors Drona
and Kripa.42 For the welfare of the Pandavas, you should be the one who should send word. It is certain that whatever message you send will be acceptable to all of us. If the bull among the Kurus seeks peace, as is proper, there
will be no great loss to the fraternal feelings that exist between the Kurus and the Pandavas. If Dhritarashtra’s son
acts contrary to this, out of insolence and delusion, send word to the others43 and then summon us. Then, having
enraged the wielder of Gandiva, the stupid and evil-minded Duryodhana will confront his destiny, together with
his advisers and his relatives.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having shown homage to Varshneya, Virata, lord of the earth, sent him home, together
with his followers and his relatives. When Krishna had left for Dvaraka, with Yudhishthira at the forefront, all of
them44 made preparations for war, together with King Virata. Together with his relatives, Virata—and Drupada,
lord of the earth—sent word to all the lords of the earth. On receiving word from the lions among the Kurus and
Matsya and Panchala, all the extremely powerful lords of the earth gathered cheerfully. On learning that a great
force was being gathered for the sons of Pandu, Dhritarashtra’s son also assembled many lords of the earth. O
king! The entire earth was thronged with lords of the earth who arrived for the sake of the Kurus and the Pandavas.
The forces of those brave ones arrived from every direction. With her mountains and forests, the goddess earth

seemed to tremble. With Yudhishthira’s approval, Panchala despatched his priest, who was old in wisdom and in
years, to the Kurus.’
669(6)

‘Drupada said, “Among all beings, beings who sustain life through intelligence are superior. Among those that
have intelligence, men are superior; and among men, brahmanas. Among brahmanas, those who know the Vedas
are superior; and among those who know the Vedas, those who have achieved understanding. It is my view that
you are the foremost among those who have achieved understanding. You have been born in a distinguished lineage and possess age and learning. In wisdom, you are the equal of Shukra and Angirasa.45 You know everything
about the kind of conduct Kourava follows. You know the conduct of Kunti’s son, Pandava Yudhishthira. The Pandavas were deceived by their enemies, with Dhritarashtra’s knowledge. Though Vidura entreated him, he followed
his son alone. It was on Shakuni’s advice that Kunti’s son had been challenged earlier. He was unskilled in dice
and they were skilled in dice, but he was steadfast in the pure conduct of a kshatriya. Thus it was that Dharmaraja
Yudhishthira was deceived. Under no circumstances will they return the kingdom of their own accord. But you
should speak words full of dharma to Dhritarashtra. It is certain that you will then win the hearts of his soldiers.
Vidura will also act in accordance with your words and bring about dissension in Bhishma, Drona and Kripa. With
dissension among his advisers and reluctance among his warriors, he will then face a task in bringing them together again. Meanwhile, the intelligent Parthas will happily and single-mindedly devote their attention to military
matters and to the collection of supplies. There will be dissension among the others and you will spend a long time
there. There is no doubt that they will not be able to pay attention to military matters. I feel that this necessary task
is your main purpose in being there. After meeting with you and listening to your words, Dhritarashtra may decide
to act according to dharma. You are united with dharma and you will act in accordance with dharma. To those who
are compassionate, recount the hardships confronted by the Pandavas. To the elders, speak about the dharma that
has been observed in the lineage earlier. I have no doubt that you will be able to estrange their minds. You have
nothing to fear from them. You are a brahmana who has knowledge of the Vedas. You are being sent on a task as a
messenger. And speciﬁcally, you are old. To bring success to the objective of the Kounteyas, leave swiftly for the
Kouravyas, when there is a conjunction of Pushya and at the muhurta of Jaya.”’46
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having been instructed in this way by the great-souled Drupada, the priest, whose conduct was excellent, departed for the city of Nagasahrya.’47
670(7)

Vaishampayana said, ‘After Krishna and Baladeva Madhava had left for Dvaravati, with hundreds of Vrishnis,
Andhakas and all the Bhojas, the king who was Dhritarashtra’s son, secretly employed messengers and spies and
got to know everything that the Pandavas were attempting. Having heard that Madhava48 had left, he himself set
out for the city of Dvaraka.49 He took a force with him that was not too large, and superb horses that were equal to
the wind. On that very day, Kounteya Dhananjaya, the son of Pandu, went to the beautiful city of the Anarta.50
Those two tigers among men, descendants of the Kuru lineage, arrived in Dvaraka. They went to Krishna and saw
that he was supine and asleep. When Govinda was asleep, Suyodhana entered. He seated himself on a supreme seat
that was towards Krishna’s head. Then the great-souled Kiriti entered. With his hands joined in salutation, he stood
towards Krishna’s feet. On waking up, Varshneya saw Kiriti ﬁrst. He welcomed both of them with the appropriate
honours. Madhusudana asked them the reason for their arrival. Then Duryodhana smiled and told Krishna, “You
should come to my aid in this battle. Your friendship with me and Arjuna is equal. O Madhava! Your relationship
with us is also equal. O Madhusudana! Today, I have come to you ﬁrst. From ancient times, the virtuous serve
those who arrive ﬁrst. O Janardana! You are now supreme among the virtuous ones in this world. You always deserve honour. You always follow virtuous conduct.”
‘Krishna replied, “I have no doubt that you arrived earlier. O king! But I saw Partha Dhananjaya ﬁrst. O Suyodhana! Since you arrived ﬁrst and since I saw him ﬁrst, I will help both of you. But it has been said that the younger
one should have the ﬁrst choice. Therefore, I will offer the ﬁrst choice to Partha Dhananjaya. There is a large number of one hundred million cowherds, equal to me in strength. They are famous as Narayanas and all of them are

warriors who have fought in battle. These warriors, who are unassailable, will be the soldiers on one side. I will
not bear weapons and will not ﬁght in the battle. I will be on the other side. O Partha! According to your preferences, choose either of these two ﬁrst. It is dharma that you should have the right of choice ﬁrst.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘At these words of Krishna, Kunti’s son, Dhananjaya, chose Keshava, though he would not
ﬁght in the battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Knowing that Krishna was excluded from the battle, Duryodhana was extremely delighted at having obtained the thousands and thousands of warriors. O lord of the earth!
He accepted all those soldiers. Then the fearsomely strong one went to Rohini’s immensely strong son.51 He reported to him the reason why he had come. Shouri52 replied to Dhritarashtra’s son in the following words. “O tiger
among men! It is appropriate that you should know everything that I have said earlier in the kingdom of Virata, on
the occasion of the wedding. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! It is for your sake that I sought to restrain
Hrishikesha.53 O king! I said repeatedly that my relationship with both of you was equal. But Keshava did not accept the words that I had spoken. I cannot exist for an instant without Krishna. I will come to the aid of neither
Partha, nor Duryodhana. After looking towards Vasudeva, this is the decision I have arrived at. You have been
born in the Bharata lineage, one that is honoured by all the lords of the earth. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
Go and ﬁght in accordance with the dharma of the kshatriyas.” At these words, he embraced the one who wields
the plough as a weapon. Knowing that Krishna had excused himself from the war, he thought that his own victory
had been assured. The king who was Dhritarashtra’s son then went to Kritavarma. Kritavarma gave him an army
that consisted of one akshouhini. Surrounded by all these terrible soldiers, the descendant of the Kuru lineage returned happily, causing delight to his well-wishers.
‘When Duryodhana had left, Krishna asked Kiriti, “I will not take part in the battle. What did you think of when
you decided to choose me?” Arjuna replied, “There is no doubt that you are alone capable of slaying all of them. O
supreme among men! I am also capable of slaying them alone. Your deeds are famous in this world and this fame
will also devolve on you. I too wish to be famous and that is the reason I have chosen you. It has always been my
desire that you should be my charioteer. I have desired this over many nights and you should satisfy my wishes.”
Vasudeva said, “O Partha! It is appropriate that you desire to rival me. I will be your charioteer. Let your desire be
satisﬁed.” Having been thus delighted, Partha, accompanied by Krishna and surrounded by the foremost among the
Dasharhas, returned to Yudhishthira.’
671(8)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! On getting to know through messengers, Shalya, together with his maharatha sons,
marched towards the Pandavas, surrounded by a large army. His army’s camp extended for one and a half
yojanas.54 That bull among men was the lord of such a large army. Those brave warriors were dressed in colourful
armour. They had colourful ﬂags and bows. All of them wore colourful ornaments. They had colourful chariots
and vehicles. Those hundreds and thousands of warriors wore their native attire and ornaments. Those bulls among
the kshatriyas were the generals of the army. The beings were frightened and the earth trembled. Resting often, the
army slowly marched towards the Pandavas. Duryodhana heard about the maharatha’s great army. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! He hastened towards him himself and showed him homage. In his honour, Duryodhana had
pavilions constructed in beautiful regions, ornamented and adorned with gems. When he arrived at those pavilions,
he was shown homage by Duryodhana and his advisers in every region, like an immortal. Then he reached another
pavilion that was as resplendent as the abode of a god. It was full of all objects and possessed superhuman loveliness. He began to think very highly of himself and lowly about Purandara.55 That bull among the kshatriyas was
delighted and asked the servants, “Which one of Yudhishthira’s men has constructed these pavilions? Bring the
builders of the pavilions here. It is my view that they should be rewarded.” Duryodhana had concealed himself
there and now showed himself to his maternal uncle.56 On seeing him and learning of the efforts he had undertaken, the king of Madra embraced him. He told him in great delight, “Accept whatever you desire.” Duryodhana
replied, “May your words be true. Please grant me a boon that will ensure my welfare. It is appropriate that you
should be the general of my entire army.” Shalya said, “Agreed. What else do you wish me to do?” Gandhari’s son
kept on repeating, “Agreed! Agreed!” Having taken his leave of Shalya, he then returned to his own city. Shalya
went to the Kounteyas to tell them what he had done.

‘Having gone to Upaplavya, Shalya went to the camp and saw all the Pandavas there. When he went there, as
was prescribed, the sons of Pandu offered him water to wash the feet,57 the gift for a guest58 and a cow. Then the
king of Madra, the slayer of enemies, asked them about their welfare. He embraced Yudhishthira with great delight, Bhima, Arjuna and the twins who were his sister’s sons. Having seated himself, Shalya then told Partha,59
“O tiger among kings! O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Are you well? O supreme among victorious ones! It is
good fortune that you have been freed from dwelling in the forest. O king! O Indra among kings! You performed
an extremely difﬁcult act in dwelling in the secluded forest, together with your brothers and Krishna. You performed an extremely difﬁcult act in spending that terrible period of concealment. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is only unhappiness for one who has been dislodged from his kingdom. How can there be happiness? All
this great misery has been brought on by Dhritarashtra’s son. O king! O scorcher of enemies! You will obtain happiness after you have killed your enemies. O great king! O lord of men! You know about the nature of this world.
O son!60 That is the reason you never act out of greed.” O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then the king told
him about his encounter with Duryodhana and everything about how he had been served and the boon that he had
granted. Yudhishthira replied, “O king! You performed a good deed, when you were happy in your own soul. O
brave one! You must observe the pledge that you have given to Duryodhana. O fortunate one! O lord of the earth!
But there is an act that I wish you to perform. O great king! You are the equal of Vasudeva in battle. O supreme
among kings! When Karna and Arjuna confront each other in a duel, there is no doubt that you will perform the
task of being Karna’s charioteer. O king! If you wish to satisfy my desires, you must protect Arjuna. Your task will
be to sap the energy of the son of the suta and ensure our victory. O maternal uncle! Though this is not a task that
should be done, you must do it.” Shalya said, “O Pandava! O fortunate one! You are asking me to sap the energy of
that evil-minded son of a suta in battle. It is certain that I will be his charioteer in battle. He has always thought of
me as Vasudeva’s equal. O tiger among the Kurus! When he wishes to ﬁght in the ﬁeld of battle, it is certain that I
will speak words that do him harm. O Pandava! They will make him lose his pride and lose his energy. He will
then be easy to kill. I tell you this truthfully. O son! I will do whatever you have asked me to do. I will do whatever
else brings you pleasure. Together with Krishna, you have suffered miseries because of the gambling match. The
son of the suta has spoken harsh words. O immensely radiant one! You have suffered hardships because of
Jatasura61 and Kichaka. Droupadi underwent several unholy sufferings, like Damayanti.62 O brave one! All this
unhappiness will result in the rise of happiness. Do not think that all this is because of your deeds. Destiny is more
powerful. O Yudhishthira! Even great-souled ones confront difﬁculties. O lord of the earth! Even the gods have
faced unhappiness. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! We have heard that the great-souled Indra, the
king of the gods, had to experience great unhappiness, together with his wife.”’
672(9)

‘Yudhishthira asked, “O Indra among kings! How did the great-souled Indra confront supreme and terrible unhappiness, together with his wife? I wish to know this.”
‘Shalya said, “O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen to this old and ancient historical account,
about how Indra had to face unhappiness, together with his wife. There was Tvashtra Prajapati.63 He was foremost
among the gods and was a great ascetic. Out of hatred for Indra, he created a son with three heads. This immensely
radiant one,64 who was universal in form, coveted Indra’s station. His three faces were terrible and were like the
sun, the moon and the ﬁre. He studied the Vedas with one mouth, he drank liquor with another. With another, he
glanced at all the directions, as if he was going to drink them up. He was an ascetic, mild and self-controlled. He
was engaged in dharma and austerities. O destroyer of enemies! His austerities were so great and terrible that they
were extremely difﬁcult to accomplish. Having witnessed his austerities, valour, truthfulness, Shakra was depressed that he might become Indra.65 ‘How can one get him addicted to desire, so that he does not torment
through these great austerities? If Trishira continues to grow, he will swallow up the three worlds.’66 O bull among
the Bharata lineage! That intelligent one thought about this in many ways. He then instructed the apsaras to seduce
Tvashtra’s son. ‘Go quickly, without any delay. Seduce Trishira and get him addicted to the pleasures of desire. O
ones with the beautiful hips! Wear the garments of love. Adopt a charming demeanour. O fortunate ones! Tempt
him and pacify my fear. O one with the beautiful limbs! I feel ill. I do not feel like myself. O ladies! Swiftly take

away my extremely terrible fear.’ The apsaras replied, ‘O Shakra! O destroyer of Bala!67 We will make endeavours
to seduce him, so that you have nothing to fear. That treasure among ascetics seems to burn everything down with
his eyes. O god! We will go together and try to seduce him. We will try to bring him under our control and remove
your fear.’ Being instructed by Indra, they went to Trishira. There, the ones with the beautiful limbs adopted all
kinds of allurements to seduce him. They showed their dances. They exhibited the beauty of their limbs. But having seen this, the great ascetic was not perturbed. He was in control of his senses and was as calm as the full ocean.
They made supreme efforts and returned to Shakra. All of them joined their hands in salutation and told the king of
the gods, ‘O lord! This one is extremely difﬁcult to distract. It is impossible to sway him from his ﬁrmness. O immensely fortunate one! Do what must be done hereafter.’ The immensely wise Shakra honoured the apsaras and
sent them away.
‘“He began to think about a way of killing the great-souled one. The brave and powerful king of the gods began
to think about this in silence. The wise one began to think about a means of killing Trishira. He thought, ‘I will
swiftly strike him with the vajra today, so that he quickly ceases to exist. One who is stronger must not ignore a
weak enemy who is strengthening.’ Deciding on a course of action that was in accordance with the sacred texts, he
ﬁrmly made up his mind to kill him. In great anger, Shakra hurled his vajra at Trishira. It was fearsome and terrible
in form. It was like the ﬁre. Injured and slain by the ﬁrm vajra, he fell down dead on the ground, like a mountain
peak that has been shattered. On seeing him slain by the vajra and lying down like a mountain, Indra of the gods
still found no peace, because his energy still blazed forth. Though he had been killed, his energy blazed forth, as if
he was still alive. Shachi’s consort68 saw a woodcutter who had arrived there, engaged in his work. On seeing him,
the chastiser of Paka69 quickly said, ‘Listen to my words. Immediately cut off his heads.’ The woodcutter replied,
‘His shoulders are extremely broad and my axe will not be able to cut through. Besides, I am incapable of performing a deed that is condemned by the virtous.’ Indra said, ‘Do not be afraid. Swiftly act according to my words.
Through my favours, your weapon will become as strong as the vajra.’ The woodcutter replied, ‘I must know who
you are and why you have performed this terrible deed today. I wish to hear all this. Tell me everything
accurately.’ Indra said, ‘O woodcutter! I am Indra. Know me to be the king of the gods. Act according to my
words. O woodcutter! Do not reﬂect on this.’ The woodcutter replied, ‘O Shakra! How is it that you are not
ashamed of this cruel deed? Having killed the son of a rishi, are you not scared of the sin that comes from killing a
brahmana?’ Indra said, ‘To purify myself, I will perform an extremely difﬁcult task of dharma later. This was an
extremely valorous enemy and I have killed him with my vajra. O woodcutter! I am anxious and frightened about
this even now. Swiftly cut off his heads and I will show you my favours. When animals are sacriﬁced, men will
give you their heads as a share. O woodcutter! This is the favour that I will show to you. Swiftly do that which
brings me pleasure.’ Having heard these words of the great Indra, the woodcutter sliced off Trishira’s heads with
his axe. When the heads had been cut off, birds like kapinjalas, tittiras and kalavimkas issued from them.70 From
the mouth through which the Vedas had been studied and soma juice had been drunk, kapinjalas quickly ﬂew
away. O king! O Pandava! From the mouth through which he glanced in every direction and seemed to drink them
up, tittiras ﬂew out. O bull among the Bharata lineage! From the mouth through which Trishira used to drink
liquor, kalavimkas ﬂew away. When the heads had been cut off, Maghavan71 was freed from his fever and happily
went to heaven. The woodcutter also returned to his own home.
‘“On hearing that his son had been killed by Shakra, Tvashtra Prajapati’s eyes reddened in rage and he spoke
these words. ‘My son was always intent on austerities. He was forgiving, self-controlled and the master of his
senses. He committed no crime. Yet violence has been done to him. For this reason, I will create Vritra, with a
view to destroying Shakra. Let the worlds witness my valour and the great strength of my austerities. Let the evilsouled and evil-minded Indra of the gods also behold.’ That extremely famous and enraged ascetic touched water.
He offered oblations into the ﬁre. Having created the terrible Vritra, he told him, ‘O enemy of Indra! Through the
strength of my asceticism, increase in power.’ He grew and touched the sky and was like the sun and the ﬁre.
‘What shall I do?’ he asked, like the sun at the time of destruction. Having been told that he should kill Shakra, he
went to heaven. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! There ensued an angry and extremely terrible battle and the
valorous Vritra grasped Shatakratu Indra of the gods. Overcome with rage, Vritra opened his mouth and swallowed
him. When Shakra had been swallowed by Vritra, the lords of heaven were terriﬁed. Those greatly spirited ones

created a yawn that would be Vritra’s destruction. When Vritra yawned, the destroyer of Bala contracted his limbs
and emerged from the gaping mouth. Ever since then, the yawn has remained in all living beings. On seeing
Shakra emerge, all the gods were delighted. Vritra and Vasava again engaged in a battle. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! It was a terrible ﬁght that went on for a long time. Because of the power of Tvashtra’s austerities, Vritra’s
power increased in that battle and Shakra retreated. When he retreated, the gods were immersed in supreme despondency. They were deluded because of Tvashtra’s energy. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Together with
Shakra, they sought the advice of all the sages. O king! Deluded by fear, they reﬂected about what should be done.
In their minds,72 all of them went to the imperishable and great-souled Vishnu. All of them seated themselves on
the peak of Mandara, wishing to kill Vritra.”’
673(10)

‘“Indra said, ‘O gods! This entire indestructible universe has been pervaded by Vritra. There is nothing that is
equal to him and can stand up to him. I was capable in earlier times. But I am now incapable. O fortunate ones!
What can I do? It seems to me that it is extremely difﬁcult to overcome him. This energetic and great-souled one is
inﬁnitely valorous in battle. He will devour the three worlds, with all the gods, the asuras and men. O residents of
heaven! Therefore, listen to what I have decided. We must approach the abode of the great-souled Vishnu. We
must consult with him about the means for killing this evil-souled one.’”
‘Shalya said, “At these words of Maghavan, the gods, together with the masses of rishis, then sought refuge with
the immensely strong god Vishnu, one with whom refuge should be sought. All of them were oppressed with the
fear of Vritra and spoke to Vishnu, the lord of all the gods. ‘O lord! You covered the three worlds in three strides.73
O Vishnu! You killed the daityas in battle and obtained the amrita.74 Having bound down the great daitya Bali, you
made Shakra the lord of the gods. You are the lord of all the worlds. Everything is vested in you. You are the god
who is the great god. You are revered by all the worlds. O supreme among the immortals! Become the salvation of
Indra and the gods. O destroyer of asuras! The entire universe has become pervaded by Vritra.’ Vishnu replied, ‘I
will certainly do that which ensures your supreme welfare. I will tell you a means whereby he will cease to exist.
With all the rishis and the gandharvas, go to the spot where the one with the universal form resides. Use conciliation towards him. You will then be able to vanquish him. O gods! Shakra will go there. Using my energy, I will invisibly enter his supreme weapon, the vajra. O supreme among gods! Go there with the rishis and the gandharvas.
Without any delay, bring about a truce between Vritra and Shakra.’ Having been thus addressed by the god, the
rishis and the denizens of heaven went together, having placed Shakra at the forefront.
‘“All those greatly energetic ones approached him. He was burning the ten directions with the radiance of his
energy. He seemed to be swallowing the three worlds and was like the sun and the moon. Together with Shakra,
the gods saw Vritra there. The rishis approached and spoke to Vritra in pleasant words. ‘O invincible one! The entire universe is pervaded by your energy. But you will not be able to vanquish Vasava, who is supremely valorous.
Since the two of you began to ﬁght, a very long period of time has elapsed. All the beings, including the gods, the
asuras and men, are oppressed. O Vritra! Let there always be friendship between you and Shakra. You will then
obtain happiness and eternally dwell in Shakra’s world.’ Hearing these words of the rishis, the greatly strong asura
Vritra bowed his head in obeisance before all of them and said, ‘O immensely fortunate ones! O all the gandharvas! O unblemished ones! I have heard everything that you have said. Now listen to me. O gods! We are both extremely energetic. How can there be friendship between us?’ The rishis replied, ‘Righteous ones should meet, at
least once. After that, what is destined will happen. No one transgresses an agreement with a righteous person.
Therefore, there should be an agreement between those who are righteous. An agreement between the righteous is
ﬁrm and eternal. Even in times of difﬁculties, the wise say that this is desirable. Great welfare derives from an
agreement with a righteous person. That is the reason wise ones do not cause violence to righteous ones. Indra is
honoured by righteous ones and great-souled ones reside with him. He also speaks the truth, isn’t mean, follows
dharma and is determined in his decisions. Let there always be peace between you and Shakra. You must have
trust. Do not think otherwise.’ Having heard the words of the maharshis, the immensely radiant one told them, ‘O
illustrious ones! I must certainly revere ascetics. O gods! If you carry out everything that I am asking you to, I will
do everything that these bulls among the brahmanas have asked me to do. O Indras among brahmanas! I will be

incapable of being killed by Shakra, together with the gods, by anything that is dry, anything that is wet, anything
made of stone or wood, by any weapon, by the vajra,75 and during the day or during the night. Such an agreement
with Shakra will always please me.’ O bull among the Bharata lineage! The rishis said that it would be this way.
When this agreement had been made, Vritra was delighted.
‘“But Shakra was always full of resentment. He kept thinking about a means of killing Vritra. The destroyer of
Bala and Vritra was always anxious and kept looking for a weakness. One day, he saw the great asura on the shores
of the ocean. It was evening and the extremely lovely, but terrible, muhurta had arrived.76 He thought about the
boon that the great-souled one had been granted. ‘It is the terrible evening. It is not night or day. He is the enemy
who has robbed me of everything. I can certainly kill him now. He is immensely powerful and has a gigantic body.
If I do not kill the great asura Vritra through deceit today, it will not be good for me.’ Shakra thought in this way
and remembered Vishnu. He saw the foam in the ocean, as large as a mountain. ‘This is not wet, nor dry. Nor is it a
weapon. If I ﬂing it at Vritra, he will perish in an instant.’ With the vajra, he swiftly ﬂung the foam at Vritra. Vishnu entered the foam and destroyed Vritra. With Vritra dead, the darkness vanished from all the directions. An auspicious breeze began to blow and the beings rejoiced. All the gods, the gandharvas, the yakshas, the rakshasas, the
serpents and the rishis praised the great Indra with many hymns. Having been honoured by all the beings, he pronounced benedictions on all the beings. With the enemy having been slain, Vasava was delighted, and together
with the gods, showed his homage to Vishnu, who is learned in dharma and is supreme in the three worlds.
‘“After the extremely valorous Vritra, who had terriﬁed the gods, had been killed, Shakra was overcome by
falsehood77 and was extremely depressed. After having killed Trishira earlier, he had taken on the sin of killing a
brahmana. Bereft of his senses and consciousness, Indra of the gods went to the extremities of the world. Overcome by his own sins, he no longer possessed any wisdom. He remained immersed in water, writhing like a serpent. Thanks to the fear of having killed a brahmana, Indra of the gods was destroyed. The earth seemed to be ravaged.78 There were no trees and the groves dried up. The ﬂows stopped in the rivers and the ponds were without
water. Because of the lack of rains, there was great distress among the beings and the gods. All the maharshis were
extremely terriﬁed. The entire universe was without a king and was confronted with calamities. The frightened
gods thought, ‘Who will be our king now?’ The gods and the rishis in heaven no longer had a king of the gods.
And none of the gods had a desire to be the king.”’
674(11)

‘Shalya said, “Then all the rishis and all the gods said, ‘Nahusha is majestic. Let us appoint him king of the gods
and the lord of the thirty gods.’ All of them went to him and said, ‘O lord of the earth! Be our king.’ O king!
Nahusha thought about his own welfare and told the gods and the masses of rishis, accompanied by the ancestors,
‘I am weak. I am incapable of protecting you. It is a powerful one who should be the king. Shakra was always
powerful.’ All the gods, with the rishis at the forefront, again told him, ‘You will be endowed with the power of
our austerities. Protect the kingdom of heaven. There is no doubt that we are terribly afraid of each other.79 O Indra
among kings! Be our king in heaven. You will absorb the energy of gods, danavas, yakshas, rishis, rakshasas,
gandharvas and all beings as soon as you behold them. You will then be powerful. Always placing dharma at the
forefront, be the lord of all the worlds and the herdsman of the brahmarshis and gods in heaven.’ Having obtained
this extremely rare boon, he became the king in heaven.
‘“He had always had dharma in his soul. But he now became addicted to desire. Nahusha, the king of the gods,
sported in many different ways in all the gardens of the gods, in the grove of Nandana,80 in Kailasa on the slopes
of the Himalayas, on the mountains Mandara, Shveta, Sahya, Mahendra and Malaya and in oceans and rivers, surrounded by apsaras and the maidens of the gods. He listened to many kinds of celestial accounts, pleasant to the
ear, and to all kinds of musical instruments and songs with sweet sounds. Vishvavasu,81 Narada, masses of gandharvas and apsaras and the six seasons in personiﬁed form, waited upon the Indra of the gods. A fragrant breeze
blew—pleasant, charming and cool.
‘“While the great-souled Nahusha was sporting in this way, his eyes fell upon the goddess who was Shakra’s
beloved queen. On seeing her, the evil-souled one spoke to all his courtiers. ‘Why doesn’t the goddess who is Indra’s queen serve me? I am Indra of the gods now. I am also the lord of the worlds. Let Shachi swiftly come to my

abode today.’ On hearing these words, the goddess was distraught and told Brihaspati, ‘O brahmana! Protect me
from Nahusha. I am seeking refuge with you. O brahmana! You have always told me that I bear all the auspicious
marks. You have spoken of me as the beloved of the king of the gods, deserving of happiness, and as one who will
never be a widow. I will be the wife of one and will be devoted to my husband. Let those words that you have spoken to me earlier, come true. O illustrious one! O lord! What you have said earlier has never been false. O supreme
among brahmanas! Therefore, ensure that what you have said comes true.’ At this, Brihaspati told Indrani,82 who
was confounded with fear, ‘O goddess! What I have told you will certainly come true. You will soon see Indra,
king of the gods, return here. I tell you truthfully that you have nothing to fear from Nahusha. In a short while, I
will unite you with Shakra again.’ Nahusha heard that Indrani had gone and sought refuge with Brihaspati Angirasa.83 The king was enraged.”’
675(12)

‘Shalya said, “On seeing that Nahusha was enraged, the gods, with the rishis at the forefront, went and told
Nahusha, the king of the gods, whose visage was terrible. ‘O king of the gods! Conquer your anger. O lord! The
universe, with all its asuras, gandharvas, kinnaras and giant serpents, is terriﬁed at your wrath. O virtuous one!
Conquer this anger. Those who are like you are never enraged. That goddess is the wife of another. O lord of the
gods! Be paciﬁed. Turn your mind away from the sin of molesting another one’s wife. O fortunate one! You are the
king of the gods. You should protect the subjects in accordance with dharma.’ He was addressed in this way, but
did not accept these words. He was deluded by desire. Then the lord of the gods spoke to the gods about Indra.
‘The illustrious Ahalya was the wife of a rishi. But Indra had raped her earlier, while her husband was still alive.84
Why did you not restrain him then? In earlier times, Indra performed many cruel deeds. He acted against dharma
and resorted to deceit. Why did you not restrain him then? Let the goddess serve me. That will be the best for her.
And that will always ensure welfare for the gods too.’ The gods replied, ‘O lord of heaven! We will bring Indrani
here, as you wish. O brave one! O lord of the gods! Conquer your anger and be pleased.’ O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Having said this, the gods, together with the rishis, went to Brihaspati and told Indrani the inauspicious words. ‘We know that Indrani has sought refuge in your abode and that you have granted her freedom from
fear. O Indra among brahmanas! O supreme among devarshis! O greatly radiant one! The gods, together with the
gandharvas and the rishis, seek your favours. Let Indrani be handed over to Nahusha. Nahusha is the greatly radiant king of the gods and is superior to Indra. Let this one with the excellent complexion and with the excellent
thighs accept him as her husband.’ Having been thus addressed, the goddess shed loud tears.
‘“She was miserable and weeping and spoke these words to Brihaspati. ‘I do not wish to have Nahusha as my
husband and give up my lord. O brahmana! I have sought refuge with you. Save me from this great calamity.’ Brihaspati replied, ‘It is certain that I will not give up Indrani, who has sought refuge with me. She follows dharma.
Her conduct is in accordance with dharma. O unblemished one! I will not give you up. I do not wish to perform an
act that should not be done, especially because I am a brahmana. I have heard about dharma. I am truthful in my
conduct. I know the injunctions of dharma. I will not do this. O supreme among the gods! Depart. In these matters,
Brahma recounted a song in earlier times. Listen to it. “He who hands over to the enemy someone who has sought
refuge, his seed will not grow at the time of sowing. His rains will not shower at the time of rains. When he wishes
for protection, he will not receive it. That insensate one will have a barren harvest. That one, whose mind has been
deluded, will be dislodged from the world of heaven. The gods refuse to accept the offerings of one who gives
away a frightened one who has sought succour. His offspring will perish before the right time. His ancestors will
always discard him. If one hands over a frightened one who has sought succour to the enemy, the gods and Indra
hurl their vajra at him.” Knowing this, I will not hand over Shachi Indrani, who is famous in the world as Shakra’s
beloved wife. O best among the gods! What is good for her will also be good for me. Let us act according to that. I
will not give Shachi away.’ Then the gods told their preceptor, who was supreme in the Angirasa lineage, ‘O Brihaspati! You advise us about the best course of action.’ Brihaspati replied, ‘Let this beautiful goddess ask for some
time from Nahusha. I think this will ensure Indrani’s welfare and ours too. Time brings many impediments. It is
time which leads to another time. Because of the boon he has obtained, Nahusha is insolent and powerful.’ When
he had spoken thus, the gods were delighted and told him, ‘O brahmana! What you have spoken is for the welfare

of all the denizens of heaven. O best of brahmanas! Let us seek the favours of this goddess.’ Then all the gods,
with Agni at the forefront, anxious to ensure the welfare of all the worlds, told Indrani, ‘You bear the entire universe, with everything that is immobile and mobile. You are true and devoted to one husband. Go to Nahusha. That
lord of the earth, Nahusha, who lusts after you, will soon be destroyed. Shakra will become the lord of the gods
again.’ Having thus decided on a course of action that would ensure success, Indrani went to Nahusha, whose visage was terrible.
‘“She was bashful. Having beheld her in her youth and beauty, the evil-souled Nahusha was delighted. He lost
his senses because of desire.”’
676(13)

‘Shalya said, “Having seen her, Nahusha, king of the gods, addressed her thus. ‘O one with the beautiful smiles! I
am Indra of the three worlds. O one with the beautiful thighs! O one with the beautiful complexion! Serve me as
your husband.’ Having been thus addressed by Nahusha, the goddess, who was devoted to her husband, trembled
in fear, like a plantain tree during a storm. She joined her hands in salutation and bowed her head before Brahma.
She told Nahusha, king of the gods whose visage was terrible, ‘O lord of the gods! I am asking for some time from
you. I do not know where Shakra is. I do not know where he has gone. O lord! Let me try to ascertain the truth.
Alternatively, if this cannot be found out, I will serve you. I am telling you this truthfully.’ Having been thus addressed by Indrani, Nahusha was delighted. Nahusha replied, ‘O one with the beautiful hips! It will be as you say.
Once you have got to know, your task is to come here. Remember the truth you have sworn.’ Thus given permission by Nahusha, the beautiful one departed. The ascetic one went to Brihaspati’s abode.
‘“O supreme among kings! On hearing her words, the gods, with Agni at the forefront, began to consult about
what might be done for the sake of Shakra. They went and met Vishnu, the god of the gods and anxious, the ones
who were eloquent with words addressed these words to the lord Vishnu. ‘Shakra, the lord of the masses of gods,
has been burdened because he has killed a brahmana.85 O lord of the gods! You are our refuge. O lord! You were
there before the universe was created. You assumed the form of Vishnu for the sake of protecting all beings. When
Vasava slew Vritra through your valour, he was burdened because he had killed a brahmana. O supreme among the
masses of gods! You decide on a way for him to be freed.’ Having heard the words of the gods, Vishnu replied,
‘Let Shakra offer a sacriﬁce to me. I will purify the wielder of the vajra. Having worshipped me, let the chastiser of
Paka perform a holy horse sacriﬁce. Without any fear, he will then become Indra of the gods again. The evil-minded Nahusha will ensure his destruction through his own deeds. O gods! You must be patient and endure him for
some time.’ Having heard the pure and true words of Vishnu, which were like amrita, all the masses of gods, the
preceptors86 and the gods went to the region where Shakra had hidden himself, anxious with fear.
‘“Then the great-souled and great Indra performed the extremely great horse sacriﬁce. O king! This was for the
sake of purifying him from the taint of killing a brahmana. O Yudhishthira! He distributed the killing of a brahmana over trees, rivers, mountains, the earth and women.87 With it having been thrown out and distributed among
beings, the lord of the gods was cleansed of his fever. Vasava’s soul became pure and he assumed his earlier form.
The slayer of Bala saw that Nahusha was not going to move from his position. Having obtained the boon, he was
now unassailable, because he had absorbed the energy of all beings. Therefore, the god who was Shachi’s husband
vanished again. Waiting for the appropriate time, he remained invisible to all beings. When Shakra seemed to have
been destroyed, Shachi was immersed in grief. In great misery, the goddess began to lament. ‘Alas, Shakra! If I
have ever given, if I have ever received gifts, if my seniors have been satisﬁed with me, if there is any truth in me,
I will only have one husband. I am bowing down before this divine and auspicious goddess Night, which has now
embarked on a northern course.88 May my wishes be fulﬁlled.’ When Night arrived, the goddess worshipped her.
Because of her devotion to her husband and because of her truthfulness, Upashruti89 appeared before her. The goddess asked Upashruti, ‘Show me the region where the king of the gods is. Use the truth to show me the truth.’”’
677(14)

goddess90

‘Shalya said, “On seeing that the
was endowed with youth and beauty, thus did Upashruti appear before
the beautiful and virtuous one. Indrani was delighted and showing her homage, said, ‘O one with the beautiful

face! I wish to know who you are. Tell me.’ Upashruti replied, ‘O goddess! I am Upashruti. Since I am satisﬁed
with your truthfulness, I have shown myself before you. You are devoted to your husband. You have restraint and
are self-controlled. I will show you Shakra, the god who killed Vritra. O fortunate one! Follow me quickly and you
will be able to see that supreme among gods.’ As the goddess91 went on ahead, Indrani followed her. Having traversed many forests of the gods and many mountains, she crossed the Himalayas and went to its northern slopes.
She came to an ocean that was many yojanas wide. She then went to a large island that was covered with many
trees and creepers. She saw a divine lake there, populated by many kinds of birds. It was pure and a hundred yojanas broad, with a similar length. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thousands of divine lotuses bloomed
there, with ﬁve colours, and bees buzzed around. She broke the stalk of a lotus and entered with her.92 She saw
Shatakratu, who had also entered there. On seeing her lord in that extremely tiny form, the goddess and Upashruti
also assumed extremely tiny forms.
‘“Indrani praised Indra for the famous deeds he had performed earlier. Having been thus praised, the god Purandara told Shachi, ‘Why have you come here and how did you get to know that I was here?’ She then told him
about what Nahusha had tried to do. ‘When he became the Indra of the three worlds, he became insolent because
of his valour. O Shatakratu! Having become insolent, the evil-souled one asked me to serve him. That evil one has
granted me some time. O lord! If you do not save me, he will bring me under his powers. O Shakra! I am tormented because of this and have come to you. O mighty-armed one! Destroy that terrible Nahusha. His mind is set on
evil. You are the destroyer of daityas and danavas. Reveal your own self. O lord! Regain your own energy. Rule
the kingdom of the gods.’”’
678(15)

‘Shalya said, “Having been thus addressed by Shachi, the illustrious one replied, ‘This is not the time for valour.
Nahusha is superior in strength. O beautiful one! The rishis have made his powers increase because of the oblations he has offered to the gods and the ancestors.93 O goddess! I will indicate a course of action and you should
carry it out. You must carry this task out in secrecy. O beautiful one! You must not talk about it in any way. O slender-waisted one! Go to Nahusha and tell him when you are alone, “O lord of the universe! Come to me in a celestial vehicle that is borne by the rishis. I will then happily come under your control.” Tell him this.’ Thus addressed
by the king of the gods, his lotus-eyed wife told him that it would be this way. She went to Nahusha. When
Nahusha saw her, he was surprised and spoke these words. ‘O one with the beautiful thighs! You are welcome. O
sweet-smiling one! What can I do for you? I am devoted to you. Love me. O fortunate one! O spirited one! What
task do you wish me to perform for you? Do not be shy. O slender-waisted one! You should have trust in me. O
goddess! I truthfully swear that I will do whatever you ask me to.’ Indrani replied, ‘O lord of the universe! I am
waiting out the time that you have granted to me. O lord of the gods! After that, you will become my husband.
There is a task that I desire in my heart. O king of the gods! Think about it. O king! I will tell you about it, provided that you do what brings me pleasure. Out of love, I am speaking these words to you. If you carry them out, I
will come under your control. As his vehicles, Indra possessed horse, elephants and chariots. O lord of the gods! I
desire a vehicle from you that has not existed earlier, one that Vishnu, Rudra, the asuras or the rakshasas do not
possess. O great king! O lord! Let all the rishis bear you together on a palanquin. O king! That will bring me pleasure. You should not be the equal of the asuras or the gods. With your valour, you should grasp all their energy by
glancing at them. O brave one! No one will be able to stand before you.’
‘“Having been thus addressed, Nahusha was extremely delighted. The Indra of the gods spoke these words to
the unblemished one. ‘O one whose complexion is beautiful! You have spoken about an extraordinary vehicle. O
goddess! I have taken a strong fancy towards it. O one with the beautiful face! I am under your powers. One who
makes the sages carry his vehicle cannot be weak in strength. I am a powerful ascetic. I am the lord of the past, the
present and the future. When I am angry, the universe ceases to exist. Everything is vested in me—the gods, the
danavas, the gandharvas, the kinnaras, the serpents and the rakshasas. O sweet-smiling one! All the worlds are not
enough to counter my anger. I take the energy from anyone I look at with my eyes. O goddess! There is no doubt
that I will act in accordance with your words. The seven rishis94 will bear me and all the brahmarshis. O beautiful

one! Behold my greatness and my prosperity.’ Having spoken thus, he gave the goddess with the beautiful face
permission to leave.
‘“He did not possess the qualities of a brahmana. He was powerful and intoxicated. He was insolent because of
the boon. He yoked the rishis, who were established in the rules, to his celestial vehicle. That evil-souled one was
overcome by desire and made the rishis bear him. Having been dismissed by Nahusha, she told Brihaspati, ‘Only a
little bit of the time that Nahusha granted me is left. Hunt out Shakra quickly. I love him and show me
compassion.’ The illustrious Brihaspati told her, ‘It will be this way. O goddess! You have no reason to fear the
evil-minded Nahusha. He will not last for a long time. That worst of men has been destroyed. He is ignorant of
dharma. O beautiful one! He has made the maharshis carry him and has been slain.95 I will offer oblations for the
destruction of that evil-minded one. I will go to Shakra. O fortunate one! Do not be afraid.’ Having kindled a ﬁre
in accordance with the prescribed rites, the immensely energetic Brihaspati offered oblations to discover where the
king of the gods was. The illustrious god of the ﬁre himself appeared. He adopted the extraordinary form of a
woman and suddenly disappeared. With the speed of the mind, he searched the directions, the sub-directions, the
mountains, the forests, the earth and the sky, and returned within a brief moment to Brihaspati. Agni said, ‘O Brihaspati! I cannot see the king of the gods anywhere. Only the waters remain to be searched and I am incapable of
entering the waters. O brahmana! I have no means of going there. What else can I do for you?’ Having been thus
addressed, the preceptor of the gods said, ‘O greatly resplendent one! Enter.’ Agni replied, ‘I cannot enter the waters. That will be my destruction. I am seeking refuge with you. O immensely radiant one! Be paciﬁed. The ﬁre
arose from the waters,96 kshatriyas from brahmanas and iron from stone. Their energy goes everywhere, but is
paciﬁed if they return to their wombs.’”’
679(16)

‘“Brihaspati said, ‘O Agni! You are the mouth of all the gods. You carry the oblations. You are inside all beings97
and roam around like a secret witness. The wise ones have spoken of you as one, and again as three.98 O bearer of
oblations!99 Without you, the universe is instantly destroyed. Having bowed down before you, the brahmanas go to
whatever eternal destinations they have won because of their own deeds, together with their wives and their sons.
You are the bearer of oblations. You are the supreme oblation. You are worshipped at sacriﬁces. You are the
supreme sacriﬁce. O bearer of oblations! Having created the three worlds, you become the kindling and cook them
when the time has come.100 You gave birth to this entire universe. O Agni! You are the foremost reason for its establishment again. O Agni! You are the source of all water. You are the blazing lightning. The ﬂames that issue
from you burn all beings. Water is based on you. Everything is this entire universe is based on you. O purifying
one! There is nothing in the three worlds that is not known to you. Everyone loves one’s womb, so enter the water
without any fear.101 I will make you grow with my eternal brahmana mantras.’”
‘Shalya said, “Having been thus praised by the illustrious and supreme sage Brihaspati, the bearer of oblations
spoke these supreme words. ‘I tell you truthfully that I will show Shakra to you.’ The ﬁre entered the water, with
its oceans and ponds. It went to the lake where Shatakratu was secretly hidden. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
He searched through the lotuses and found Indra of the gods in the middle of a stalk. He returned quickly and told
Brihaspati, ‘The lord is hidden inside the stalk of a lotus, in a very tiny form.’ With all the gods, rishis and gandharvas, Brihaspati went there and propitiated the slayer of Bala because of his earlier deeds. ‘O Shakra! You killed
the great and terrible asura named Namuchi, and Shambara and Bala, both of whom were terrible in valour. O
Shatakratu! Grow and destroy all the enemies. O wielder of the vajra! Arise and see the gods and the rishis who
have come. O great Indra! O lord! You saved the world by killing the danavas. You used the foam of the waters,
strengthened through Vishnu’s energy, to slay Vritra earlier. O king of the gods! O lord of the universe! You are
worshipped by all beings. You are the one who should be worshipped. There is no other being in the world who is
your equal. O Shakra! You sustain all the beings. You ensured the greatness of the gods. Save the world of the
gods. O great Indra! Increase in strength.’ When he had been thus propitiated, he slowly grew. He assumed his
own form and became endowed with strength. The god asked his preceptor Brihaspati, who was standing before
him, ‘What task remains? The great asura who was the son of Tvashtra has been killed and so has the extremely
gigantic Vritra who wished to devour the world.’102 Brihaspati replied, ‘The human King Nahusha has obtained

the kingdom of the gods through the energy of the gods and the masses of rishis. He is grievously oppressing all of
us.’ Indra asked, ‘How did Nahusha obtain the kingdom of the gods, difﬁcult to attain? O Brihaspati! What austerities did he possess and what was his valour?’
‘“Brihaspati said, ‘The frightened gods wished for a Shakra, after you had given up the position of the great Indra. All the gods, the ancestors, the rishis and the masses of gandharvas then assembled. O Shakra! They went and
told Nahusha, “Be our king and the herdsman of the universe.” Nahusha replied, “I do not have the capacity. You
must make me increase through the energy of your austerities.” The gods acted in accordance with these words. He
became a king with terrible valour. Having obtained the kingdom of the three worlds, that evil-souled one makes
the ascetics bear him throughout the world. There is poison in his extremely terrible eyesight and it robs the energy. Nahusha must never look at you. All the gods are frightened of Nahusha. They roam in secret, so that he may
not look at them.’”
‘Shalya said, “Thus spoke the best of the Angirasa lineage, Brihaspati. At that time, Kubera, guardian of the
world, and the ancient Vaivasvata Yama, and the gods Soma and Varuna also arrived. When they arrived, they told
the great Indra. ‘It is extremely fortunate that the son of Tvashtra and Vritra have been slain. It is extremely fortunate that you are hale and unhurt. O Shakra! We see that your enemies have been killed.’ Shakra then replied in the
appropriate way and incited them against Nahusha. ‘Nahusha, the king of the gods, is terrible in form. Therefore,
you must assist me against him.’ They said, ‘Nahusha is terrible in form. O god! There is poison in his eyes and we
are frightened of him. O king! O Shakra! If you truly vanquish Nahusha, we should also be entitled to our
share.’103 Indra replied, ‘It shall be that way. The lord of the waters,104 Kubera and Yama will also be instated with
me. Uniting today, we will vanquish the enemy Nahusha, whose eyesight is terrible.’ Then the ﬂaming ﬁre told
Shakra, ‘Give me a share also and I will render you assistance.’ Shakra said, ‘You will also get a share. In great
sacriﬁces, there will be one share for Indra and Agni together.’105 Having thought about this, the illustrious and
great Indra, the chastiser of Paka, made Kubera the lord of all the yakshas and riches, Vaivasvata of the ancestors
and Varuna of the waters. With due honours, Shakra, the granter of boons, gave them these lordships.”’
680(17)

‘Shalya said, “When the intelligent king of the gods was thinking about a means for killing Nahusha, together with
the guardians of the world,106 the illustrious ascetic Agastya appeared. He showed homage to Indra of the gods and
said, ‘It is fortunate that you have gained in strength. Vishvarupa107 has been destroyed and the asura Vritra has
been slain. O Purandara! It is through good fortune too that Nahusha has been dislodged from the kingdom of the
gods. O destroyer of Bala! It is through good fortune that I look upon you now.’ Indra replied, ‘O maharshi! Welcome. I am happy to see you. Please accept from me water for washing the feet, water for washing the mouth, the
cow and the arghya.’108 Having been thus honoured, that supreme of sages, bull among brahmanas, seated himself
and the lord of the gods happily asked him, ‘O illustrious one! O supreme among brahmanas! I wish to hear from
you how Nahusha, whose mind was set on evil, has been dislodged from heaven.’
‘“Agastya said, ‘O Shakra! Listen to the pleasant news of how the evil-souled and evil-acting King Nahusha,
insolent because of his strength, has been dislodged from heaven. The immensely fortunate devarshis and the unblemished brahmarshis were exhausted at having to bear the evil-acting Nahusha. O god! O supreme among victorious ones! They posed a question to Nahusha. “Brahma has chanted mantras that should be used when cows are
sprinkled.109 Are these accurate?” O Vasava! This is the question they asked. Nahusha’s senses were confounded
because of darkness and he replied in the negative. The rishis said, “You are engaged in adharma. You do not know
dharma. For us, they are accurate, because the maharshis have uttered them earlier.” O Vasava! While he was arguing with the sages, oppressed by adharma, this man touched my head with his foot.110 O consort of Shachi! Because of this, he lost his energy and his prosperity. I told the anxious one who was oppressed by fear, “This was
undertaken by Brahma earlier and was observed by the brahmarshis.111 They should not be censured and you have
censured them. You have touched my head with your foot. O stupid one! The rishis are like Brahma and are unassailable. You have made them carry around your vehicle. Therefore, you will lose your brilliance and will be dislodged from heaven. O evil one! With all your merits exhausted, you will be dislodged and will descend on earth.
You will roam for ten thousand years in the form of a giant serpent. After this period is over, you will return again

to heaven.” O destroyer of enemies! Thus, the evil-souled one was dislodged from the kingdom of heaven. O
Shakra! It is through good fortune that the thorn of brahmanas has been uprooted and we are ﬂourishing. O consort
of Shachi! Return to heaven and protect the worlds. Conquer your senses and conquer your enemies. Be praised by
the maharshis.’”
‘Shalya said, “The gods, surrounded by the masses of maharshis, were extremely satisﬁed. So were the ancestors, the yakshas, the serpents, the rakshasas, the gandharvas, the maidens of the gods and all the masses of apsaras. O lord of the earth! All the lakes, rivers, mountains and oceans approached and said, ‘O destroyer of enemies!112 It is through good fortune that you are ﬂourishing. It is through good fortune that the evil Nahusha has
been dislodged by the wise Agastya. It is through good fortune that the one who was evil in his conduct has become a snake on the face of the earth.’”’
681(18)

‘Shalya said, “Then Shakra was praised by the masses of gandharvas and apsaras. He ascended Airavata, the king
of elephants, who possessed all the auspicious marks. The immensely energetic god of the ﬁre was there, maharshi
Brihaspati, Yama, Varuna and Kubera, lord of riches. Surrounded by all the gods, gandharvas and apsaras, Shakra,
the destroyer of Vritra, went to the three worlds. Having been united with the great Indrani, Shatakratu, the king of
the gods, was supremely delighted and began to rule as the king of the gods.
‘“The illustrious Angira113 appeared. He honoured Indra of the gods with mantras from Atharva Veda and he
bestowed a boon on Atharva Angirasa.114 ‘This Veda will be known by the name of Atharva Angirasa. For example, you will also obtain a share in the sacriﬁce.’115 O great king! Having thus honoured the illustrious Atharva
Angirasa, Shatakratu, the king of the gods, gave him permission to leave. Indra honoured the thirty gods and the
rishis, rich in austerities. O king! He happily ruled over the subjects, in accordance with dharma. Such were the
difﬁculties confronted by Indra, together with his wife. With a desire to kill his enemies, he lived in disguise.
‘“O Indra among kings! You should not be angry because you confronted difﬁculties in the great forest, together
with Droupadi and your great-souled brothers. O Indra among kings! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O descendant of the Kourava lineage! You will also regain your kingdom, the way Shakra obtained it after killing Vritra. The evil-acting Nahusha was evil in intelligence and hated brahmanas. Because of Agastya’s curse, he was destroyed for an eternal period of time. O destroyer of enemies! This will also happen to your evil-souled enemies.
Karna, Duryodhana and the others will soon confront their destruction. O brave one! O lord! With your brothers
and Droupadi, you will then enjoy the earth, up to the frontiers of the ocean. This is the account of Shakra’s victory, equal in importance to the Vedas. It should be heard by a king who wishes for victory. O supreme among victorious ones! It is for that reason that I have recounted it, for the sake of your victory. O Yudhishthira! Great-souled
ones are strengthened when they are praised. O great-souled Yudhishthira! Because of Duryodhana’s crimes and
the strength of Bhima and Arjuna, the defeat of the kshatriyas will occur. He who always reads this account of Indra’s victory, has his soul cleansed and having won heaven, rejoices in the afterlife. That man does not have any
fear from enemies and he is never without sons. He never confronts a calamity. He always has a long life. He is triumphant everywhere and is never vanquished.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O bull among the Bharata lineage! The king was thus assured by Shalya. In accordance
with the prescribed rites, the supreme among those who uphold dharma showed Shalya homage. Having heard
Shalya’s words, Kunti’s son, Yudhishthira, spoke these words to the mighty-armed king of Madra. “There is no
doubt that you will be Karna’s charioteer and your task is to destroy Karna’s energy through your prowess.” Shalya
replied, “I will do as you have asked me to do and everything else that I am able to do for your sake.” O destroyer
of enemies! Having taken his leave from Kounteya, Shalya, the handsome lord of Madra, then went with his army
to Duryodhana.’
682(19)

Vaishampayana said, ‘The brave maharatha Satyaki of the Satvatas then arrived with a large army, with the four
types of forces, before Yudhishthira. His immensely valorous warriors had arrived from many countries. They
were courageous and wielded many weapons. The army was beautiful. It had battleaxes, slings, spears, javelins,

clubs, lances, swords, axes, nooses, unblemished scimitars, swords,116 bows, helmets and many different kinds of
arrows that had been washed in oil. With all these weapons, that army dazzled like a cloud. The soldiers shone,
like lightning in the midst of a cloud. O king! That akshouhini of soldiers joined Yudhishthira’s army and having
entered, vanished, like a small river into the ocean. In a similar way, Dhrishtaketu, bull among the Chedis, brought
an akshouhini to the inﬁnitely energetic Pandavas. Jayatsena of Magadha, Jarasandha’s son, arrived before Dharmaraja with one akshouhini of soldiers. O Indra among kings! Pandya, who dwelt by the shores of the ocean, arrived before Yudhishthira, surrounded by many kinds of warriors. When that force arrived, the soldiers looked extremely radiant. O king! Strong and well attired, it was worthy of being looked at. Drupada had an army that consisted of soldiers from many regions. There were handsome and brave men and his maharatha sons too. King Virata of Matsya, the lord of an army, came to the Pandavas, with kings from the mountainous regions. In this way, the
great-souled sons of Pandu assembled seven akshouhinis. They had many ﬂags. The Pandavas wished to ﬁght with
the Kurus and this delighted them.
‘The delight of Dhritarashtra’s son also increased. Bhagadatta, lord of the earth, gave him one akshouhini of soldiers. That army had chinas and kiratas and was covered with gold.117 That army looked like a forest of
karnikaras.118 O descendant of the Kuru lineage! In a similar way, the brave Bhurishrava and Shalya arrived before Duryodhana, each with one separate akshouhini. With the forces of the Bhojas and the Andhakas, Hardikya
Kritavarma went to Duryodhana with one akshouhini. Among those tigers among men, those soldiers, with garlands of wild ﬂowers, looked like crazy elephants sporting in the forest. Among the others, there were those from
Sindhu and Souvira, with Jayadratha at the forefront. The lords of the earth arrived and seemed to make the mountains tremble. That large akshouhini of soldiers was resplendent, like many different kinds of rain clouds stirred by
the wind. O lord of the earth! Sudakshina of Kamboja joined Kouravya with one akshouhini, together with the Yavanas and the Shakas.119 Those soldiers looked like a swarm of locusts. Having joined Kouravya, they seemed to
disappear.120 Nila, resident of Mahishmati,121 came with Nilayudha, and with the immensely valorous lords of the
earth who lived in the southern regions. The two kings of Avanti,122 surrounded by large forces, came to Suyodhana with one akshouhini each. The ﬁve brothers, who were kings of Kekaya and were tigers among men, came to
Kouravya with one akshouhini and delighted him.123 O bull among the Bharata lineage! From other directions,
many other great-souled lords of the earth arrived and brought three more armies.124 Thus, Duryodhana had eleven
armies. They wished to ﬁght with the Kounteyas and were covered with many ﬂags. O king! O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! There was no space left in Hastinapura then, not even for the foremost kings and the leaders of
their armies. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The region of the ﬁve rivers,125 Kurujangala,126 the forest of
Rohitaka,127 the entire desert region, Ahichhatra,128 Kalakuta, the banks of the Ganga, Varana, Vatadhana and the
mountains around the Yamuna—this entire region was extremely large and full of treasure and grain. It was completely covered by the forces of the Kouravas. This was the army that the priest, who had been sent by the king of
the Panchalas to the Kouravas, saw.’
683(20)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Drupada’s priest went to Kouravya. Together with Bhishma and Vidura, Dhritarashtra’s son
welcomed him with honours. He129 asked them about their welfare and whether they were all in good health. In
the midst of the leaders of the army, he then spoke the following words. “All of you know what the eternal dharma
of kings is. But though it is known, I will refer to it, because it leads up to the words that I will say. It is known that
Dhritarashtra and Pandu are sons of the same father. There is no doubt that they possess equal rights to what belonged to their ancestors. The sons of Dhritarashtra have now obtained those ancestral riches. Why have the sons
of Pandu not obtained a share of the ancestral riches? This is the way it is. In earlier times too, it is known that the
Pandavas did not obtain a share of the ancestral objects. The sons of Dhritarashtra gathered them. There have been
several occasions when attempts have been made on their lives. But because their lives were not over, they could
not be sent to Yama’s abode. Through their own powers, the great-souled ones again obtained a kingdom. But together with Soubala, that was deceitfully taken away from them by the mean sons of Dhritarashtra. That act was
undesirable, but this one130 approved it. With their wife, these brave ones were terribly mistreated in the assembly
hall. They went through many extremely terrible hardships in the forest. Then, in Virata’s city, it was as if they

went through another birth.131 These great-souled ones went through extreme difﬁculties, as if they had performed
evil acts. Having left all that, and all the earlier difﬁculties, behind, the bulls among the Kurus132 only wish for
conciliation with the Kurus. Knowing their conduct and the conduct of Duryodhana, the well-wishers of Dhritarashtra’s son should entreat with him. Those brave ones do not wish to ﬁght with the Kurus. The Pandavas want
what is theirs, without destroying the world. Whatever reasons Dhritarashtra’s son cites in favour of a war, cannot
be regarded as a reason, because they133 are stronger. Dharma’s son has assembled seven akshouhinis. They are
eager to ﬁght with the Kurus and are waiting for instructions. There are other tigers among men, who are equal to
thousands of akshouhinis. There are Satyaki and Bhimasena and the extremely strong twins. These eleven armies
are assembled on one side. But on the other side, there is the mighty-armed Dhananjaya, who possesses many
forms. Just as Kiriti surpasses all armies, so does the mighty-armed and immensely radiant Vasudeva. Knowing the
multitude of their armies, Kiriti’s valour and Krishna’s wisdom, which man will wish to ﬁght? Since the stipulated
time has passed, in accordance with dharma, you must return what should be returned. Do not let time pass by
idly.”’
684(21)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing his words, the immensely radiant Bhishma, aged in wisdom, applauded him and
spoke these words, which were appropriate to the occasion. “It is fortunate that the Pandavas and their relatives are
well. It is fortunate that they have allies now and it is fortunate that they are devoted to dharma. It is fortunate that
those brothers, the descendants of the Kuru lineage, desire peace. It is fortunate that they, together with
Damodara,134 do not desire a war. There is no doubt that you have spoken the truth in every way. It is my view that
because you are a brahmana, your words are too sharp. There is no doubt that the Pandavas went through hardships, here and in the forest. There is no doubt that, according to dharma, they have a claim on all their ancestral
riches. Kiriti Partha is powerful. He is immensely strong and is skilled in the use of weapons. Who is there who
can withstand Pandu’s son, Dhananjaya, in battle? Even the wielder of the vajra cannot, how can other archers? It
is my view that he can stand up against the three worlds.”
‘While Bhishma was still speaking these words, Karna glanced in Duryodhana’s direction and angrily and insolently said, “O brahmana! What you have said is not unknown by any being in the world. What is the point of repeating it again and again? In earlier times, for Duryodhana’s sake, Shakuni defeated Pandu’s son, Yudhishthira, in
the gambling match. He went to the forest for a stipulated time. Without that time being over, he now desires his
ancestral kingdom back.135 The king depends on the strength of the Matsyas and the Panchalas. O learned one!
Duryodhana will not give up even one foot of ground because of fear. But if it is according to dharma, he will hand
over the entire earth, even to an enemy. If they desire the kingdom of their fathers and grandfathers again, they will
again have to roam around in the forest for the time that had been sworn. Then they can approach Duryodhana’s
lap, without any reason for fear. Their present intentions are against dharma. This is plain stupidity. If the Pandavas
forsake dharma and wish for a war, they will remember my words when they confront the best of the Kurus.”
Bhishma responded, “O Radheya! How can you speak? You should remember your own deeds, when Partha alone
vanquished the six charioteers in battle.136 If we do not act as this brahmana has spoken, we will certainly be killed
on the ﬁeld of battle and will have to eat dust.” Dhritarashtra pleaded with Bhishma and placated him. He censured
Radheya.
‘He then spoke these words. “The words spoken by Shantanu’s son, Bhishma, are for our own welfare, for the
welfare of the Pandavas and for the entire universe. After reﬂecting about this, I will send Sanjaya to the Parthas.
Therefore, you should now go back to the Pandavas without any delay.” Kouravya137 then treated him hospitably
and sent him back to the Pandavas. Having summoned Sanjaya to the assembly hall, he spoke these words.’

Section Fifty
Sanjaya-Yana Parva
This section has 311 shlokas and eleven chapters.
Chapter 685(22): 39 shlokas
Chapter 686(23): 27 shlokas
Chapter 687(24): 10 shlokas
Chapter 688(25): 15 shlokas
Chapter 689(26): 28 shlokas
Chapter 690(27): 27 shlokas
Chapter 691(28): 14 shlokas
Chapter 692(29): 51 shlokas
Chapter 693(30): 47 shlokas
Chapter 694(31): 23 shlokas
Chapter 695(32): 30 shlokas
The word yana means going or voyage. So this parva is about Sanjaya’s journey as a messenger. Dhritarashtra sends Sanjaya as an emissary to
the Pandavas. This mission doesn’t succeed, though Krishna says that he will go as a messenger to the Kouravas. Yudhishthira asks for ﬁve villages (through Sanjaya). Sanjaya returns to Hastinapura.
685(22)

‘Dritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! They have said that the sons of Pandu have reached Upaplavya. Go there and show
homage to Ajatashatru and tell the unblemished one that it is fortunate that they have stationed themselves in that
village. O Sanjaya! Honour them all, in words of conciliation. Say that they did not deserve the difﬁculties of
dwelling in exile. Say they will soon be at peace with us. Though they have been falsely acted against, they retain
affectionate feelings towards us. O Sanjaya! I have never seen any kind of falsehood on the part of the Pandavas.
Having obtained all the riches through their own valour, the Pandavas offered them to me. Having scrutinized the
Parthas for misdemeanours, I have never been able to ﬁnd any sin in them. They have always performed tasks for
dharma and artha, and not in pursuit of happiness, pleasure or desire. They have endured hot and cold, and hunger
and thirst. They have controlled sleep, lassitude, anger and delight. They have overcome delusion with fortitude
and wisdom. The Parthas have sought to obtain dharma and artha. When the time is right, they have given away
riches to their friends. Even living together for a long time does not diminish their friendship. The Parthas honour
with homage and riches those to whom these are due. In Ajamidha’s lineage,1 there is no one who hates the
Parthas, except that evil, hateful and evil-minded Duryodhana and the even more inferior Karna. Those two engendered anger in those great-souled ones, when they tried to reduce their pleasure and comfort. Duryodhana is used
to pleasures and because his valour has increased, he thinks that he is in the right. As long as the Pandavas are
alive, only a child can think that their share can be taken away.
‘“Ajatashatru’s footsteps are followed by Arjuna, Keshava, Vrikodara, Satyaki, Madri’s two sons and all the
Srinjayas.2 It is better to give it to him than to ﬁght. Savyasachi, the wielder of the Gandiva, is capable of subjugating the earth alone on his chariot. The unassailable and great-souled Keshava Vishnu is the lord of the three
worlds. Which mortal man can stand before him? He is worthy of being honoured by all the gods. The shower of
his arrows is like the roar of the clouds and they are as swift as locusts.3 With a single chariot, the wielder of the
Gandiva conquered the northern direction and the northern Kurus.4 Savyasachi robbed them of their riches and

forced the soldiers to follow and pay tribute. In Khandava, Savyasachi, the wielder of the Gandiva, defeated Indra
and the gods.5 Phalguna rendered the offerings to the ﬁre god and increased the honour and the fame of the Pandavas. There is no one who is Bhima’s equal in wielding the club, or his equal in riding an elephant. It is said that
he is Arjuna’s equal on the chariot and he has the valour of ten thousand elephants in the strength of his arms. He
is well trained, skilled and swift. As an enemy, he will swiftly burn down the sons of Dhritarashtra. He is intolerant
and powerful and even Vasava will be unable to defeat him in battle. Phalguna’s brothers6 have been taught well.
They are extremely intelligent and strong and their arms are swift. Like vultures destroying a ﬂock of birds, the
sons of Madri will not leave any remnants among the Kurus. The swift Dhrishtadyumna is in their midst and he is
regarded as one of the Pandavas. With his advisers, the joy of the Somakas7 has devoted his soul for the victory of
the Panadavas. The aged Virata, the lord of the Shalveyas,8 is one with whom they have lived for a long time. He
has opted for the Pandavas, together with his sons. I have heard that he is devoted to Yudhishthira. The ﬁve brave
and spirited brothers, who are great archers, have been barred from Kekaya.9 They desire to obtain the kingdom of
Kekaya, and eager to ﬁght, follow the Parthas. All the brave ones among the lords of the earth have been assembled for the sake of the Pandavas. I have heard that these brave ones are devoted to him.10 With great affection,
they have resorted to Dharmaraja. There are warriors who dwell in the mountainous passes on earth. They are pure
and have been born in noble lineages. There are valorous mlecchas11 with many weapons. They have single-mindedly assembled for the sake of the Pandavas. The limitless King Pandya is equal to Indra in battle. He is accompanied in battle by many warriors. He is valorous in this world and his energy cannot be countered. That great-souled
one has arrived for the sake of the Pandavas. I have heard that Satyaki learnt about weapons from Drona, Arjuna,
Vasudeva, Kripa and Bhishma and that he is an equal of Krishna’s son.12 He is also devoted to the cause of the
Pandavas.
‘“The Chedis and the Karushakas have also joined him, with all the enterprising lords of the earth. In their
midst, blazing in prosperity like the sun, used to be the ﬂaming king of Chedi. He was regarded as unassailable in
battle. In drawing the bow, he was foremost on earth. He was chief among the kshatriyas. But using his powerful
force, Krishna crushed and killed him. In earlier times, he crushed Shishupala in battle, thus increasing the fame of
the Yadavas. All the Indras among men, the kings of the Karushas, then increasingly extolled his honour. When
Krishna rode on his chariot with Sugriva, they realized that Keshava was invincible.13 They ran away, deserting
the king of Chedi, like small animals at the sight of a lion. Whoever insolently wishes to engage in a duel with Vasudeva, is smitten down lifeless by Krishna, like a karnikara14 struck down in a storm. O Sanjaya! O son of Gavalgana! On remembering what I have been told about Keshava’s valour, undertaken for their15 sake, and on remembering Vishnu’s other deeds, I cannot ﬁnd any peace. No enemy can withstand those who are led by that lion
among Vrishnis. My heart trembles when I hear that the two Krishnas16 are united on the same chariot. I hope my
evil-minded son, whose intelligence is contrary, does not fall foul of them in a ﬁght. O Sanjaya! Otherwise, they
will burn down the Kurus, like Indra and Vishnu against the armies of the daityas. It is my view that Dhananjaya is
Shakra’s equal and the Vrishni warrior17 is the eternal Vishnu. Kunti’s spirited son, Pandava Ajatashatru, is humble
and has sought refuge in dharma. The intelligent one has been deceived by Duryodhana. I hope that in his anger,
he does not burn down the sons of Dhritarashtra.
‘“I am not afraid of Arjuna, Vasudeva, Bhima or the twins, as much as I have always feared the ﬂaming rage of
that king. O suta!18 He is united with austerities and brahmacharya. Any resolution that he sets his mind on, is always successful. O Sanjaya! I am extremely terriﬁed of his anger on the ﬁeld of battle and I know that his cause is
just. Therefore, swiftly depart on your chariot. Having gone to the abode of the king of Panchala, you must ask
Ajatashatru about his welfare repeatedly, in words full of affection. O son!19 When you meet Janardana, immensely wise, brave and generous, on my instructions, you must ask him about his good health too. Say that Dhritarashtra wishes for peace with the Pandavas. O suta! There is no word of Vasudeva’s that Kunti’s son will not carry out.
Krishna is as dear to them as their own selves. He is intelligent and is always attentive to their cause. On meeting
the Pandavas, the Srinjayas, Janardana, Yuyudhana and Virata, on my instructions, you must ask about their health
and also that of the ﬁve sons of Droupadi. O Sanjaya! At the right time, whatever you think should be said for the
welfare of the Bharatas, say that in the midst of the kings, but do not say anything that incites them to the war.”’

686(23)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing the words of King Dhritarashtra, Sanjaya went to Upaplavya to meet the inﬁnitely energetic Pandavas. Having approached King Yudhishthira, who had dharma in his soul, the son of the suta
ﬁrst bowed down before him. Sanjaya, Gavalgana’s son, the son of the suta, then said, “O king! O Ajatashatru! It is
fortunate that I see you healthy, with all your aides, who are the equals of the great Indra. The wise and aged King
Dhritarashtra, Ambika’s son, has asked about your health. Is Bhima, foremost among the Pandavas, well, and also
Arjuna and Madri’s two sons? How about the princess Krishna Droupadi, devoted to truth, the wife of warriors and
the mother of sons? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! She is the spirited one for whom you offer sacriﬁces and
wish for good fortune.”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “O son of Gavalgana! O Sanjaya! You are welcome. O suta! I am delighted and honour
you. O learned one! Let me tell you that I am well and my younger brothers are also well. O suta! It has been a
long time since I heard about the welfare of King Bharata, the aged one of the Kuru lineage!20 O Sanjaya! I am
looking at you with delight, because I think that it is like looking at that Indra among men in person. Our grandfather is aged, intelligent, immensely wise and has all the qualities of dharma. O son!21 Is Kouravya Bhishma well?
Does he conduct himself as he used to do earlier? Is the great-souled King Dhritarashtra, Vichitravirya’s son, well,
together with his sons? O son of a suta! Is Pratipa’s son, the intelligent and great King Bahlika, well? O son! Are
Somadatta, Bhurishrava, Satyasandha, Shala, Drona and his son and the brahmana Kripa, all great archers, well?
Are they free from disease? O Sanjaya! They are the foremost archers on earth and all of them are on the side of
the Kurus. They are immensely wise and are learned in all the sacred texts. They are foremost among archers on
this earth. O son! Are they being treated with due honours? Are those wielders of bows free from disease? Drona’s
son, the handsome and great archer whose conduct is good, lives in that kingdom. O son! Is the immensely wise
Prince Yuyutsu, the son of a vaishya, well?22 O son! Is the adviser Karna well? He is the one whose advice the evil
Suyodhana follows. O son! Are the aged ladies, the mothers of the Bharatas, the cooks and the wives of the servants well? How about the daughters-in-law, the sons, the nephews, the sisters and the sons of the daughters? Are
they at peace? O son! Does the king continue to properly support the brahmanas, as he used to do earlier? O Sanjaya! I hope Dhritarashtra’s sons have not discontinued what I used to give to the brahmanas. Does King Dhritarashtra, together with his sons, overlook the transgressions committed by brahmanas? He is the refuge. Does he
overlook any shortages they confront in their livelihood? The creator has decreed this pure light in the world of the
living for the welfare of all beings. If those evil ones do not restrain their avarice, there will be complete destruction for the Kouravas. Does King Dhritarashtra, together with his sons, make arrangements for the livelihood of
the advisers? Are there ill-wishers, who dwell as well-wishers, and bring about dissension and ruin? O son! Do all
the Kurus talk about the crimes committed by the Pandavas? When they see the masses of dasyus23 assemble, do
they remember Partha,24 the foremost warrior? O son! Do they remember the straight-ﬂying and whirring arrows
released from the string of the bow? Do they remember the roar of Gandiva? I have not seen anyone on earth who
is Arjuna’s equal or superior in battle. With a single stroke, he can release sixty-one sharp and well-shafted arrows
that have been sharpened on stone. With the club in his hand, Bhimasena is spirited. He makes masses of his enemies tremble. He is like a rutting elephant that tears down a bed of reeds. Do they remember him? Sahadeva,
Madri’s son, vanquished the assembled Kalingas and Dantakura.25 The immensely strong one fought with his left
hand and his right. Do they remember him? O son of Gavalgana! O Sanjaya! You saw when I sent Nakula out and
he brought the western direction under my sway.26 Do they remember Madri’s son? They were defeated in Dvaitavana, when they embarked on their ill-advised expedition with the cattle. The evil-minded ones were taken captive
by the enemy and were freed by Bhimasena and Jaya.27 I protected Arjuna from the rear and Bhimasena and the
twins guarded his ﬂanks. The wielder of the Gandiva defeated the enemies and was unhurt. Do they remember
him? O Sanjaya! Through good deeds one cannot make everything all right. With all our souls, we have not been
able to sway Dhritarashtra’s son.”’
687(24)

‘Sanjaya said, “O Pandava! You have described what you are capable of. O foremost among the Kuru lineage! You
have asked about the Kurus and the people. O father!28 O Partha! Those intelligent ones, the best of the Kurus that

you have asked about, are well. O Pandava! Know that there are aged and virtuous men around Dhritrashtra’s son,
but there are evil ones too. Dhritarashtra’s son has given to enemies. Why should he then take away the shares of
brahmanas? If he follows adharma in his behaviour towards you, like injuring those who do not injure you, that
would not be right. If Dhritarashtra, together with his sons, hates those who like you are righteous, that would not
be right and would be like injuring one’s friends. He does not approve of this and is extremely tormented. O
Ajatashatru! The aged one is sorrowing. Having consulted with brahmanas, he has heard that hating one’s friends
is the most grievous of sins. O god among men! They remember you in their assemblies and Jishnu, the foremost
among warriors, in battles. When there is the sound of drums and conch shells, they remember Bhimasena, who
wields the club in his hand. In the midst of battle, they remember Madri’s two sons, who advanced in all the directions, continuously showering arrows on soldiers. Those maharathas were never perturbed in battle. O king! I think
that no one knows the destiny that will befall a man. O Pandava! You have all the qualities of dharma, yet you
have had to confront difﬁculties in the form of hardships. O Ajatashatru! You have been able to overcome your
hardships, and even greater ones, because of your wisdom. All the sons of Pandu are like the equals of Indra and
will not deviate from dharma for the sake of desire. O Ajatashatru! With the aid of your wisdom, you will be able
to bring about the peace that will protect the sons of Dhritarashtra, the Pandavas, the Srinjayas and all the other
kings who have gathered. O Ajatashatru! O king! Listen to the words your father Dhritarashtra told me in the
night, when his advisers and his sons had gathered.”’29
688(25)

‘Yudhishthira said, “The Pandavas and the Srinjayas have assembled, together with Janaradana, Yuyudhana and
Virata. O son of Gavalgana! O son of a suta! Tell us what Dhritarashtra has instructed you to say.”
‘Sanjaya said, “I show homage to Ajatashatru, Vrikodara, Dhananjaya, the sons of Madri, Shouri Vasudeva,
Yuyudhana, Chekitana and Virata, and also to the aged lord of Panchala, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna and
Yajnaseni.30 All of you listen to my words, which I speak for the welfare of the Kurus. King Dhritarashtra welcomes peace. He has asked me to swiftly yoke my chariot. If the king,31 his relatives, his brothers and his sons so
desire, let the Pandavas ﬁnd peace. The Parthas are endowed with all the qualities of dharma. They are steadfast,
mild and upright. They have been born in a noble lineage and are non-violent and generous. They are restrained by
shame and are determined in their deeds. Mean deeds do not beﬁt you. O Bhimasenas!32 Such is your spirit. Any
mean act by you would be glaring, like a spot of collyrium on a white garment. Who will knowingly commit an
evil act that is seen to bring about complete destruction? That will be sin and will lead to devastation and hell. A
victory obtained thus will be equal to a defeat. Blessed are those who act for their relatives. They are your sons,
your well-wishers and your relatives. If prosperity can be ensured for the Kurus, they are prepared to give up their
lives, which are of limited value, for your cause. O Parthas! If you subjugate the Kurus, and destroy and vanquish
all your enemies, your being alive will be equal to being dead. It is not right that you should live after killing your
kin. Who is capable of ﬁghting with you, even if Indra and all the gods were to help? You have Keshava, Chekitana and Satyaki and are protected by Parshata’s arms.33 O king! But who can withstand in battle and vanquish the
Kurus, protected by Drona, Bhishma, Ashvatthama, Shalya, Kripa and the others, and protected by Radheya and
the other lords of the earth? The king who is Dhritarashtra’s son has a large army. Who can withstand it, without
being killed and destroyed? Therefore, I do not see the slightest welfare, either in victory, or in defeat. Why should
the Parthas commit an act that is against dharma, like those born in low and inferior lineages? Therefore, I bow
down and seek the favours of Vasudeva and the aged lord of Panchala. With hands joined in salutation, I seek
refuge with you. How can there be safety for the Kurus and the Srinjayas? O Vasudeva! There is not a single one
of your words that Dhananjaya will fail to follow. He will give up his life, if you were to ask him. O learned one! I
am speaking to you, so that my objective is accomplished. The king,34 with Bhishma at the forefront, desires that
there should be supreme peace amongst you.”’
689(26)

‘Yudhishthira said, “O Sanjaya! What words have you heard from me, desirous of ﬁghting, that you are frightened
of war? O son! The absence of war is superior to war. O suta! Having obtained that,35 who goes to war? O San-

jaya! If all of a man’s desires are satisﬁed, without his having done anything, I know that he will never do anything.36 There is nothing more foolish than going to war. Why should a man go to war, unless he has been cursed
by destiny? The Parthas undertake tasks that bring about happiness, for the sake of dharma and the welfare of the
world. He, who undertakes tasks for the sake of happiness, avoids difﬁcult tasks that bring on unhappiness. He desires happiness and tries to avoid unhappiness.
‘“But one, who seeks to bring pleasure to his senses, is overcome by desire and torments his own body. Having
become confounded, he confronts unhappiness. A ﬁre that has been kindled becomes more energetic and stronger
if more kindling is added. Thus, even if the objective has been attained, desire is not satisﬁed and is like a ﬁre with
clariﬁed butter added to it. Look at the great abundance of objects of desire that the king who is Dhritarashtra’s son
enjoys. Compare it with our diminished lot. He is not the lord of inferior beings. He does not hear the songs of inferior beings. He does not inhale the fragrance of inferior garlands. He does not use inferior unguents. He does not
don inferior garments. Why have we then been banished from the land of the Kurus? Having thus driven us out,
his heart is still consumed by the desire in his body. The king is himself partial and it is not proper that he should
expect others to be impartial. The way one behaves towards others, is exactly reﬂected in the way others behave
towards one’s own self. At the end of the cold season,37 in the height of summer, one has kindled a ﬁre in a dense
forest with dry wood, so that it grows because of the wind. Having done this, one suffers when one tries to escape.
O Sanjaya! Having obtained the prosperity, why does King Dhritarashtra lament now? He has always accepted the
evil-minded advice of his evil son and his stupid advisers. Unworthy himself, Suyodhana ﬂouted the good advice
rendered by the trustworthy Vidura. Because of affection towards his son, King Dhritarashtra knowingly deviated
from the path of dharma. He38 is wise among the Kurus and wishes for the welfare of the Kurus. He is extremely
learned, eloquent and of virtuous conduct. But out of affection for his son, King Dhritarashtra did not listen to
Vidura. He39 himself desires honour, but does not show honour. He is selﬁsh and envious and transgresses dharma
and artha for the sake of his own interests. He is ill-spoken and is overcome by intolerance. He is addicted to desire
and his heart is evil. He is perverse and insults those who are superior. He seeks for revenge. He injures his friends.
O Sanjaya! He is evil-minded. Out of affection for that son, King Dhritarashtra knowingly deviated from the objective of dharma. O Sanjaya! When gambling, it occurred to me that the destruction of the Kurus might have arrived. Though Vidura spoke laudable and wise words, Dhritarashtra paid no attention to them. When they no
longer followed the advice of Kshatta,40 the Kurus started to face hardships. As long as they followed his wise advice, the kingdom continued to prosper. O suta! Now hear from me about the ones who advise Dhritarashtra’s son.
They are Duhshasana, Shakuni and the son of the suta.41 O son of Gavalgana! Behold his stupidity.
‘“Therefore, when I reﬂect on it, I do not see how there can be welfare for the Kurus and the Srinjayas. Dhritarashtra has usurped the wealth of others and has exiled the far-sighted Vidura.42 Dhritarashtra and his son now
aspire for a great kingdom on this earth, without any rivals. It is because of this that there cannot be any peace.
They think that whatever is mine, should also be theirs. Karna thinks that it is possible to take up weapons against
Arjuna in battle. There were many great battles in earlier times? Why was Karna not a source for recourse then?43
Karna knows and so does Suyodhana, Drona knows and so does the grandfather,44 and all the other Kurus also
know that there is no wielder of the bow like Arjuna. All the Kurus know, and so do all the other assembled lords
of the earth, that Duryodhana can perform evil acts only if Phalguna, the destroyer of enemies, is not present. Dhritarashtra’s son thinks that he can take away the riches that I have gathered, from the Pandavas. Knowing these intentions, Kiriti will ﬁght with a bow that is as long as a palm tree. The sons of Dhritarashtra survive as long as they
have not heard the twang of the extended Gandiva. Overlooking the force of the angry Bhimasena, Suyodhana
thinks that he has been successful in his objective. O son! Even Indra cannot take away my riches as long as Bhimasena is alive. O suta! There are Dhananjaya, Nakula and the brave Sahadeva too. O suta! The aged king, together with his son, should use his intelligence. O Sanjaya! Otherwise, the sons of Dhritarashtra will be consumed by
the rage of the Pandavas in battle. You know the hardships that we have confronted. O Sanjaya! In your honour, I
pardon them. You know what we have obtained earlier from the Kouravas and the conduct that we have shown towards Dhritarashtra’s son. We will behave in the same way today. As you have said, we will strive for peace. Let
me have my kingdom in Indraprastha. Let Suyodhana, foremost among the Bharatas, agree.”’

690(27)45

‘Sanjaya said, “O Pandava! You have always based yourself on dharma. O Partha! That is famous in the world and
can be seen. But this great ﬂow of life is always transient. O Pandava! On noticing that, stay away from destruction. O Ajatashatru! If the Kurus refuse to return your share without a war, I think that it is better to be a beggar in
the kingdoms of Andhaka and Vrishni than to obtain a kingdom through war. A man’s life lasts for a short time.
That ﬂow is always subject to unhappiness and is unstable. Therefore, one should not shorten life. O Pandava! One
should never resort to an evil act. Desire is created in man. O Indra among men! This causes obstructions in the
path of dharma. If a persevering man strikes it46 down in advance, he obtains unparalleled praise in this world. O
Partha! The thirst for riches is a bond. It ties one down from the pursuit of dharma. He who chooses dharma is enlightened. He, who strives for desire, is diminished because of that. O father! He, who places dharma at the forefront of all deeds, obtains great radiance, like the sun. A man, who diminishes dharma, may obtain the earth. But
because of his evil intelligence, he will be ruined. You have studied the Vedas. You have followed brahmacharya.
You have observed sacriﬁces. You have donated to brahmanas. You know about the supreme objective. You have
given many of your years to pleasure. He, who devotes himself excessively to pleasure and does not perform deeds
according to the practice of yoga, is extremely unhappy when his riches are exhausted. He is incited by the force of
desire and is immersed in misery. In the same way, a foolish one, who abandons dharma and follows adharma in
the pursuit of riches, does not believe in the hereafter. When he gives up his body, that evil one is burnt in the hereafter. The deeds that have been performed are not destroyed in the hereafter, be they good or be they evil. The
good and evil deeds precede the doer. The doer only follows them from behind. Your deeds are as pure as the fragrant and succulent food offered with devotion to brahmanas and the stipends offered at sacriﬁces, in accordance
with the proper rites. O Partha! Deeds are performed in this world. In the hereafter, there are no deeds to be performed. You have performed great deeds, applauded by righteous ones, for the sake of the hereafter. Death brings
an end to old age and fear. There is no hunger or thirst, nor anything that causes unpleasantness. There is no deed
that remains to be done, but for the satisfaction of the senses.
‘“O Indra among men! Such are the fruits of our deeds. O Pandava! Do not bear the load of what is pleasing to
the heart and arises out of anger or the pursuit of happiness. Do that which brings pleasure in both the worlds. After an act is over, there remains one’s good name, truthfulness, self-control, honesty and non-violence. Horse-sacriﬁces, royal sacriﬁces and other sacriﬁces are evil deeds that transgress the limits.47 O Parthas! After all this time, if
you follow common norms and perform evil deeds, what was the reason for the Pandavas to spend many unhappy
years in the forest, for the sake of observing dharma? You could have assembled an army without the exile. It was
under your control earlier. The Panchalas have always been your advisers and Janardana and the brave Yuyudhana.
That’s also true of the king of Matsya, who rides a golden chariot, and his sons; and Virata, with his warrior sons;
and the kings whom you had conquered earlier. All of them would have gathered to your side. With all these great
aides and a powerful army, honoured by Vasudeva and Arjuna, you would have slain the best of warriors in the
arena of battle. You would have destroyed the insolence of Dhritarashtra’s son. Why did you increase the strength
of your rivals? Why did you reduce the number of your aides? O Pandava! If you wished to ﬁght, why did you
dwell for so many years in the forest and why have you picked the wrong time now? O Pandava! A foolish one desires to ﬁght, or one who is unaware of dharma and deviates from the path that ensures welfare. Even a wise person, or one who knows about dharma, can deviate from the path of welfare because of anger. O Partha! But your
intelligence is not ﬁxed on adharma. Never have you committed an evil act out of anger. What is the reason for you
to be attracted to a course of action that is counter to wisdom? O great king! Wrath is a bitter headache that does
not result from disease. It destroys fame and gives rise to evil fruits. Unlike those who are sinful, those who are
righteous should swallow it. Swallow your anger and be paciﬁed. Who desires to be tied down by evil? Forgiveness is superior to pleasures, when the latter results from Shantanu’s son, Bhishma, and Drona and his sons being
slain. O Partha! Kripa, Shalya, Somadatta’s son, Vikarna, Vivimshati, Karna, Duryodhana—having killed all these,
tell me what kind of happiness you will obtain. O king! Having obtained the entire earth, up to the frontiers of the
ocean, you will not be able to conquer old age and death, pleasure and displeasure, happiness and unhappiness.
Knowing this, do not wage war. If you wish this because of the desires of your advisers, and it is because of them

that you are about to err like this, then give everything to them and go away. Do not deviate from the path that
leads you to the road followed by the gods.”’
691(28)

‘Yudhishthira said, “O Sanjaya! You have undoubtedly spoken the truth. As you have said, dharma is supreme
among all deeds. O Sanjaya! But you should not censure me before you know whether I am following dharma or
adharma. Adharma sometimes adopts the guise of dharma. And dharma sometimes appears as adharma. According
to their intelligence, the learned ones distinguish between the two. When there is a calamity, depending on one’s
livelihood, dharma and adharma should be followed accordingly.48 O Sanjaya! Know from me that in times of
calamity, the pursuit of dharma often implies the ﬁrst.49 When one’s natural means of livelihood has gone, one
should strive to perform the duties that have been laid down. O Sanjaya! When the natural means of livelihood are
present, both should be censured.50 The creator has laid down a course of action for brahmanas who wish to remedy wrongs. O Sanjaya! When there is a time of calamity, those who do not act, or those who do not act correctly,
are both reprehensible. According to livelihood, the right course of action has always been laid down, including for
those who are not brahmanas and for those who do not follow the Vedas. It is only those righteous ones who can
tell us what is best. This is the path that has been followed by our fathers earlier, and by our grandfathers and those
who have preceded them. Those who are wise undertake these tasks and I do not think that this is the way of the
unrighteous. O Sanjaya! Through the path of adharma, I do not crave whatever riches exist on this earth, whatever
is with the thirty gods and beyond them, in Prajapati’s world, in heaven, or in Brahma’s world. The learned
Krishna is the lord of dharma. He is skilled and knows about the right policy. He is honoured by the brahmanas. In
many ways, he has instructed many powerful kings like the Bhojas. The immensely famous Keshava must tell me
whether I should be censured for giving up peace and following my own dharma of embarking on a ﬁght.51 Vasudeva wishes for the welfare of both sides. The Shinis, the Chaitrakas,52 the Andhakas, the Varshneyas, the Bhojas, the Kukkuras53 and the Srinjayas resort to Vasudeva’s intelligence to subdue their enemies and delight their
well-wishers. Led by Krishna, Ugrasena and all the others among the Vrishnis and the Andhakas are like the
equals of Indra. They are intelligent and have truth as their valour. The immensely strong Yadavas are prosperous.
Babhru, the king of Kashi, has obtained supreme prosperity after having obtained Krishna as a brother and an instructor.54 Vasudeva satisﬁes all his desires, like a showering cloud brings satisfaction to beings after the summer.
O son! This is the kind of person Keshava is. We know that he knows how to decide on a course of action. We are
devoted to the virtuous Krishna. We will not transgress Keshava’s words.”’
692(29)

‘Vasudeva said, “O Sanjaya! I desire that the Pandavas are not destroyed and that they are prosperous. I love them.
O suta! In the same way, I desire the prosperity of King Dhritarashtra and his many sons. O Sanjaya! It has always
been my desire that there should be peace between them and I have told them this. I hear that this is also desired by
the king.55 I think that this is also best for the Pandavas. O Sanjaya! Pandava56 has already exhibited a kind of
peacefulness that is extremely difﬁcult to attain. Though Dhritarashtra and his sons are avaricious, there need not
be any quarrel between them. O Sanjaya! You know the nature of dharma better than I do or Yudhishthira does. O
Sanjaya! Why are you then ﬁnding fault with Pandava, who is endeavouring to accomplish his own duty? As is
known, his conduct towards his relative has always been virtuous, right from the beginning. On the present issue,
there is a difference of opinion among the brahmanas. Some say that deeds bring success in the hereafter. Others
discard deeds and say that success comes from learning. It is known to brahmanas that those who have food, but
fail to eat it, will remain hungry. It is only knowledge which leads to deeds that bears fruit, not other kinds.57
Deeds can be seen to bear fruits. One who is thirsty is satisﬁed by drinking water.
‘“O Sanjaya! Therefore, the rites of deeds have been laid down and it is deeds that circulate. Thus, I think that
there is nothing superior to deeds. It is weak and vain to speak otherwise. Elsewhere,58 the gods are radiant because of their deeds. It is because of deeds that the wind blows. Determining day and night through his deeds, the
sun ceaselessly rises every day. Ceaselessly, the moon goes through fortnights and months, through nakshatras and
conjunctions. The ﬁre burns ceaselessly and through his deeds, kindles for the welfare of beings. Through her

strength, the goddess earth ceaselessly bears a heavy load. The rivers ceaselessly bear the waters that satisfy the
wishes of all beings. The destroyer of Bala59 has a lot of energy and ceaselessly showers down, resounding in the
sky and in heaven. He ceaselessly practises brahmacharya, desiring to be the foremost among the gods. Shakra
gave up happiness and his mind’s desires. He became the foremost through his deeds. He steadfastly protects truth
and dharma, with self-control, fortitude, equanimity and amiability. Cultivating all these, the foremost Maghavan
obtained the kingdom of the gods. Brihaspati controlled his mind and restraining his soul in the proper fashion, followed brahmacharya. He gave up happiness and controlled his senses. He thus obtained praise and reverence from
the gods.60 The nakshatras shine because of their deeds. So do the Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Vishvas,61
King Yama, Vaishravana Kubera, the gandharvas, the yakshas and the shining apsaras. The sages shine there62 because they observe brahmacharya, study the Vedas and follow the rituals. You know this to be the dharma of all the
worlds and for brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaishyas. You know what learned ones know.
‘“O Sanjaya! Why are you then pleading for the Kouravas? Know that he is always devoted to the sacred texts
and to ashvamedha and rajasuya.63 He is also united with bows and armour, with arm guards, chariots and
weapons. If the Parthas knew of some other means of accomplishing the objective, without slaughtering the
Kouravas, whereby dharma could be saved and the purity of deeds preserved, they would force Bhimasena to follow the conduct of an arya.64 But if they are engaged in deeds followed by their ancestors, and in the process, destiny makes them confront death, that death will be regarded as praiseworthy, because they will have accomplished
their own deeds, to the best of their capacities. I think that you know everything and I would like to hear your response to a question. Is it better for a king to wage war in accordance with dharma, or is it better for him not to
wage war in accordance with dharma? O Sanjaya! You must ﬁrst consider the division into the four varnas and the
deeds that are decreed for each. After having determined the duty of the Pandavas, you can then praise or censure
it, according to your inclination. A brahmana must study, sacriﬁce, give, visit the sacred tirthas, teach, ofﬁciate for
those who are ﬁt to sacriﬁce and receive gifts that he knows he can accept. A king must protect his subjects, act in
accordance with dharma, steadfastly give, perform sacriﬁces, study all the Vedas, take a wife and observe the sacred deeds of a householder. A vaishya must not study. He must steadfastly sustain agriculture, animal husbandry
and trade, accumulate riches, do what is pleasant for brahmanas and kshatriyas and observe the conduct of dharma
and the sacred deeds of a householder. The ancient dharma of shudras is known to be that he must serve and honour brahmanas. Both study and sacriﬁce are prohibited for him. He must ceaselessly ensure the welfare of all beings. The king must tirelessly protect all the varnas in the pursuit of their own dharma. He must not be addicted to
desire and must be impartial across all beings. He must never be addicted to desire that is adharma. If there is
someone with all the qualities of dharma, he must acknowledge his superiority. He must chastise inferior subjects.
If he acts in this fashion, he is virtuous. If he violently seizes land that belongs to others, intoxicated because of his
powers, he angers destiny and this leads to strife between kings, creating armour, weapons and bows. For the task
of killing dasyus, Indra created armour, weapons and bows. Whether riches are stolen secretly in private, or
whether they are stolen forcibly in public, the two crimes are equally reprehensible. O Sanjaya! How is the act of
Dhritarashtra’s son different?
‘“Overcome by intolerance and because of his avarice, he thinks that whatever he desires is dharma. The share
of the Pandavas was determined. Why should we be robbed of those by others? If we are killed in battle, that will
be praiseworthy. Inheritance is better than the conquest of another’s kingdom.65 O Sanjaya! In the midst of their
kingdom,66 recount this ancient dharma to the Kouravas. Those who have been assembled by Dhritarashtra’s sons
are stupid and evil and are under the control of death. Behold again the evil deed that the Kurus committed in the
midst of their assembly hall. The illustrious Droupadi is the beloved wife of the Pandavas and she has virtuous
conduct. With Bhishma at the forefront, the Kurus ignored it when she was seized by that lecher67 and was forced
to weep. If the Kurus who were assembled there, young and old, had tried to prevent it then, Dhritarashtra would
have performed an act I would have approved of. This would have been a good deed for his sons too. Disregarding
all norms, Duhshasana dragged Krishna to the midst of the assembly hall, with her fathers-in-law persent. Brought
there, she was in a pitiable state, but found no protector other than Kshatta.68 The kings in that assembly hall were
such wretches that they were incapable of protesting. For the sake of dharma, Kshatta was the only one who spoke.
Knowing dharma, he censured the one who possesses limited intelligence.69 You did not speak of dharma in that

assembly hall. But you see it ﬁt to instruct the Pandavas now. However, when she was brought into that assembly
hall, Krishna did perform a pure deed that was extremely difﬁcult. Like a boat in the midst of the ocean, she freed
herself and the Pandavas from that difﬁcult situation.70 When Krishna stood before her fathers-in-law in that assembly hall, the son of the suta71 spoke to her. ‘O Yajnaseni! You have no other recourse left. Go to Dhritarashtra’s
house. They have been defeated and are no longer your husbands. O beautiful one! Choose another man as your
husband.’ This was as heart-rending as a stake. They were extremely terrible and pierced the heart. Karna’s words
were like arrows that possessed great energy. They were embedded in Bibhatsu Phalguna’s heart. When they
donned garments that were made of black antelope skin, Duhshasana also spoke these harsh words. ‘All of you are
like sterile and destroyed sesamum seeds. You have been ruined and will go to heaven for a very long time.’
Shakuni, the deceitful king of Gandhara, spoke to the Parthas at the time of gambling with the dice. ‘Nakula has
been won. What stake is left other than Krishna Yajnaseni?’72 O Sanjaya! You yourself know these reprehensible
words that were spoken at the time of the gambling.
‘“I wish to go there myself, to settle matters before there is a disaster. If I can bring peace to the Kurus, without
sacriﬁcing the interests of the Pandavas, I will accomplish a great and auspicious task. I will free the Kurus from
the noose of death. I will speak words that are full of wisdom. They will be based on dharma and will be in conformity with the principles of non-violence. When I go there, I hope the Kurus honour me and the sons of Dhritarashtra listen to my words. If it is otherwise, Phalguna will ride on his chariot and Bhima will arm himself for
war. Know that because of their own evil deeds, the wretched sons of Dhritarashtra will be burnt down. When the
Pandavas were vanquished,73 Dhritarashtra’s son spoke many terrible words. Wielding a club in his hand, the enraged Bhimasena will remind Duryodhana about these at the right moment. The angry Suyodhana is a giant tree.
Karna is the trunk and Shakuni constitutes the branches. Duhshasana is the abundance of ﬂowers and fruit. The
foolish King Dhritarashtra is the root. Yudhishthira is a giant tree that is full of dharma. Arjuna is the trunk and
Bhimasena constitutes the branches. The sons of Madri constitute the abundance of ﬂowers and fruit. The brahman
and brahmanas constitute the root. King Dhritarashtra and his sons are the forest. O Sanjaya! The Pandavas are the
tigers. Do not cut down the forest with its tigers. Do not banish the tigers from the forest. Without the forest, the
tiger is killed. Without the tigers, the forest is cut down. Therefore, the tiger protects the forest and the forest sustains the tiger. O Sanjaya! Dhritarashtra’s sons are like the creepers of dharma, but the Pandavas are shala trees. A
creeper cannot grow without resorting to a large tree. The Parthas are positioned to serve, but those scorchers of
enemies are also positioned, ready to ﬁght. Let Dhritarashtra, lord of men, decide on what he has to do. The greatsouled Pandavas are the followers of dharma and are positioned for peace. But they are capable of ﬁghting. O
learned one! Relate this accurately.”’
693(30)

‘Sanjaya said, “O god among gods among men! O Pandava! I will now take your leave and go. May you be fortunate. As a result of the distress in my mind, I hope I have not spoken words that should not be spoken and caused
you distress. I am taking my leave of Janardana, Bhimasena, Arjuna, Madri’s sons, Satyaki and Chekitana. May
you be happy and prosperous. O kings! Look at me with eyes that are full of equanimity.”
‘Yudhishthira replied, “O Sanjaya! With our permission, depart in peace. You have not said anything unpleasant.
They know, and all of us know, that when you speak in the midst of an assembly hall, you are pure in your soul. O
Sanjaya! You were sent as an appropriate messenger. You are extremely dear to us. You have spoken words full of
welfare and you have exhibited good conduct. O suta! Your views have not been clouded by delusion. When we
have spoken the truth, you have not been angered. You have not spoken harsh and piercing words. Nor have you
spoken bitter and acerbic words. O suta! We know that your words are guided by dharma and artha and that they
are full of meaning, not meant to hurt. For us, you are a beloved messenger. Vidura is the only other one who could
have come here. In earlier times, we have seen you frequently. You are our friend, like Dhananjaya himself. O Sanjaya! Having quickly departed from here, serve the brahmanas who are deserving of worship. They are pure and
brave and are devoted to the Vedas.74 They have been born in noble lineages and have all the qualities of dharma.
The brahmanas are devoted to studying and live on alms. There are ascetics who always live in the forest. Greet all
the elders on my behalf. O raconteur! Ask about the welfare of each one.

‘“You must meet King Dhritarashtra’s priest, his preceptors and all his sacriﬁcial priests.75 O son!76 You must
greet each one, as he deserves. O suta! You must meet each one and ask about his welfare. Our beloved preceptor77
follows brahmacharya and the Vedas and never deviates from the right course of action. You must greet and honour Drona, as he deserves. He is the one who made the four techniques of weaponry known again.78 You must
swiftly go to Ashvatthama and ask about his welfare. He has studied and follows the Vedas.79 He is the one who
made the four techniques of weaponry known again. He is as swift as the son of a gandharva. You must then go to
the abode of Sharadvat’s son.80 He is a maharatha and supreme among those who know about weapons. O Sanjaya! You must remember me repeatedly and touch Kripa’s feet with your hand. You must also grasp the feet of
Bhishma, supreme among the Kurus, and mention me to him. Valour, non-violence, austerities, wisdom, good conduct, learning and fortitude reside in him. O Sanjaya! You must salute the aged king81 and tell him that I am well.
He governs the Kurus with the sight of wisdom. He is extremely learned and the learned one tends to the aged.
‘“O Sanjaya! Dhritarashtra’s eldest son is evil, stupid, deceitful and prone to bad conduct. He now rules over the
entire earth. O son!82 You must ask about Suyodhana’s welfare. O Sanjaya! His younger brother is equally evil. He
has always been like him in conduct.83 He is a great archer and supreme among the Kuru warriors. O son!84 You
must ask about Duhshasana’s welfare. O son!85 You must ask about the welfare of the son of the vaishya.86 He has
never liked the idea of a war. He is immensely wise and has all the qualities of dharma. He is supreme among all
wise ones and is never confused. O son!87 Ask about the welfare of Chitrasena.88 He is unmatched in cutting and
playing with dice.89 He is extremely deceitful and is skilled in gambling and knows the heart of the dice. He is incapable of being defeated in duels with the dice. You must greet the learned bull of the Bahlika lineage, who has
always had no other desire than that of there being peace among the Bharatas. He may happily greet me again, as
he used to do earlier. It is my view that Somadatta must also be honoured. He is supreme among those who possess
all the qualities. He is learned and is never cruel. Because of his affection, he has always endured all the injury.90 O
Sanjaya! Somadatta’s son91 is the most venerable among the Kurus. He is our brother and friend. He is a great
archer and supreme among charioteers. Ask him about his welfare and that of his advisers. There are other young
ones who are chief among the Kurus. They are our sons, grandsons and brothers. If you meet them along the way,
on my behalf, ask about their welfare. Dhritarashtra’s son has assembled kings to ﬁght against the Pandavas. There
are the foremost among the Vasatis, the Shalvakas, the Kekayas, the Ambashthas and the Trigartas. There are
brave ones from the east, the north, the south, the west and all the mountainous regions. They are non-violent and
are proper in conduct. O son!92 Ask all of them about their welfare. There are those who ride on elephants, horses
and chariots, infantry and large masses of aryas. Tell all of them that I am in good health. Ask all of them if they
are in good health. There are advisers who have been appointed by the king. There are gatekeepers and others who
lead the army. There are those who calculate revenue and expenditure. There are great ones who think about his93
welfare. The king from the mountainous region of Gandhara, Shakuni, is unrivalled in cutting and playing with the
dice. O suta! He heightens the honour of Dhritarashtra’s son. O son!94 He is false in his intelligence. But ask him
about his welfare. O son!95 Ask about Vaikartana’s96 welfare. He is unmatched in deluding the deluded. The Pandavas are impossible to vanquish. But alone, on a single chariot, that brave one hopes to defeat them. Ask about
the welfare of the inﬁnitely intelligent and far-sighted Vidura. He is devoted to us. He is our senior and our servant.
He is our father, our mother and our well-wisher. He is our adviser.
‘“O Sanjaya! The aged women who possess all the qualities are regarded by us like our mothers. Meet with all
those aged women when they are assembled together, and on our behalf, show them honour. ‘O those among you
who have sons who are alive! Do your sons treat you properly and without violence?’ O Sanjaya! Having said this,
subsequently tell them that Ajatashatru and his sons are well.97 O Sanjaya! There are those whom you know to be
our wives.98 O son!99 All of them should be asked about their welfare. ‘Are you protected properly? Do you have
fragrances? Are you uncensured and not distracted when you undertake the duties of the household? O fortunate
ones! Do you behave properly towards your fathers-in-law? Are you well and are you treated without violence?
Can you ensure your own conducts, so that your husbands remain devoted towards you?’ O Sanjaya! There are
those whom you know to be our daughters-in-law.100 They have all the qualities and have been born in noble lineages. When you meet them, tell them that Yudhishthira has happily saluted those mothers of children. O Sanjaya!
You must meet the maidens in their houses. On my behalf, you must ask them about their welfare and say, ‘May

you be fortunate and may you have husbands who are devoted to you. May you also be devoted to your husbands.’
O son!101 You must ask about the welfare of the courtesan women. ‘Do you have ornaments, garments and fragrances? Are you happy and prosperous, without being frightened? Are your visits short? Are your words
shorter?’102 The sons of the servant maids, the servants of the Kurus, the many hunchbacked and crippled ones
who have sought refuge, must be told that I am well. Ask how the worst among them fares. ‘Do you continue to be
engaged in your old pursuits? Does Dhritarashtra’s son provide you objects of pleasure? There are those who have
lost limbs, or are miserable, or dwarfs. Does Dhritarashtra’s son treat you non-violently?’ There are many who are
blind and aged. There are many who have to earn a living through their hands. Tell them that I am well and ask
how the worst among them fares. ‘Do not be unhappy because of this sorry life. This must be because of sins committed in earlier lives. After subduing my enemies through the aid of my well-wishers, I will sustain you with garments and food. I used to provide stipends to brahmanas. I will provide more in the future. I will see all of you
properly taken care of.’ Tell the king103 whatever you hear about their success. There are those who are unprotected, weak and always stupid, preoccupied with their own selves. They are miserable in every way. O son!104 You
must ask about their welfare on my behalf.
‘“O son of a suta! There are others who have sought refuge with Dhritarashtra’s son, arriving from many directions. On seeing them, or anyone who is deserving of honour, ask if they are well in every way. There are those
who have come and others who are arriving—kings and messengers from all the directions. O suta! Ask all of
them about their welfare. Later, you should tell them that I am well. There are no warriors on earth who are equal
to the ones Dhritarashtra’s son has obtained. But dharma is eternal. And my dharma is that all immensely strong
enemies must be destroyed. O Sanjaya! You must make Dhritarashtra’s son, Suyodhana, listen to my ﬁnal words.
‘The heart in your body has a desire to rule the Kurus without any rivals. This has no rationale. We will not do
anything that doesn’t bring you pleasure. Give us our Shakrapura.105 O foremost among the warriors of the Bharata lineage! Otherwise, be prepared to ﬁght.”’
694(31)

‘Yudhishthira said, “O Sanjaya! The creator places the righteous, the unrighteous, the young, the old, the weak and
the strong under his control. The lord grants learning to children and childishness to the learned. He grants all this
when he provides the seed in a being. There is no need to tell you more. You will report it the way it actually is,
now that we have cheerfully consulted each other. O son of Gavalgana! Go to the Kurus and show homage to the
immensely strong Dhritarashtra. Touch his feet and ask about his welfare. When he is seated, surrounded by the
Kurus, tell him, ‘O king! It is through your valour that the Pandavas are living happily. O destroyer of enemies! It
is through your favours that they obtained a kingdom while they were still young. After having established them in
a kingdom ﬁrst, do not destroy them by ignoring them now.’ O Sanjaya! No one should enjoy everything alone. ‘O
father! We will live together. Do not fall prey to enmity.’ In the same way, lower your head in homage and recount
my name to Shantanu’s son, Bhishma, the grandfather of the Bharatas. After having greeted him, you should tell
the grandfather, ‘When Shantanu’s lineage was drowning, you rescued it once.106 O father!107 O grandfather! Act
again in that fashion so that your grandsons live with affection among themselves.’ You should speak in the same
way to Vidura, the adviser to the Kurus. ‘O peaceful one! O one who wishes for the welfare of Yudhishthira!
Speak words of peace.’
‘“Then you should repeatedly speak to the intolerant Prince Suyodhana, entreating him when he is seated in the
midst of the Kurus. When Krishna was brought alone into the assembly hall, evil was done towards her. But we
ignored it patiently, so that the Kurus might not be slaughtered. The Pandavas have borne hardships earlier and
will do so again, though they are stronger now. All the Kurus know this. ‘O peaceful one! You sent us into exile,
with deerskin as our garments. We bore those miseries, so that the Kurus might not be slaughtered. When
Duhshasana, with your approval, oppressed Krishna by the hair in the assembly hall, we overlooked that also. O
scorcher of enemies! But we will ﬁght for our rightful share now. O bull among men! Turn your mind away from
avarice and from grasping the possessions of others. O king! Let there be peace and harmony amongst us. We wish
for peace. Give us one province from your kingdom—Kushasthala, Vrikosthala, Asanti, Varanavata and whichever
else you pick as the ﬁfth and the last. O Suyodhana! Give ﬁve villages to the brothers.’108 O Sanjaya! O immense-

ly wise one! Let there be peace between us and our relatives. Let brother be united with brother, and let father be
united with son. With smiles, let the Panchalas mingle with the Kurus. I desire to see the Kurus and the Panchalas
uninjured. O son!109 O bull among the Bharata lineage! Let all of us live happily in peace. O Sanjaya! I am as
ready for peace, as I am for war. For the sake of dharma and artha, I can be mild. But I can also be terrible.”’
695(32)

Vaishampayana said, ‘With the permission of Pandava, Sanjaya then departed, having carried out all the instructions of the great-souled Dhritarashtra. Having reached Hastinapura, he entered swiftly and reaching the inner
quarters, told the gatekeeper, “O gatekeeper! Tell Dhritarashtra that I have returned after meeting the Pandavas. If
he is awake, tell him that Kshatta110 wishes to enter after the king knows about his return.” The gatekeeper said,
“O lord of the earth! I bow down before you. Sanjaya is here and is waiting at the gate, wishing to meet you. Your
messenger has returned, after meeting the Pandavas. O king! Issue orders about what he should do.” Dhritarashtra
replied, “Tell him that I am well and am waiting for him. Let Sanjaya be welcome and let him enter. I have always
been ready for him. Why is Kshatta waiting at the gate then?” With the king’s permission, the son of a suta entered
the large palace that was protected by wise and brave aryas. The king who was Vichitravirya’s son was seated on a
throne and he joined his hands in salutation. Sanjaya said, “O lord of the earth! I am Sanjaya and I am bowing
down before you. I have returned after meeting the Pandavas, gods among men. Yudhishthira, Pandu’s intelligent
son, has greeted you and has asked about your welfare. O king! He has affectionately asked about your sons and
wishes to know if you are happy with your sons and grandsons, and with your well-wishers and advisers, and with
all those who are earning a living through you.” Dhritarashtra replied, “O son!111 O Sanjaya! I am greeting you on
your return. Is Partha Ajatashatru happy? Is the king well with his sons, his advisers and the younger
Kouravas?”112
‘Sanjaya said, “Pandu’s son is well with his advisers, even more than you had had known him earlier. The intelligent one does that which ensures dharma and artha. He is extremely learned, has foresight and follows good conduct. The non-violent Pandava is devoted to supreme dharma. He thinks that dharma is superior to riches. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those who know him know that he will not follow happiness or pleasure that is
against the norms of dharma. A man is controlled by others,113 like a wooden puppet on a string. When I witness
Pandava’s hardships, I think that earlier karma114 determines the destiny of beings. On seeing the taints of your
deeds, with the evil it leads to and its terrible form, I think that as long as a man desires that which is right, a man
obtains praise. Ajatashatru has given up evil, like a snake discards its useless skin. Having transferred sins to you,
the brave Yudhishthira is resplendent in his conduct. O king! Learn how your deeds have harmed you. They are not
united with dharma and artha and are not the conduct of aryas. O king! You have only obtained ill fame. That evil
cannot be removed and will be with you in the hereafter. You have ignored them and have followed your son and
wish to obtain an objective that is impossible to attain. The earth has loudly proclaimed that this is adharma. O
foremost among those of the Bharata lineage! This was not an act that was worthy of you. One who is weak in intelligence, one who is born from an inferior lineage, one who is violent, one who remembers enmity for a long
time, one who does not know about the conduct of kshatriyas and one who is weak in valour, such a person will
not be able to overcome the disaster that adharma brings. One who is born in a noble lineage, one who follows
dharma, one who is famous, one who is greatly learned, one who is in control of his soul and one who places dharma and artha over everything else, such a person lives happily. In no other way, can one overcome destiny. How
can one who has intelligent advisers, who are well versed in the canons of dharma and artha, be foolish enough to
commit such a violent act, as if one did not possess all the good counsel? These learned advisers have assembled
together and have always advised about your tasks. They have arrived at the ﬁrm conviction that the hell that will
wreak the destruction of the Kurus is imminent. The Kurus will be destroyed before their time, if Ajatashatru
counters the evil with evil and passes on the evil to you. There will be censure for you in this world. Was it not in
accordance with the will of the gods that Partha set his eyes on the supreme world?115 He ascended there, and was
honoured. There is no doubt that this wasn’t because of human action. In examining the qualities of deeds, that
which has been and that which will be, King Bali came to the conclusion that the present was transient.116 He decided that destiny was the root cause of everything. The eyes, the ears, the nose, the skin and the tongue—these are

the sources of knowledge for beings. When the thirst has been quenched, these are content. Therefore, one should
happily control them.117 There are others who think that if performed well, a man’s deeds take on forms of their
own. The child is the outcome of the deeds of the mother and the father and in due course, grows through the intake of food. O king! One is subject to pleasant and unpleasant, happiness and unhappiness, censure and praise.
One censures others for committing a crime and praises them for good conduct. I censure you for discord among
the Bharatas. This will lead to the destruction of many beings. Because of the crimes of your deeds, the Kurus will
be burnt up, like the one with the black form118 burns up dry wood. O king! O Indra among kings! Among all
those in this world, you alone have come under the control of the sons that were born to you. At the time of the
gambling match, you praised the one whose soul was overtaken by desire. Now witness the calamity that has been
brought down on him. O Indra among men! You accepted those who are unworthy. O king! You rejected those
who are worthy. O Kouravya! You are now feeble and are incapable of protecting this extensive earth. I am exhausted from the speed of the chariot. O lion among men! I seek your permission to sleep. In the assembly hall tomorrow, the assembled Kurus will listen to the words that Ajatashatru has sent.”’

Section Fifty-One
Prajagara Parva
This section has 541 shlokas and nine chapters.
Chapter 696(33): 104 shlokas
Chapter 697(34): 83 shlokas
Chapter 698(35): 67 shlokas
Chapter 699(36): 72 shlokas
Chapter 700(37): 60 shlokas
Chapter 701(38): 44 shlokas
Chapter 702(39): 70 shlokas
Chapter 703(40): 30 shlokas
Chapter 704(41): 11 shlokas
Prajagara means sleeplessness, lying awake at night. This parva is so named because Dhritarashtra cannot sleep at night. He still does not know
Yudhishthira’s message and summons Vidura. Vidura advises Dhritarashtra.
696(33)

Vaishampayana said, ‘The immensely wise Dhritarashtra, lord of the earth, told the gatekeeper, “I wish to see
Vidura. Bring him here immediately.” Having been sent by Dhritarashtra, the messenger told Kshatta,1 “O immensely wise one! Our lord, the great king, wishes to see you.” Having been thus addressed, Vidura went to the
king’s palace and said, “O gatekeeper! Inform Dhritarashtra that I am here.” The gatekeeper said, “O Indra among
kings! On your instructions, Vidura has arrived. He wishes to see your feet. Instruct me about what he should do.”
Dhritarashtra replied, “Allow the immensely wise and far-sighted Vidura to enter. I am always ready to see
Vidura.” The gatekeeper said, “O Kshatta! Enter the inner quarters of the wise and great king. The king has told
me that he is always ready to see you.” Vidura then entered Dhritarashtra’s abode. He joined his hands in salutation
and told the lord of men, who was immersed in thought, “O immensely wise one! I am Vidura and I have arrived
here on your instructions. Please tell me if there is anything that I should do.” Dhritarashtra said, “O Vidura! Sanjaya has returned. He has left after berating me. He will recount Ajatashatru’s words in the midst of the assembly
hall. I do not yet know the words that brave one among the Kurus2 has addressed towards me. Therefore, my body
is burning and I am suffering from sleeplessness. What do you think should be heard by someone who is awake
and whose mind is burning? O son!3 Tell me. You are knowledgeable about dharma and artha. Ever since Sanjaya
has returned after meeting the Pandavas, I am unable to obtain the peace of mind that I should. All my senses are
distracted now. I am reﬂecting about what he is going to say.” Vidura replied, “If a weak one is attacked by a
stronger enemy, if one’s faculties are weak, if one has lost everything to a lecher or a thief, one is overcome by
sleeplessness. O lord among men! It is certain that you have not been touched by these great calamities. Nor can
you be tormented because you are covetous of the riches of others.” Dhritarashtra said, “I wish to hear from you
words about dharma and about that which leads to supreme welfare. In this lineage of rajarshis, you are the only
one who is regarded as wise.”
‘Vidura said, “One who does not serve that which is censured, is praised. He is not an atheist and has faith.
These are the signs of one who is learned. One who does not deviate from his objective because of anger, joy,
pride, false modesty and a false sense of vanity, is regarded as learned. One whose planned deeds and counsel are

not known to others, but are known only after the tasks have been executed, is regarded as learned. He whose
deeds are not obstructed by cold and heat, fear and affection, prosperity and adversity, is regarded as learned. One
who wisely follows dharma and artha, and artha over kama for the sake of the hereafter, is regarded as learned.
They exert to the best of their ability. They act to the best of their ability. They disregard nothing. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! Such men are regarded as learned. He learns quickly. He listens patiently. He pursues the objective because of artha, not because of kama. If not asked, he does not dabble in the affairs of others. These are the
ﬁrst signs of a wise and learned one. They do not hanker after the unobtainable. They do not sorrow over what has
been lost. They are not deluded in times of adversity. Such men are regarded as learned. He decides on a course of
action and does not stop before the task has been accomplished. He does not waste time and is in control of his
soul. Such a man is regarded as learned. They are attracted towards the tasks of aryas. They perform tasks that
bring prosperity. They do not disregard that which ensures welfare. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Such ones
are learned. He is not overjoyed because of honours. He is not tormented because of neglect. He is as undisturbed
as a pond near the Ganga. Such a person is regarded as learned. He knows about the nature of all beings. He is familiar with the nature of all deeds. He knows the nature of men. Such a man is regarded as learned. He is skilled in
words. He can talk about diverse subjects. He is quick to understand and possesses intellect. He can quickly explain what is in the texts. Such a man is regarded as learned. His wisdom facilitates his learning. His learning facilitates his wisdom. He does not transgress the norms laid down for aryas. Such a person obtains the appellation of a
learned one.
‘“If one is not learned and vain, if one is poor and proud, if one strives for artha without performing deeds, the
learned regard such persons as stupid. He gives up his own objectives and tends to the objectives of others. He resorts to falsehood for the sake of his friends. Such a person is regarded as stupid. He desires that which should not
be desired. He gives up those that should be desired. He hates those who are stronger. Such a person is stupid in
intelligence. He acts like a friend towards an enemy. He hates and harms those who are friends. He postpones tasks
that should be performed. He procrastinates in every way. He takes a long time over something that should be done
fast. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Such a person is stupid. He enters when he is not invited. He speakes a lot,
even though he has not been asked. He trusts those who should not be trusted. He is worst among men and is stupid in his intelligence. Though he is the one who should be blamed, he is quick to blame others. He is angered,
though he has no powers. Such a person is regarded as the most stupid among men. He ignores his own strength.
He gives up dharma and artha. He wishes to obtain that which is unattainable, but without performing tasks. He is
said to be stupid in his intelligence. O king! He instructs those who are not his pupils. He serves those who are hollow. He honours those who are ignoble. Such a person is known as stupid in intelligence. However, one who has
obtained a great deal of riches, learning and power, and yet roams around without any show of pride, he is said to
be learned. Who can be crueller than one who eats, lives and dons expensive garments alone, without sharing them
with his servants? One person performs evil deeds, but the fruits are borne by many. Others enjoy, while the doer
alone is blamed. A single arrow released by an archer may kill, or it may not kill. But when an intelligent person
uses his intelligence,4 it can destroy a kingdom, together with its king.
‘“Having differentiated between the two5 with the use of the one,6 bring the three7 under your control by using
the four.8 Conquer the ﬁve.9 Know the six.10 Stay away from the seven11 and be happy. Poison kills one. Only one
is killed with a weapon. But the disclosure of counsel destroys a kingdom and a king, with the subjects. One
should not eat tasty food alone. One should not think only about one’s own objectives. One should not travel alone.
One should not be awake alone, when the others are asleep. There is one without a second.12 O king! You have not
been able to comprehend Him. He is the truth. He is the staircase to heaven. He is like a boat in the ocean. Those
who are forgiving have one taint, and there is not a second one to be seen. People think that a forgiving one is incapable. There is one dharma that is supreme. Forgiveness alone brings supreme peace. Learning brings supreme satisfaction. Non-violence takes one to happiness.
‘“The earth destroys two, like a snake destroys those who live in holes—a king who is not aggressive, and a
brahmana who has not dwelt away from home.13 Through two deeds, a man can be radiant in this world—by not
speaking harsh words and by not requesting dishonourable ones. O tiger among men! There are two kinds of people who trust others—women who desire those who are desired,14 and people who honour those who are hon-

oured.15 There are two sharp thorns that dry up the body—desire on the part of those who are poor, and anger on
the part of those who are powerless. O king! There are two kinds of men who are established above heaven—powerful ones who are forgiving, and generous ones who are poor. There are two kinds of abuse of property that has
been acquired through rightful means—giving it to those who are unworthy, and not giving it to those who are
worthy.
‘“O bull among the Bharata lineage! It has been heard that there are three courses of action for men—inferior,
medium and superior. This is known to those who are learned in the Vedas. O king! There are three kinds of men—
inferior, medium and superior.16 They should accordingly be employed in three different kinds of duties. O king!
There are three who cannot own property—a wife, a slave and a son. Whatever riches they obtain, belongs to the
one who owns them.
‘“Those who are learned have said that a greatly strong king should avoid consultations with four—those who
have limited intelligence, those who procrastinate, those who are lazy and those who are ﬂatterers. O father!17 You
have been blessed with fortune. While you are following the dharma of a householder, four kinds of people should
dwell in your house—a relative who is aged, one who is born from a noble lineage but is in distress, a friend who
is poor and a sister who does not have offspring. O great king! When he was asked by Indra of the thirty gods, Brihaspati said that four things bear instant fruit. Listen to them—the resolution of the gods, the intellect of the wise,
the humility of the learned and the destruction of those who perform evil deeds.
‘“O bull among the Bharata lineage! Men must carefully tend to ﬁve ﬁres—the father, the mother, the ﬁre, one’s
own self and the preceptor. Through worshipping ﬁve, one obtains fame in this world—gods, ancestors, men, mendicants and guests. There are ﬁve who follow, wherever you go—friends, enemies, those who are neutral, those
you live on and those who are supported by you. On earth, if there is a hole in any of the ﬁve senses,18 it is like
wisdom draining out from the bottom of a water pot.
‘“A man who desires prosperity must avoid six vices—sleep, drowsiness, fear, anger, laziness and procrastination. A man must avoid these six, like a broken boat in the ocean—a preceptor who does not teach, an ofﬁciating
priest who has not studied, a king who does not protect, a wife who speaks unpleasantly, a cowherd who desires a
village and a barber who desires the forest. There are six qualities that a man must never give up—truthfulness,
generosity, endeavour, lack of jealousy, forgiveness and fortitude. He who always controls these six qualities within himself and has conquered his senses, is never touched by sin and is united with prosperity. There are six who
live off six others and there isn’t a seventh like this—thieves live on those who are careless, physicians on diseases, wayward women on lechers, priests on those who offer sacriﬁces, kings on those who quarrel and the
learned always live on fools.
‘“A king must always avoid addiction to seven vices. Otherwise, kings who have established themselves are often destroyed because of these—women, dicing, hunting, drinking, harsh words as the ﬁfth, great severity of punishment and the abuse of wealth.
‘“There are eight causes that lead to a man’s destruction—ﬁrst, hatred of brahmanas; acting against brahmanas;
acquiring the wealth of brahmanas; a desire to kill brahmanas; delight when they are censured; disapproval when
they are praised; not remembering them when tasks have to be performed; and ﬁnding fault when they ask. Knowing these vices, a wise and learned man should avoid them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! These are the
eight that are the fresh butter of delight and are seen to provide happiness when they are present—union with
friends, large inﬂows of wealth, the embrace of a son, sexual intercourse, pleasant conversation at the right time,
high positions for one’s allies, the attainment of desired objectives and honour in the assembly of men.
‘“The abode has nine gates, three pillars and ﬁve witnesses. These are presided over by the soul.19 The learned
one who knows this is supreme among the wise.
‘“O Dhritarashtra! There are ten who do not know dharma. Listen to who they are—the intoxicated, the deluded,
the insane, those who are tired, those who are angry, those who are hungry, those who are hasty, those who are
timid, those who are greedy and those who are driven by lust. These are the ten. Therefore, a learned one should
avoid such sentiments.
‘“On this, an ancient history is recounted, about what the Indra among the asuras, told Sudhanva for the welfare
of his son.20 ‘The king who gives up desire and anger and donates riches to worthy ones is discriminating, learned

and is quick to act. He is regarded as an authority by all the worlds. He knows how to make other men trust him.
Once crimes have been established, he punishes with the staff. He knows his limits and is also forgiving. All prosperity descends on such a person. He does not think lightly of a weak enemy, but uses his intelligence to deal with
him. He does not desire conﬂict with those who are strong. He exhibits valour when it is the right time and is wise.
He is not distressed in a time of calamity. He perseveres in his efforts, without being distracted. In times of unhappiness, he conquers his soul. Such an eminent one triumphs over his enemies. He never remains away from home
without a purpose. He does not have an alliance with the wicked, or consort with another person’s wife. He is not
insolent, or prone to thievery. He is not ungrateful, or addicted to liquor. A person who avoids these traits is always
happy. He never strives extremely hard for objectives. When he is appealed to, he states the exact truth. He does
not enter into a quarrel over a triﬂe. He is not stupid and is not angered when he is not honoured. He is not envious
towards others. When he is weak, he does not enter into a feud. He does not speak too much and pardons a quarrel.
Such a person is praised everywhere. He never dons the demeanour of the arrogant. He never speaks to others
about his manliness. He does not utter harsh words in a moment of forgetfulness. People always look upon him affectionately. He does not revive enmity that has been paciﬁed. He does not have excessive arrogance, or excessive
humility. When faced with difﬁculties, he does not act out of anger. Such a person is regarded as supreme among
those who follow arya codes of conduct. He is not supremely delighted at his own happiness. He is not content at
the unhappiness of others. After having donated, he does not repent later. Such a person is regarded as virtuous and
arya in conduct. He wishes to know about the dharma and conduct of different countries and different races.21
Wherever he goes, he always learns about the superior and the inferior. Such a person is regarded as a lord by great
ones. He avoids insolence, delusion, jealousy, evil action, hatred against the king, ingratitude and historical enmity,
and conversations with the drunk, the insane and the wicked. Such a person is regarded as foremost among wise
ones. Self-control, purity, devotion to the gods, auspicious acts, penances, as laid down by many people—one who
observes these daily rites, is honoured by the gods. He has a matrimonial alliance with an equal, and not with
someone who is inferior. He has friendships and dealing and conversations with those who are equal. He places the
possession of special qualities above everything else. He is wise and his conduct is in accordance with the best policy. He eats in moderation, after having shared with those who are dependent on him. He sleeps little, but performs
a lot of tasks. If asked, he gives even to his enemies. Calamities never confront a person with a soul like that. The
desires, intentions and motivations behind his deeds are never known to others. His counsels are kept secret. Such
a person’s objectives are never unfulﬁlled, not even by a triﬂe. He is engaged in the welfare of all beings. He is
truthful, mild, generous and is pure in his sentiments. He is known among his relatives as a great gem. Such a man
is ashamed of his own faults. He is revered by all the worlds as a preceptor. His energy is inﬁnite. His mind is excellent and he is controlled. He is radiant in his energy, like the sun.’22
‘“King Pandu was tormented by a curse. Five sons were born to him in the forest, the equals of ﬁve Indras. Under your supervision, those children grew up and were trained. O Ambika’s son!23 They are now waiting to follow
your instructions. O father!24 If you return their rightful kingdom back, you will be happy and rejoice with your
sons. O Indra among men! Your intentions will no longer be questioned by gods and men.”’
697(34)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “What should a tormented and sleepless person do? Tell me what you think is the right course
of action. O son!25 Amongst us, you are skilled in knowledge of dharma and artha. O Vidura! Instruct me and tell
me exactly. O one who is not weak in spirit! Use your wisdom to tell me what you think to be the best for
Ajatashatru and tell me what you think to be the best for the Kurus. I am anxious about evil and can foresee evil. O
learned one! Tell me completely and truthfully about everything that Ajatashatru desires.”
‘Vidura replied, “Even if one is not asked, one should speak to one whom one does not wish to see defeated—be
it good or bad, hateful or pleasant. O king! Therefore, since I desire the welfare of the Kurus, I will tell you. I will
speak words that ensure welfare and are in accordance with dharma. Listen. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Do not set your mind on deeds that can only be attained through falsehood and inappropriate means. O king! If a
deed undertaken correctly through appropriate means does not succeed, a learned one does not distress his mind
over that. Deeds have consequences and one should duly reﬂect on a deed and its consequences. An act should not

be undertaken in haste. Examining a deed and its consequences, and one’s own capacity, a wise one decides
whether an act should be done or should not be done. If he26 does not know about the expanse of his kingdom,
about how it can be extended, how it might decay, the treasury, population and punishments, his kingdom does not
remain. One who remembers these measures and knows about dharma and artha, is one who retains the kingdom.
Having obtained a kingdom, one should not become haughty, because haughtiness destroys prosperity, just as old
age destroys physical beauty. Because it does not consider the consequences, a greedy ﬁsh goes by appearances
and swallows an iron hook that is concealed in a dainty morsel. One who desires prosperity should consider what
can be swallowed, whether it can be digested if swallowed, and whether it will ensure welfare if digested. If one
plucks fruits that are not ripe from a tree, one does not obtain any juice from them. But then again, the seed is destroyed. If one obtains right fruit at the right time, one obtains juice from the fruit, and again fruit from the seed.
Bees suck honey, but protect the ﬂowers. In that way, one27 should take riches from people, but without causing
them violence. Flower can be collected after ﬂower, but the root must not be severed. One should be like the maker
of a garland in a grove and not like a burner of charcoal.28 Think about an intended action. ‘How will I gain from
it? How will I gain if I don’t do it?’ Having thought in this way, a man should decide whether to do something, or
not do it. There are acts that should not be undertaken, because the exertions spent on them will be fruitless. There
are others that bring gain, require little effort and bring great gain. A wise man undertakes these swiftly and removes obstacles from these. If he29 looks at everything in a straightforward way, as if he is drinking it with his
eyes, his subjects love him, even if he is seated immobile and silent. When one looks favourably at the world in
four ways—through sight, thoughts, speed and deeds—the world also looks upon one favourably. But if beings are
frightened of him, like deer fear the hunter, he may obtain the earth, up to the frontiers of the ocean, but will still
lose it.
‘“One may obtain the kingdom of fathers and grandfathers through one’s own energy. But if one uses inappropriate deeds, one can cause its destruction, like wind scattering the clouds. The earth is full of riches. It promotes
and increases the prosperity of a king who follows the dharma followed by virtuous ones from the beginning. If
one abandons dharma and resorts to adharma, the earth contracts, like a piece of leather inserted into ﬁre. The efforts made to protect one’s own kingdom should be similar to those that are made to destroy another one’s kingdom. A kingdom should be obtained through dharma. It should be protected through dharma. With dharma as the
root, the kingdom will be prosperous and will not decay or be destroyed. One should look for substance in everything, the ravings of a lunatic or the crawling of an infant, like gold extracted from rock. A wise man collects good
conduct, good speech and good deeds, like one who lives off ears of corn gathers them.30 Cows see through their
sense of smell. Brahmanas see through the Vedas. Kings see through spies. Ordinary people see through their eyes.
A cow that is difﬁcult to milk faces a great deal of discomfort. O king! But one that is easy to milk is not discomforted. That which is bent without heating, is not heated. The wood that is bent on its own is never heated. Because
of this image, a wise one bends to one who is stronger. Bending before someone who is stronger is like bending
before Indra himself. Animals are sustained by clouds,31 kings by their friends and relatives. Husbands are the relatives of wives. The Vedas are the relatives of brahmanas. Dharma is sustained through truth. Learning is sustained
through yoga. Beauty is sustained through ablutions. Lineage is sustained through conduct. Grain is sustained
through it being measured. Horses are sustained through exercise and cows through constant supervision. Women
are sustained through bodices.32
‘“It is my view that if there is inferior conduct, noble lineage signiﬁes nothing. Good conduct stands out, especially among one who is low-born. He who is envious of another one’s riches, beauty, valour, lineage, happiness,
fortune and honour, suffers from a disease that has no cure. If one is frightened of doing the wrong thing, not doing
the right thing, or of one’s counsel being disclosed at the wrong time, this is like getting intoxicated on liquor.
Those who are prone to intoxication get drunk because of knowledge, get drunk because of riches, and as a third
reason, get drunk because of noble birth. But the virtuous are strong because they control such intoxication. If
those who are virtuous ask those who are not virtuous for a small favour, those who are not virtuous think that they
have come to be regarded as virtuous. The soul is the refuge of the virtuous. The virtuous are the refuge of the virtuous. The virtuous are the refuge of those who are not virtuous. But those who are not virtuous are never the
refuge of those who are virtuous. A well-dressed one triumphs in an assembly, a possessor of cattle triumphs in a

congregation. One with a vehicle triumphs over a road. One with good conduct triumphs everywhere. Good conduct is most important in a man. If that is destroyed, there is nothing to be gained from life, riches, wealth or relatives. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Meat is the supreme dish for the rich, cow’s milk for those who are in the
middle and salt for those who are poor. But the poor always have the best of food. Their hunger generates succulence in the food, extremely rare among those who are opulent. Those who are rich in the world have no capacity
to eat. O Indra among kings! But the poor digest pieces of wood. Those who are inferior fear a loss in livelihood
and those who are in the middle fear death. The greatest fear for those who are supreme on earth is disrespect. The
evil intoxication with riches is worse than intoxication with liquor and similar objects. He who is intoxicated with
riches does not come to his senses until he confronts a downfall. In this world, men are obsessed with their senses,
unless they control the objects of their senses, just as the nakshatras are tormented by the planets. For one who is
conquered by attraction towards the natural ﬁve senses, calamities increase, like the moon waxing during shuklapaksha. One who wishes to conquer his advisers without conquering himself and one who wishes to conquer his
enemies without conquering his advisers are eventually destroyed. He who ﬁrst conquers his soul, as it is in the
form of a country, will certainly conquer his advisers and his enemies. He who controls his senses, conquers his
advisers, wields his staff against those who cause offence, acts with deliberation and is patient, is blessed with
prosperity.
‘“O king! A man’s body is like a chariot. The soul is the charioteer and the senses are the horses. When those
excellent horses are skilfully controlled, the patient charioteer is happy. When they33 are not controlled, that leads
to destruction, just as uncontrolled and untrained horses bring calamity to a charioteer on the road. One who is
foolish is guided by his senses. He sees good where there is evil and evil where there is good. He thinks that unhappiness is happiness. If one gives up dharma and artha and comes under the control of the senses, one swiftly
decays and loses prosperity, life, riches and wife. One who owns riches but is himself owned by the senses, is dislodged from this riches because he is conquered by his senses. One should seek to know the soul, with the mind,
the intelligence and the senses controlled. The soul is one’s friend and the soul is also one’s enemy. O king! Desire
and anger are like two large ﬁsh that are caught in a small net and lead to the destruction of wisdom. If one considers dharma and artha before accumulating possessions, then having obtained the possessions, one is always happy.
He who does not conquer the ﬁve inner enemies34 that lead to the destruction of intelligence, but wishes to conquer
other enemies, is subjugated by his enemies. It can be seen that great-souled kings are killed through their own
deeds, because they have not been able to control their senses and because they lust for other kingdoms. Those
who commit sin and those who do not commit sin receive equal punishment if they consort with each other, just as
wet kindling burns when it is mixed with the dry. Therefore, one should never ally with the wicked. A man who is
deluded and does control the ﬁve enemies and their ﬁve needs, is swallowed by disaster. Lack of malice, uprightness, purity, contentment, pleasant speech, self-control and truthfulness are not the attributes of those who are evil
in their souls. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those who are inferior are not characterized by knowledge of
the soul, steadfastness, patience, constant adherence to dharma, carefulness in speech and generosity. Those who
are stupid try to cause injury to the wise through anger and slander. The speaker35 bears the guilt, but one who forgives is freed. Violence is the strength of the evil and decreed punishment is the strength of kings. Service is the
strength of women. Forgiveness is the strength of those who possess qualities.
‘“O king! It has been thought that control of speech is the most difﬁcult. It is not possible to speak wisely and
copiously on many and varied subjects. Words spoken well bring many beneﬁts. O king! In the same way, words
spoken ill bring many evils. A forest pierced by arrows or cut down by axes grows again. But a terrible wound
caused by harsh speech is never healed. Shafted arrows, hollow arrows and iron arrows can be plucked out from a
body. But it is impossible to uproot the stakes of words from the heart. The arrows of words are released from the
mouth. Pierced by these, one sorrows night and day. They descend on the weak spots of others. Therefore, learned
ones do not release these on others. When the gods wish to vanquish a man, they distract his intelligence and they
see right in what is wrong. The intelligence is tainted and destruction is nigh. Wrong, in the appearance of right, is
not removed from his heart. O bull among the Bharata lineage! That clouded intelligence has now overcome your
sons because of their enmity towards the Pandavas, and you do not know this. O Dhritarasthra! Yudhishthira has
all the auspicious marks and is ﬁt to rule the three worlds. He is your pupil and should reign. Even more than all

your sons, he has been honoured by fortune. He has energy and wisdom and knows about the nature of dharma and
artha. O Indra among kings! He is supreme among those who uphold dharma and because of his compassion and
non-violence, and because of his respect towards you, he has undergone many hardships.”’
698(35)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O immensely intelligent one! Yet again, tell me words that are full of dharma and artha. I am
not satisﬁed from listening to your varied words.”
‘Vidura replied, “It is probably the case that bathing in all the tirthas and kindness towards all beings are equal.
But perhaps kindness is superior. O lord! Always be kind towards your sons. You will obtain supreme fame here
and in heaven after your death. O tiger among men! As long as a man’s pure deeds are recounted in this world, he
obtains greatness in the world of heaven. On this, the ancient history of the conversation between Virochana and
Sudhanva, over Keshini, is cited.
‘“Keshini asked,36 ‘O Virochana! Are brahmanas or the sons of Diti superior? With whom should Sudhanva not
be seated on the couch?’
‘“Virochana replied, ‘O Keshini! We are the descendants of Prajapati and are the supreme among beings. This
entire world belongs to us. Who are the gods and who are the brahmanas?’
‘“Keshini said, ‘O Virochana! Be seated here and we will await Sudhanva’s arrival in the morning. I will see
both of you together in this pavilion.’
‘“Virochana replied, ‘O fortunate one! O timid one! I will do as you say. In the morning, you will see me and
Sudhanva together.’
‘“Sudhanva said,37 ‘O son of Prahlada! I cannot touch that golden seat occupied by you. I will then descend to
the same level as you and I cannot be seated with you.’
‘“Virochana replied, ‘O Sudhanva! You deserve a wooden plank, a handful of kusha grass or a cushion made of
grass. You do not deserve to sit on the same seat as I.’
‘“Sudhanva said, ‘Even your father honours me and sits below me when we are seated together. You are a child
reared in happiness at home and do not know anything.’
‘“Virochana replied, ‘O Sudhanva! I am offering gold, cows, horses and all the other riches that we asuras possess, as a stake. Let us put the question to those who know.’
‘“Sudhanva said, ‘O Virochana! Forget your gold, cows and horses. Let us stake our lives and put the question
to those who know.’
‘“Virochana replied, ‘Having staked our lives, where will we go? I will not stand before the gods, nor before
men.’
‘“Sudhanva said, ‘After having staked our lives, we will go to your father. Prahlada will not utter a falsehood,
even for the sake of his son.’
‘“Prahlada said, ‘These two have never been together before and have now appeared together. They are arriving
by the same road, like two angry serpents. You have never travelled together before. O Virochana! How is it that
you are travelling together now? I am asking you about your friendship with Sudhanva.’
‘“Virochana replied, ‘There is no friendship between me and Sudhanva. We have staked our lives. O Prahlada! I
am asking you a question. Please do not utter a falsehood.’
‘“Prahlada said, ‘Let water and madhuparka38 be brought for Sudhanva. O brahmana! You deserve to be honoured by me. A fat and white cow has been prepared for you.’
‘“Sudhanva replied, ‘Water and madhuparka have been offered to me on the way. O Prahlada! Answer the question that we are asking you.’
‘“Prahlada said, ‘O brahmana! You are like another son who is standing before me as a witness. When the two
of you are debating a question, who am I to say anything about it? O Sudhanva! I am asking you a question. Where
does the false witness, who neither speaks the truth nor lies, spend the night?’
‘“Sudhanva replied, ‘A false witness spends the night like a woman ignored,39 like one who has been defeated
in gambling, or like one whose limbs are exhausted from carrying a load. A false witness spends the night like
someone who is debarred from the city and remains hungry outside the gates, where he always sees many enemies.

A lie for the sake of an animal implies that ﬁve are killed.40 A lie for the sake of a cow implies that ten are killed.
A lie for the sake of a horse implies that one hundred are killed. A lie for the sake of a man implies that one thousand are killed. A lie for the sake of gold implies that those who have been born, and those who are yet to be born,
are killed. A lie for the sake of land implies that everything is killed. Therefore, do not lie for the sake of land.’
‘“Prahlada said, ‘O Virochana! Angiras is superior to me and Sudhanva is superior to you. His mother is superior to your mother. Therefore, you have been won by him. O Virochana! This Sudhanva now owns your life. O
Sudhanva! I desire that you should give it41 back to Virochana.’
‘“Sudhanva replied, ‘O Prahlada! Since you have adhered to dharma and have not uttered a falsehood out of affection, I will give you this rare present of a son. O Prahlada! Virochana, this son of yours, has been given by me
to you. He should wash my feet before the maiden.’”
‘Vidura said, “O Indra among kings! Therefore, you should not utter a falsehood for the sake of land. By deviating for the sake of your son, do not head towards destruction with your sons and your advisers. The gods do not
protect with a staff, like herdsmen looking after animals. They give wisdom to those they wish to protect. There is
no doubt that a man obtains success to the extent that he sets his mind on doing that which is good. Hymns do not
save from calamities one who resorts to illusion and deceit. When the time for destruction arrives, hymns desert
him, like birds who have grown wings leaving a nest. It is said that one should discard intoxicating liquor, quarrels
that are extensive and with many, discord between the husband and the wife, dissension among relatives, hatred
towards the king, disputes between women and men and a road that is wrong. There are seven who should not be
summoned as witnesses—a palmist,42 a trader who has been a thief earlier, a skilled fowler, a physician, an enemy,
a friend and an actor.43 An agnihotra performed out of pride, silence that is based on pride, studying that is done
out of pride and sacriﬁces performed out of pride—these are four things that are not fearful. But they become fearful when they are performed inappropriately. An arsonist, a poisoner, a pimp,44 a seller of soma, one who makes
arrows, a soothsayer, one who injures friends, one who consorts with another’s wife, an abortionist, one who violates his preceptor’s bed, a brahmana who drinks liquor, one who is unnecessarily harsh in use of words, a base
person, an atheist, one who criticizes the Vedas, a bribe-taker, an outcast, one who is niggardly despite possessing
riches and one who injures when asked for protection—these are the equals of those of who kill brahmanas. Gold
is tested in a ﬁre made of straw, one who is noble through the yoke that he bears, a virtuous man through his conduct, a brave one at the time of fear, a patient one when confronted with calamity and well-wishers and enemies in
times of great hardship. Old age destroys beauty, hope destroys steadfastness, death destroys life, jealousy destroys
dharma, anger destroys prosperity, association with the ignoble destroys conduct, lust destroys modesty and vanity
destroys everything. Prosperity arises from auspicious roots. It increases because of strong action. Its roots are
based on skill. It is based on self-control.
‘“There are eight qualities that illuminate a man—wisdom, noble birth, self-control, learning, valour, restraint in
speech, generosity according to capacity and gratitude. O father!45 These are great qualities, but there is one quality that gathers them together. When a king honours a man, that quality shines over all the other qualities. O king!
In the world of men, these eight are regarded as the signs of attainment of heaven. Of these, four are innate qualities of the virtuous and the other four are qualities pursued by the virtuous. Sacriﬁces, generosity with gifts, studying and austerities are innate qualities of the virtuous. Self-control, truthfulness, uprightness and non-violence are
the four qualities pursued by the virtuous. There is no assembly where there are no elders. They are not elders if
they do not speak about dharma. There is no dharma where there is no truth. There is no truth when there is immersion in falsehood. Truth, beauty, learning, knowledge, noble birth, good conduct, strength, riches, valour and
eloquence of speech—these ten ensure good social relationships. An evil man performs evil action and reaps evil
fruits. A good man performs good action and reaps good fruits. Evil acts, when performed again and again, destroy
wisdom. A man whose wisdom has been destroyed, always performs evil deeds. The wisdom of a man, who repeatedly performs good deeds, prospers. When wisdom prospers, a man always performs good deeds. A man who
is envious, a man who is malicious, a man who is cruel and a man who always makes enemies out of others, will
quickly confront great hardships, as they follow their evil ways. A man who is without envy, a man who is accomplished in wisdom and a man who always follows good conduct, never confronts great hardships and is lustrous
everywhere. He who learns wisdom from a wise one is learned. He obtains dharma and artha through his wisdom

and can strive towards happiness. During the day, he should act so that he can sleep happily at night. He should act
during the eight months so that he can live during the monsoons happily.46 During the young years, one should act
so that one can live happily in old age. Throughout one’s life, one should act so that one can live happily in the afterlife. People speak well of food that has been digested, a wife whose youth has passed, a warrior who is beyond
battles and an ascetic who has crossed over to the other side.47 If one tries to cover up a hole with riches that have
been obtained through adharma, it will remain uncovered and another will surface elsewhere. The preceptor controls those who control their souls. The king controls evil-souled ones. Vaivasvata Yama controls those who sin secretly. The powers of rishis, rivers, those born in noble lineages and great-souled ones cannot be recovered,48 nor
those of women and those who are evil in conduct. O king! One who worships brahmanas, one who is generous,
one who is liberal towards his relatives and a kshatriya who looks towards heaven, rule the earth for a long time.
The brave, the learned and those who know how to serve—these are the three kinds of men who pluck golden
ﬂowers from the earth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Deeds performed through intelligence are the best,
those performed with the arms are medium, and those performed by bearing loads with the thighs are the worst.
‘“Duryodhana and Shakuni are stupid, and Duhshasana is also like that. So is Karna. Having entrusted your
riches to them, how can you hope to thrive? O bull among the Bharata lineage! The Pandavas possess all the qualities. They look upon you as a father. Treat them like sons.”’
699(36)

‘Vidura said, “In this connection, we have heard the ancient history of the conversation between Atreya and the
Sadhyas quoted. The maharshi,49 rigid in his vows, was roaming around in the form of a swan. In ancient times,
the gods, the Sadhyas, asked the immensely wise one. ‘O maharshi! We are the gods known as the Sadhyas. We
can see you, but we are unable to understand who you are. It is our view that you are learned, steadfast and intelligent. Tell us great words that are full of wisdom.’
‘“The swan replied, ‘O immortals! I have heard that one’s task is to be steady, self-controlled, truthful and devoted to dharma. Having loosened all the knots of one’s heart, one should equally control that which is pleasant
and that which is unpleasant. When one is reviled, one should not revile in return. One should endure it. This torments the one who reviles and you enjoy the fruits of his good deeds. Do not revile. Do not insult an enemy. Do
not quarrel with friends, or serve those who are inferior. Do not be vain. Do not be inferior in conduct. Avoid harsh
words and those that come from anger. Terrible words pierce the innards, the bones and the hearts of men and burn
them. Therefore, one must avoid harsh and angry words. One who seeks delight in dharma, must always avoid
them. If one hurts men with harsh and scathing words, words that are like wounding thorns to men, such an unfortunate person bears death and misery on his face. When an enemy strikes with extremely sharp arrows that burn
like the ﬁre and the sun, and though pierced one withstands it, a wise one knows that the fruits of the good deeds of
the other one50 devolve on him. If one serves a virtuous man or one who is not virtuous, an ascetic or a thief, just
as garments are coloured by dyes, one is accordingly coloured by one’s associates. If one does not revile in return
when one is reviled and does not make others revile, if one does not strike back in return when one is struck and
does not make others strike, if one does not wish to injure an assailant, the gods wish for the association and arrival
of such a person. First, it is better not to speak than to speak. Second, if one speaks, one should speak the truth.
Third, if one speaks, one should say that which is pleasant. Fourth, if one speaks pleasant truth, it should be in accordance with dharma. A man becomes like the one he converses with, like the one he serves, and like the one he
wishes to be. One becomes free of whatever one keeps oneself away from. By turning away from everything, the
least bit of unhappiness vanishes. Such a person is not vanquished, nor does he wish to vanquish others. He has no
enmity, nor does he strike back. He is equally disposed towards praise and blame. He does not sorrow and he does
not rejoice. He wishes for the welfare of everyone and his mind does not harbour ill will towards anyone. He is
truthful, mild and self-controlled. Such a man is superior. One who does not placate without reason, one who gives
what he has promised and one who knows good deeds and bad ones—such a man is medium. He who is difﬁcult to
control, he who strikes back instead of being instructed, he who cannot control himself when overcome by anger,
he who is ungrateful, he who is without friends and evil-souled—these are the signs of a worst man. He does not
appreciate the good things done by others. He is distrustful of himself. He drives away his friends. Such a man is

the worst. If one desires prosperity for one’s own self, one must serve superior men and medium ones at the right
time. But one must never serve the worst. Riches can be obtained through force, constant endeavour, wisdom and
manliness. But this still does not warrant complete praise, or the conduct that characterizes those born in great
lineages.”
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “The gods desire those who have been born in great lineages, those who are extremely
learned and are always devoted to dharma and artha. O Vidura! I have a question to ask you. What makes a lineage
great?”
‘Vidura replied, “Great lineages of appropriate conduct are those in which seven qualities are resident—austerity, self-control, knowledge of the brahman, sacriﬁces, purity, marriages and constant donation of food. They do not
deviate from good conduct, nor do their descendants suffer. They practise dharma through good conduct. They desire to distinguish their lineages through deeds. They discard falsehood. Such are great lineages. Through the nonperformance of sacriﬁces, through bad marriages, through neglect of the Vedas and through transgression of dharma, lineages degenerate. By destroying what is due to the gods, by stealing the property of brahmanas and by causing offence to brahmanas, lineages degenerate. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! By oppressing brahmanas and
speaking ill of them and by stealing what has been entrusted to them, lineages degenerate. Lineages that own cattle, men and horses are not reckoned as foremost lineages if they are inferior in conduct. Lineages that are deﬁcient
in riches, but are good in conduct, accumulate great fame, and are reckoned as the foremost of lineages. Let no one
in our lineage engender enmity. Let no one who is an adviser to the king steal someone else’s property, exhibit enmity towards friends, indulge in falsehood or deceit and eat before the ancestors, the gods and the guests. No one
who kills a brahmana, no one who hates a brahmana and no one who causes an obstruction to agriculture should
have an association with us. A seat made of straw, a place on the ﬂoor, water and sweet words as the fourth, are
never lacking in the homes of the good. O king! O immensely wise one! Those who observe good conduct and are
pure in their deeds and devoted to dharma, offer these with complete devotion to others. O king! Even though it is
thin, a syandana tree51 can bear loads that other larger trees cannot. Thus, those born in great lineages can bear
great burdens that other men cannot.
‘“He whose anger engenders fear, is not a friend. He who has to be served with anxiety, is not a friend. He is a
friend who can be trusted like a father. Others are friends only by association. If someone is not a relative, but acts
through friendly sentiments, he is a relative, a friend, a refuge and a protector. A man who is ﬁckle in his mind and
does not serve the elders, if his disposition is changing and is not constant, it will be difﬁcult for him to collect
friends. Prosperity deserts those who are ﬁckle in their minds, those who are not in control of their souls and those
who are under the control of their senses, just as swans desert a dry lake. Sudden anger and paciﬁcation without
reason are not the signs of those who have good conduct, like clouds that are not constant. There are those who are
served by their friends, but are ungrateful and do not treat them well. Even predatory beasts do not touch their
corpses. Whether one is rich or poor, one must always ask favours from friends. Without asking, one does not
know whether the friends are deep or shallow. Grief destroys beauty. Grief destroys strength. Grief destroys
knowledge. Grief brings on disease. Nothing is gained through sorrow, only the body is tormented. This only delights the enemies. Therefore, do not sorrow in your mind.
‘“Man dies and is born again and again. Man withers and grows again and again. Man asks, and is asked, again
and again. Man grieves, and is grieved over, again and again. Happiness and unhappiness, prosperity and adversity,
gain and loss, death and life—all of these touch everyone by turn. Therefore, a wise person neither rejoices, nor
grieves. The six senses52 are not constant. Wherever one of them increases disproportionately, the intelligence
oozes out, like water from a pot with holes.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “The king53 shines like a thin and high ﬂame. I have treated him with falsehood. He will destroy my evil sons in battle. Everything always seems to be a cause for anxiety and therefore, my mind is always
anxious. O immensely intelligent one! Tell me that which will relieve me of my anxiety.”
‘Vidura replied, “O unblemished one! I see no peace for you, other than in learning, austerities, control of the
senses and discarding of avarice. Intelligence drives away fear. Austerities lead to greatness. Service of preceptors
leads to knowledge. Yoga leads to peace. Those who desire salvation roam around, free from love and hatred, and
without resorting to the merits of donations and the merits of the Vedas. After studies that have been learnt well,

after battles that have been fought well, after deeds that have been performed well and after austerities that have
been performed well, happiness increases. Those who have been separated from their relatives cannot ﬁnd sleep,
no matter how well the beds may have been prepared. O king! They ﬁnd no pleasure from intercourse with
women, or from the praises of bards and minstrels. Those who have been separated from their relatives do not observe dharma. Those who have been separated in this way do not ﬁnd happiness. Those who have been separated
in this way do not attain fame. Those who have been separated in this way do not appreciate peace. They are not
satisﬁed with the advice offered to them. They cannot ﬁnd yoga and kshema.54 O Indra among men! Those who
are separated have no end, but for destruction. Milk is possible in cows. Austerities are possible in brahmanas.
Fickleness is possible in women. Like that, fear is possible from one’s relatives. Those who are learned use the
metaphor of many long and thin threads. When they are joined together, because they are many, they can bear a
large load. O Dhritarashtra! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Relatives are like kindling. When separated, they
produce smoke. But when they are together, they blaze. O Dhritarashtra! Those who are severe towards brahmanas, women, relatives and cows fall down, like ripe fruit from stalks. A large tree that stands on its own, even if
it is strong and ﬁrmly rooted, can in an instant be brought down by the wind, with its branches and its trunk. But if
trees grow together and are ﬁrmly rooted, because they support each other, they can withstand stronger winds.
Whatever be the qualities he may possess, enemies think that a single man is capable of being harmed, like a single
tree against the wind. But because of mutual assistance and mutual support, relatives prosper together, like lotuses
in a lake. Brahmanas, cows, women, children, relatives, those whose food one has partaken and those who have
sought refuge must not be killed. O king! Even if he is rich, there is no quality greater in a man than that he should
be without disease. O fortunate one! Those who are ill are the equals of those who are dead. Even if there is no disease, anger is like a headache. It is harsh, sharp and pungent and leads to evil. The good swallow it up, while the
evil do not swallow it. O great king! Drink it up and be paciﬁed. Those who are oppressed by disease do not care
about the fruits. Nor do they obtain any satisfaction from objects. Those who are diseased are always full of unhappiness. They do not know the comforts of riches, or of happiness.
‘“O king! I spoke to you before, when I saw Droupadi won at the gambling match. But you did not listen to my
advice. ‘Restrain Duryodhana. Stop him from gambling. Those who are learned, shun deceit. It is not strength if it
runs counter to mildness. The mixed nature of dharma should be swiftly followed. Prosperity that is based on cruelty is destroyed, but if it is both mild and ﬁrm, it descends to the sons and the grandsons.’ Let the sons of Dhritarashtra protect the Pandavas. Let the sons of Pandu protect your sons. Let the Kurus be united in their counsel
and have the same enemies and friends. O king! Let them live in happiness and prosperity. O Ajamidha! You are
now the pillar of the Kouravas. The lineage of the Kurus depends on you. The Parthas are young and have been
tormented by their sojourn in the forest. O father!55 Preserve your fame by protecting them. Ensure an alliance between the Kouravas and the sons of Pandu. Let your enemies not seek out a weakness. O god among men! Let all
of them be established in truth. O Indra among men! Restrain Duryodhana.”’
700(37)

‘Vidura said, “O Indra among kings! O son of Vichitravirya! O fortunate one! O Indra among men! Svayambhuva
Manu56 named seventeen kinds of men who strike the air with their ﬁsts and seek to bend Indra’s unbendable bow
and also seek to bend the unbendable rays of the sun—he who instructs one who should not be taught; he who is
angered; he who worships his enemies; he who fails to protect women; he who asks for what should not be asked;
he who boasts; he who is well born, but does not perform proper acts; he who is weak, but always ﬁghts with
someone stronger; he who speaks to someone who does not have faith in him; he who desires what should not be
desired; he who is a father-in-law, but jokes with his daughter-in-law; he who dwells with his daughter-in-law, but
expects to be respected; he who sows his seed in another man’s ﬁeld;57 he who slanders women excessively; he
who having received something from someone, does not remember it; he who having given, boasts about it; and he
who seeks to prove that an evil person is honest. These men pursue the wind with nooses in their hands.58 A man
must be treated in accordance with what he is, and how he acts. That is dharma. One who uses deceit, must be
treated with deceit.59 One who is virtuous, must be treated with virtue.”

‘Dhritarashtra said, “It has been said in all the Vedas that a man has a life expectancy of one hundred years.
What is the reason for not attaining that entire age?”
‘Vidura replied, “O lord of men! Too much talk, too much pride, lack of renunciation, anger, avarice and enmity
with friends—these are six sharp swords that slice off the life expectancies of embodied beings. O fortunate one! O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is these that kill a man, not death. He who goes to the wife of someone who
trusts him, he who violates his preceptor’s bed, a brahmana who marries a shudra woman or drinks liquor and one
who kills someone who seeks refuge—all these are the equals of a killer of brahmanas. The learned texts say that
penances must be performed for associating with these. A generous householder whose words are not mixed with
falsehood, one who eats last,60 one who does not cause any violence, one who does not do any harm, one who
avoids discord, one who is grateful, one who is truthful, one who is mild—such a learned person goes to heaven. O
king! It is easy to ﬁnd men who are always pleasant in speech. But it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd a speaker or a listener for
unpleasant, but appropriate words. A king has a friend in a person who resorts to dharma and regardless of what is
pleasant or unpleasant to his lord, provides unpleasant but appropriate counsel. A man must be abandoned for the
sake of the lineage. A lineage must be abandoned for the sake of the village. A village must be abandoned for the
sake of the country. The earth must be abandoned for the sake of the soul. One must preserve riches for the sake of
a calamity. One must protect one’s wife with one’s riches. One must always protect oneself with one’s wife and
riches.
‘“O king! O descendant of Pratipa!61 At the time of the dicing, I had told you that it was not right. O son of Vichitravirya! But that brought you displeasure, like medicine and diet to a man who is diseased. You have vanquished the Pandavas, who are like peacocks with many-coloured feathers, with the sons of Dhritarashtra, who are
like crows. You have given up the lions and have resorted to the assembled jackals. O Indra among men! When the
time comes, you will sorrow over this. The servants are devoted to a lord who is not angry all the time and faithfully seek to ensure his welfare. They do not forsake him in times of difﬁculty. One should not seek to increase the
prosperity of strangers by curtailing the wages that are paid to servants. Deprived of comforts and denied what has
been due to them, even affectionate advisers turn against their lord. Having ﬁrst accounted for everything that must
be done and having determined wages according to the tasks, one must then seek to obtain appropriate allies. Allies accomplish what is difﬁcult to achieve. He who knows all the intentions of his lord, performs his tasks tirelessly. He speaks for his welfare and is affectionate and noble.62 He knows his own strengths and should be regarded
as one’s own self.63 If a servant is instructed but pays no attention to the words, or if he answers back when he is
instructed, if he argues because of insolence over his wisdom, he must instantly be dismissed.
‘“Lacking in pride, manly, swift to act, compassionate, polished, incapable of corruption, free from disease and
generous in speech—it is said that these eight qualities must characterize a messenger. A sensible man must never
go to the house of a stranger at the wrong time, out of a sense of conﬁdence. He must not conceal himself at a
crossroads in the night. He must not desire a woman whom the kings want. One should not seek counsel with one
who is in disguise, or one who associates with lowly company. There is no need to say that such a person is untrustworthy, but one should dismiss him on some pretext. A compassionate king must avoid ﬁnancial transactions
with a harlot, the servant of a king, a son, a brother, a widow with infant children, a mercenary and one who has
devoted servants.64 Eight qualities adorn a man who bathes—strength, beauty, pureness in pronunciation of vowels, delicacy of touch, fragrance, cleanliness, prosperity and association with beautiful women. Six qualities adorn
those who eat in moderation—immunity from disease, long life, happiness, strength, possession of children who
are healthy and freedom from accusations about being a glutton. One who performs improper acts, one who eats
excessively, one who is hated by men, one who is deceitful, one who is cruel, one who has no sense of time or
space, one who does not know how to dress—such people should not be given a lodging in the house. Even if one
is in need, one must not solicit help from a miser, one who speaks with malice, one who is not learned, one who
has fallen into evil ways, one who respects the unworthy, one who is cruel, one who makes enemies out of others
and one who is ungrateful. There are six worst kinds of men one must not serve—those engaged in vile deeds,
those who speak a lot, those who always utter lies, those lacking in devotion, those who are devoid of affection and
those who are vain. Success depends on one’s aides and aides depend on one’s success. They depend on each other
and each cannot succeed without the other. After one has obtained sons and not burdened them with one’s debts,

one must arrange a livelihood for them. After marrying off one’s daughters properly, one must resort to the forest
and live the life of a hermit. One must act for the welfare of all beings and for that which brings happiness to one’s
own self. This must be done for the sake of god and this is the root behind the success of dharma and artha. Intelligence, power, energy, spirit, resilience and resolution—if one possesses these, why should one be afraid that one
might not have a livelihood?
‘“Behold the evils from having engaged in a quarrel with the Pandavas. Even the gods, together with Shakra,
tremble at them. This enmity with your sons leads to a life full of constant anxiety and the destruction of fame,
leading to the delight of your enemies. You are an equal of Indra. This anger of Bhishma’s, of Drona’s, and of
King Yudhishthira’s, when ignited, will destroy the world, like a white planet that obliquely descends from the sky.
Your hundred sons, together with Karna, and the ﬁve Pandavas can rule the entire earth, up to the frontiers of the
ocean. O king! The sons of Dhritarashtra are the forest and it is my view that Pandu’s sons are the tigers. Do not
cut down the forest with its tigers. Do not drive the tigers away from the forest. The forest is protected by the
tigers. The tigers are protected by the forest. Those who are evil in intelligence do not wish to know about the good
qualities of others, as much as they wish to know about the qualities they don’t possess. If one wishes artha to be
accomplished completely, one must adhere to dharma right from the beginning. Artha is not separated from dharma, just as amrita is not separated from the world of heaven. All this, whether it is natural or not natural, is known
to one who withdraws from evil and devotes himself to welfare. He who serves dharma, artha and kama at the
right time, obtains a combination of dharma, artha and kama here, and in the hereafter. O king! One who controls
the rising force of anger and delight obtains prosperity and is not deluded when there is a calamity.
‘“Listen to me. Men always possess ﬁve kinds of strength and the strength of arms is said to be the most inferior
of strengths. O fortunate one! The obtaining of good advisers is said to be the second strength. Those who wish to
be victorious have said that the obtaining of riches is the third strength. O king! One’s natural strength, obtained
from a father and a grandfather, is the strength of noble birth and is said to be the fourth strength. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! But all these strengths are collected in the strength that is said to be the most superior, the
strength that derives from wisdom. If a man does great injury to another man and thereby excites his enmity, he
cannot presume to be secure, only because he is a long distance away. In deciding on what should be done, no wise
man can be certain about women, kings, snakes, studying, those who serve the enemy, objects of desire and the
span of life. For one who has been pierced by the arrow of wisdom, there are no physicians or medicines, no
mantras chanted with oblations, no benedictions, no incantations and no successful antidotes to poison.65 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A man should not ignore a snake, a ﬁre, a lion, or a son born from a noble lineage.
All of them are extremely energetic. The energy of ﬁre is great in this world. It is hidden in wood, but does not
consume the wood, unless it is ignited by others. But when the wood is drilled and kindled through friction, it66
uses its energy to swiftly burn up the wood, the forest and everything else. In the same way, those born in noble
lineages have the energy of the ﬁre. They are forgiving and seem to have no form, like ﬁre inside wood. You and
your sons follow the way of creepers. It is my view that Pandu’s sons are the shala trees. Creepers cannot grow
without resorting to a large tree. O king! O son of Ambika! You and your sons are the forest. O father!67 Know that
the Pandavas are the lions in the forest. Devoid of the lions, the forest will be destroyed. Without the forest, the lions will be destroyed.”’
701(38)

‘Vidura said, “When an aged one arrives, a young person’s life force rises up. He regains it by rising up and offering a respectful welcome.68 A seat must be given to a virtuous person who has arrived. Water must be brought so
that he can wash his feet. After he has been asked about his welfare, one can then recount one’s own affairs. He
must be patiently offered food, reﬂecting on what is appropriate. The learned ones have said that a person’s life is
in vain if one who is versed with the mantras does not accept his water, madhuparka and cow at his house, because
of his avarice, fears and miserliness. A physician, a maker of arrows, an impure man, a thief, a cruel one, a drunkard, an abortionist, a mercenary and one who sells the sacred texts69 do not deserve to be offered water as guests,
even if they are liked by the host. Salt, cooked food, curds, milk, honey, oil, ghee, sesamum seeds, meat, roots and
fruits, vegetables, dyed garments, all fragrances and molasses must not be sold.70 One who does not fall prey to

anger, one who regards a lump of earth and gold equally, one who has discarded grief, one who is beyond friendship and enmity, blame and praise and pleasure and displeasure and one who roams around completely oblivious,
is a true mendicant. A foremost and pure ascetic lives on wild rice, roots, nuts and vegetables. He is in control of
himself and is always attentive to ﬁre sacriﬁces. He dwells in the forest and is always attentive towards his guests.
After causing injury to an intelligent person, one should not be satisﬁed because one is a long distance away. An
intelligent person has long arms and when injured, will cause hurt in return. One should not trust those who should
not be trusted. Those who can be trusted should not be trusted too much. Hardships created by such trust can destroy the roots. One should not be envious. One must protect one’s wife. One must share one’s property. One must
be pleasant in speech. One must be mild. One must speak sweetly to women, but one must not come under their
control. Women are the prosperity of a household. They deserve respect. They are immensely fortunate. They are
pure. They light up the house. Therefore, they must be specially protected. The supervision of the inner quarters
should be given to the father, the kitchen to the mother and the cows should be given to someone who is equal to
one’s own self. However, agriculture must be attended to by one’s own self. The conduct of trade can be left to the
servants. Brahmanas must be served by the sons.
‘“Fire arose from water. Kshatriyas arose from brahmanas. Iron arose from rock. All their energy is paciﬁed
when they return to their wombs. Virtuous ones born in noble lineages have energy like that of the ﬁre. They are
forgiving and do not have a form, like ﬁre that is hidden in wood. A king whose counsel is not known by insiders
or outsiders, but who looks at everything with his own eyes, will enjoy prosperity. One should not speak about
what one wishes to do. One’s deeds of dharma, kama and artha will be seen, without the counsel being divulged.
Having ascended the peak of a mountain or the roof of the palace, or going to a forest that is devoid of grass, one
should make one’s plans. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! One who is not a well-wisher should not get to
know about the ultimate plan, nor should a well-wisher who is not learned, or a learned one who does not possess
self-control. The desire for artha and the protection of counsel depend on the adviser. A king whose attendants get
to know about all his deeds only after they have been performed, and whose counsels are kept secret, will certainly
be successful. If one commits forbidden acts out of ignorance, one even loses one’s life as a consequence of those
deeds. The performance of praiseworthy deeds brings happiness. Their non-performance leads to great injury later.
O king! One should possess conduct that is respected and know about the six means for stability, increase and decrease.71 Else, the earth will become independent.72 If his anger and delight are infallible, if he himself looks after
what should be done, if he has complete information about his treasury, the earth and its riches will be under his
control. A lord of the earth should be content with his title and his umbrella.73 He should divide his riches among
his servants and not keep everything for himself. A brahmana knows a brahmana in the same way that a husband
knows his wife, a king knows his advisers and one king knows another king. An enemy who deserves to be killed
should not be freed when he is under your control. If he is not killed, he will soon become a source of danger. One
must always try to restrain one’s anger against gods, kings, brahmanas, the aged, the young and the sick. A wise
person avoids pointless quarrels, only fools seek them. Through this, one obtains fame in this world and does not
confront disasters. Women do not wish to obtain a eunuch as their husband. Like that, no one wishes to have a lord
whose favours are fruitless and whose anger is also pointless. Intelligence does not always lead to riches. Stupidity
does not always lead to poverty. Only the wise know about the ways of this world. Others do not. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Those who are stupid always disrespect those who are learned, have good conduct, are aged in
age and aged in intelligence and are elders in prosperity and birth. Those who are ignoble in conduct, lacking in
wisdom, envious, performers of adharma, wicked in speech and prone to anger, confront disaster. Absence of deceit, generosity, observance of rites at the right time and appropriateness in speech make one dear to all beings.
One who is without deceit, skilful, grateful, intelligent and upright, is surrounded by a family, even if one’s treasury is empty. Fortitude, serenity, self-control, purity, compassion, kindness in speech and friendliness towards
friends—these are the seven kindlings of prosperity. O lord of men! One who does not share his property, one who
is evil in soul, one who is ungrateful, one who is shameless—such a person is worst among men and must be
avoided in this world. One cannot sleep happily at night, if there is a snake in the house. Like that, being guilty
oneself, one should not incite those who are inside the house to anger against those who are innocent. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those who are tainted with evil can destroy yoga and kshema. Just as the gods are

propitiated, they must always be tended to. Possessions owned by women, those who are foremost among those
who are intoxicated and those who possess ignoble conduct—there is no doubt that all of these are in danger. O
king! When a woman, a deceitful one or a child is in control, there is no doubt that one will helplessly sink, like a
boat made of stone in a river. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is my view that the learned ones are those
who can grasp the general principles, rather than the speciﬁc details. The details are a triﬂe. A man who is praised
by deceitful ones, who is praised by minstrels and who is praised by harlots, does not live for long.
‘“Having abandoned those supreme archers, the inﬁnitely energetic Pandavas, you have entrusted the great prosperity of the Bharatas to Duryodhana. You will soon see him dislodged from that, just as the foolish Bali, intoxicated with his riches, was dislodged from the three worlds.”’
702(39)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “Man is not the master of his destiny. He is like a wooden puppet dangling from a string. The
creator has made him subject to destiny. Therefore, continue to speak. I am patiently listening to your words.”
‘Vidura replied, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! By speaking when it was not the right time, even Brihaspati’s intelligence seems like ignorance and he is insulted. One is loved because of his gifts. Yet another is loved
because of his pleasant words. Yet another is loved because of his strength of mantras and roots.74 But one who is
loved, is loved. One who is hated is not virtuous, or intelligent, or learned. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
All the pure deeds are ascribed to a loved one and all the evil ones to one who is hated. O great king! There is no
loss, if that loss brings on a gain. But that should be thought of as a loss, which having been gained, destroys much
more. Some are prosperous because of qualities, others because they possess riches. O Dhritarashtra! Avoid those
who are superior in riches, but are devoid of qualities.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “All that you have said has been approved of by the wise and is for my welfare. But I cannot
abandon my son. Where there is dharma, there is victory.”
‘Vidura replied, “He who naturally possesses the qualities and is endowed with humility, will not ignore the
slightest bit of suffering that is caused to all beings. Those who malign others, are fond of unhappiness confronted
by others and seek to foment quarrels among others will always jump at such an opportunity. There is great sin in
accepting riches from, and great danger in giving riches to, those who have evil in their sight. There is extremely
great danger in dwelling with them. One should avoid association with those who are known to be wicked. One
should avoid men who possess similar and other great taints. When an association with a well-wisher comes to an
end, if one is inferior, one’s affection is also destroyed, as are the fruits and happiness that derive from an association with a well-wisher. He75 then seeks to malign and endeavours to bring about destruction. Even if the injury
was slight, because of his delusion, he cannot ﬁnd any peace. One should not associate with such low and cruel
ones who have not been able to control their souls. A wise person will use his intelligence to examine this with
skill and maintain a distance. He who helps poor, miserable and diseased relatives, will obtain the prosperity of
sons and cattle and earn eternal fame. Those who desire their own welfare must help the relatives to prosper. O Indra among kings! Therefore, act virtuously, so that the lineage can be extended. O king! By acting well towards
your relatives, you will be united with prosperity. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Even if they do not possess
qualities, relatives must be protected. How can one refuse those who possess qualities and desire favours? O lord
of the earth! Be gracious towards the miserable Pandavas. O lord! Give them a few villages so that they can sustain
themselves. O lord of men! By doing this, you will obtain fame in this world. O father!76 You are aged. Your sons
will be protected through this deed. What I speak is for your own welfare. Know that I am affectionate towards
you. O father!77 One who wishes for welfare should not quarrel with relatives. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
He should enjoy the happiness with his relatives. Eating together, conversing together, exhibiting affection towards
each other—this is what should be done among relatives. There should never be conﬂict. In this world, relatives
rescue and relatives make one sink. Those who follow good conduct, rescue. Those who follow evil conduct, make
one sink. O Indra among kings! O one who shows honour! Follow good conduct towards the Pandavas. Surrounded by them, you will become unassailable before your enemies. If a relative is oppressed, like a deer confronting
one with smeared hands,78 when he meets his prosperous relative, he takes on the other person’s demerits.79 O best
among men! You will be tormented later on, when you hear that they or your sons have been slain. Reﬂect on this.

Do not perform a deed that will make you ascend your bed and be tormented. This life is uncertain. One should not
act in this way from the outset. It is not true that no man other than Bhargava strays.80 But one who is intelligent
must consider the consequences of action. O lord of men! If Duryodhana committed an evil act earlier, as the elder
of the lineage, you must remedy it. Having established them in their stations, you will be freed from sins in this
world. O best of men! You will be revered by the learned ones. Wise ones have spoken about the fruits that bring
happiness. One should think about them and act accordingly. One will then obtain eternal fame.
‘“Humility destroys bad conduct. Valour destroys adverse circumstances. Forgiveness always destroys anger.
Good conduct destroys evil omens. O king! A lineage should be judged in accordance with its servants, arenas of
action, abode, food and attire. He whose mind is inclined towards appropriate conduct, even in secret, and he who
is inclined towards wisdom—for these two, friendship is never destroyed. Like a well covered with grass, a
learned one must avoid those who are evil in intelligence and have no wisdom. Friendship with them is destroyed.
Nor should a wise one have friendship with one who is arrogant, stupid, fearsome, rash and a follower of adharma.
One should desire friendship with those who are grateful, followers of dharma, truthful, lacking in meanness, ﬁrm,
loyal, in control of their senses and established in that which one should be attached to. Withdrawal from the senses is more difﬁcult than death. Serving them in excess brings destruction, even for the gods. The learned say that
mildness towards all beings, lack of jealousy, forgiveness, fortitude and respect for one’s friends ensures a long
life. By resorting to his intelligence, an extremely ﬁrm man follows the conduct of supplanting an objective that
has been frustrated, with one that is better to follow. A man who is ﬁrm in his resolution about how to deal with
what will happen, and about the consequences of earlier deeds, is established in the present and his objectives are
not destroyed. One is always borne by what one follows in one’s deeds, thoughts and speech. Therefore, one must
follow what ensures welfare. Undertaking what is auspicious, yoga, learning, resilience, truthfulness and constant
service to virtuous beings, ensure prosperity. Perseverance is the root of prosperity, destroying unhappiness and
bringing happiness. One who is like this attains greatness and supreme happiness. O father!81 There is nothing
more glorious and more healing than an act of forgiveness by a powerful one, everywhere and at all times. A weak
person must forgive everything. A strong person must do that for the sake of dharma. If a person regards gain and
loss equally, forgiveness is always established in him. Follow happiness as long as it does not destroy dharma and
artha. But one should not follow kama, in accordance with the conduct of those who are foolish. There is no prosperity for those who are oppressed by unhappiness, those who are confounded, those who are atheists, those who
are lazy, those who are dishonest, those who are not self-controlled and those who are devoid of enterprise. An
honest man may be united with honesty and may be mild. Thinking that this shows a lack of strength, an evilminded one may oppress him. Because of this fear, prosperity does not approach a person who is extremely noble,
extremely generous, extremely valorous and extremely devoted to vows, just as those who are insolent about their
wisdom. The fruit of the Vedas is the agnihotra. The fruit of good conduct is learning. The fruits of wives are intercourse and sons. The fruits of riches are generosity in giving. One who earns riches through adharma and uses this
to perform deeds for the hereafter does not obtain those fruits after death, because those riches were obtained
through inappropriate means. One who has remnants left82 should not be scared of wildernesses, forests, difﬁcult
terrain, extreme hardships, delusions and upraised weapons. Resilience, self-control, dexterity, steadfastness, fortitude, learning and beginnings based on contemplation—know these to be the roots of success. Austerities are the
strength of ascetics. Knowledge of the brahman is the strength of those who wish to know the brahman. Violence
is the strength of those who are not virtuous. Forgiveness is the strength of those who possess qualities. These
eight do not cause obstructions to a rite—water, roots, fruits, milk, oblations, the pleasure of brahmanas, instructions of a preceptor and medicine. One should not do that to others which is injurious to one’s own self. This is accumulated dharma. Everything else follows from desire. Anger should be conquered with lack of anger. Wickedness should be conquered with goodness. Miserliness should be conquered with generosity. Falsehood should be
conquered with truth. One should never trust women, deceitful ones, sloths, cowards, those who are terrible, men
who are insolent, thieves, those who are ingrates and atheists. There are four things that increase because of reverence, good conduct and constant servitude to superiors—fame, lifespan, renown and strength. Do not vainly set
your mind on success that can be obtained through excessive exertion, transgression of dharma or obeisance to enemies. One should sorrow over a man who is without learning. One should sorrow over a couple that has no off-

spring. One should sorrow over subjects who are hungry. One should sorrow over a kingdom that has no king.
Those who have bodies age through travels. Mountains age through rain. The lack of intercourse ages women.
Harsh words age the mind. The Vedas are tarnished if they are not recounted. Brahmanas are tarnished from lack
of vows. Curiosity tarnishes chaste women. Banishment from home tarnishes women. Silver tarnishes gold. Tin
tarnishes silver. Lead tarnishes tin. Dust tarnishes lead. Do not vanquish sleep with more sleep. Do not vanquish
women through desire. Do not conquer a ﬁre by kindling it. Do not conquer thirst through liquor. One who conquers friends by giving, one who conquers enemies in battle and one who conquers wives through food and drink,
is successful in his life.
‘“Those who have thousands live. Those who have hundreds also live. O Dhritarashtra! Give up this desire.
There is no other way to live. All the rice, barley, gold, animals and women on earth are not sufﬁcient even for a
single man. On beholding all this, do not be deluded. O king! O king! I am again telling you that you will behave
well towards your sons if you treat them and the sons of Pandu equally.”’
703(40)

‘Vidura said, “On being addressed by righteous men, if a man acts without success in mind and without transgressing his capacity, then he quickly ﬁnds fame. When they are gratiﬁed, righteous ones can bring about happiness. He
who gives up a great objective that is tainted with adharma, without being induced, sleeps in peace and discards all
his unhappiness, like a snake that casts off old skin. Falsehood by the superior, treachery towards a king and constant falsehood before a preceptor—these are equal to slaying a brahmana. Even the slightest bit of jealousy, death
and discord destroy prosperity. Lack of servitude, haste, boastfulness—these are the three weapons that destroy
learning. How can a person who seeks happiness ﬁnd learning? How can a person who seeks learning ﬁnd happiness? A person who seeks happiness should give up learning. A person who seeks learning should give up happiness. Fire is never satiated with wood. The great ocean is never satiated with rivers. Death is never satiated with all
the beings. A woman with beautiful eyes is never satiated with men. Hope destroys steadfastness. Death destroys
prosperity. Anger destroys riches. Miserliness destroys fame. Failure to tend destroys animals. O king! Even one
single angry brahmana destroys a kingdom. A goat, brass, a chariot, honey, antidotes,83 a bird, a learned
brahmana,84 an aged relative and a friend who faces adversity—these must always be kept in the house. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Manu85 has said that for the sake of good fortune, a goat, an ox, sandalwood, a veena,
a mirror, honey, butter, iron, copper,86 a conch shell, gold, the nave of a wheel and yellow pigment for honouring
gods, brahmanas and guests must be kept in a household. O father!87 I am telling you all these supreme and sacred
words that are extremely special. Do not give up dharma out of desire, fear, greed, or even for the sake of life itself. Dharma is eternal. Happiness and unhappiness are transient. Life is eternal. Its constituent elements are transient.88 Give up the transient and establish yourself in the eternal. Be content. Contentment is the supreme gain.
‘“Behold the immensely fortunate Indras among men who possessed great strength. After ruling the earth, full
of grain and riches, they gave up their kingdoms and extensive objects of desire and came under the power of
death. O king! People raise and take out of the house a son, reared with difﬁculty, who has been killed. Their hair
is dishevelled and they lament piteously. They ﬂing him into the midst of the funeral pyre, like a piece of wood.
Once a person is dead, another person enjoys the riches, just as crows89 and the ﬁre consume the elements of the
body. Surrounded by two things, merits and demerits, one goes to the other world. After casting it90 away, relatives, well-wishers and sons return. But for the man who has been ﬂung into the ﬁre, his own deeds follow him.
Above this world, and below the next, there is the greatest expanse of darkness. O king! Know that the senses are
greatly deluded there. May you not attain it. After listening to these words, if you follow them entirely, you will
obtain supreme fame in this world of the living and you will confront no fear, here or in the hereafter. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The soul is a river. Purity represents its tirthas. Truthfulness is its water. Steadfastness
constitutes the banks. Self-control represents the waves. Bathing in these, a performer of pure deeds puriﬁes himself. The soul becomes pure and is like water in the eternal waters. There is a river in which the ﬁve senses are the
water and desire and anger are the crocodiles. Make a boat out of steadfastness and cross the difﬁcult eddies of repeated birth. After due honours, one who asks the counsel of his relatives who are aged in wisdom, aged in dharma, aged in learning and years, and follows them about what should be done and what should not be done, is never

deluded. Protect your penis and stomach with steadfastness, the hands and the feet with the eyes, the eyes and the
ears with the mind and the mind and speech with deeds. A brahmana who is always attached to ablutions, always
dons the sacred thread, always studies, avoids food offered by outcasts,91 speaks the truth and follows the tasks instructed by the preceptor—is never dislodged from Brahma’s world. A kshatriya who studies the Vedas, offers
oblations to the ﬁre, performs sacriﬁces, protects the subjects, wields weapons for the sake of cattle and brahmanas, puriﬁes his soul and is killed in battle—goes to heaven. A vaishya who studies, distributes his wealth at the
right time to brahmanas, kshatriyas and those who are dependent on him and inhales the sacred smoke of the three
pure ﬁres92—obtains divine happiness in heaven after death. A shudra who shows homage in due order to brahmana, kshatriya and vaishya classes93 and satisﬁes them—enjoys happiness in heaven after he has given up his
body, because his sins are burnt up. I have told you about the dharma of the four varnas. Listen to the reason why I
have told you this. O king! Pandu’s son94 is falling short of the dharma of kshatriyas. You should instruct him to
follow the dharma of kings.”
‘Dhritarashtra replied, “This is just as you have always been instructing me. O amiable one! My mind also turns
towards that which you have told me. My inclination has always been to turn towards the Pandavas. But whenever
I meet Duryodhana, it turns in a contrary direction. No mortal one is capable of transgressing destiny. I think that
destiny is the one who acts and human endeavour is futile.”’
704(41)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Vidura! Is there anything that you have not spoken about so far? Tell me, since I am eager
to listen to you. You are speaking about wonderful things.”
‘Vidura replied, “O Dhritarashtra! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The ancient and eternal youth Sanatsujata has said that there is no death. O great king! That supreme among intelligent ones will speak to you. He will
bring out everything that is overt and covert, clinging to the heart.”
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “Do you not know what that eternal one will tell me? O Vidura! You must tell me, if you
have that much of wisdom left.”
‘Vidura replied, “I have been born from a shudra womb. It is for that reason that I cannot tell you anything
more. But I know about the eternal intelligence of that youth. He was born in a brahmana womb and speaks about
matters that are extremely secret. I will be censured by the gods by speaking to you about those.”
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O Vidura! Tell me. Here, and in this body of mine, how can I meet the ancient and eternal
one?”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Vidura thought about the rishi who was rigid in his vows. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! And having got to know about those thoughts, he showed himself. Vidura received him in accordance
with the decreed rites and tasks. When he was rested and happily seated, Vidura told him, “O illustrious one! There
is a doubt in Dhritarashtra’s mind, which I am incapable of explaining. You should speak to him. On hearing this,
this Indra among men will transcend all happiness and unhappiness, all gain and loss, and all pleasure and displeasure. Then old age and death will not overcome him, or fear and intolerance, hunger and thirst, insolence and power, hatred, lassitude, desire, anger, decline and rise.”’

Section Fifty-Two
Sanatsujata Parva
This section has 121 shlokas and four chapters.
Chapter 705(42): 32 shlokas
Chapter 706(43): 37 shlokas
Chapter 707(44): 24 shlokas
Chapter 708(45): 28 shlokas
This section is named after Dhritarashtra’s questioning of the sage Sanatsujata. Sanatsujata instructs Dhritarashtra.
705(42)

Vaishampayana said, ‘The intelligent King Dhritarashtra honoured the words that Vidura had spoken. Desiring
supreme intelligence, the great-souled one privately questioned Sanatsujata.
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O Sanatsujata! I have heard about your teaching that death does not exist. Yet, the gods
and the asuras observed brahmacharya for the sake of immortality. Which of these is true?”
‘Sanatsujata replied, “Some hold that deeds ensure immortality. Others say that there is no death. O king! Listen
to my words on this, so that you no longer have any doubts. O kshatriya! Know that both of these statements are
true. Know that the wise regard death as delusion. I am telling you that confusion is death. Therefore, I am telling
you that there is immortality where there is no confusion. The asuras were vanquished because of their ignorance.
Had they not possessed ignorance, they would have been like the brahman. Death is not a tiger that consumes beings. Its form is not one that can be fathomed. Some hold that Yama is death, but others do not agree. Immortality
is the soul’s pursuit of brahmacharya. That god1 rules his kingdom in the world of the ancestors. He is auspicious
towards those who are pure and is inauspicious towards those who are impure. Through instructions issued from
his mouth, men suffer death in the form of anger, delusion and confusion. Being overcome by confusion, they
leave for the hereafter and descend again.2 Following him, the gods also go into a decline. Thus it is that this
death3 is also known by the name of death. But there are those who are attracted to the fruits of deeds. Because of
their karma, they go there,4 without transgressing death. There are learned ones who think and kill their desires,
when they try to rise, realizing that these should not be respected. Because learned ones have killed their desires,
though assuming the form of death, death cannot destroy them. A man who follows his desires is destroyed, together with the desires. A man who can conquer his desires can withstand all passion. Darkness appears to beings
in the form of hell. Deluded, they eagerly rush towards it and fall into the hole.5 The sense of ego kills such a person ﬁrst. Desire and anger grasp him and kill him later. Childish ones are thus despatched towards their death. But
steady ones who have fortitude can transgress death. O kshatriya! If a man thinks of nothing,6 how can a tiger
made out of straw attack him? If the soul is confused through anger and desire, death exists within one’s own body.
Know that this is how death is born. One who is established in knowledge has no fear of death. If the object7 is destroyed, so is death, just as mortal beings are destroyed when they confront death.”
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “There are those here who do not follow dharma. There are also those who follow dharma.
Is dharma destroyed by evil or is evil destroyed by dharma?”

‘Sanatsujata replied, “The fruits of both are enjoyed, that of dharma and of its opposite.8 A learned one uses
dharma to give up adharma. Know that dharma is stronger.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “It is said that the eternal worlds are obtained by brahmanas who perform pure deeds in accordance with dharma. O learned one! It is said that there are different regions, depending on the deeds that have
been performed.”
‘Sanatsujata replied, “There are brahmanas who are not proud of their strength. They do not try to surpass the
strong with strength. In the hereafter, they are radiant in the world of heaven. Wherever a brahmana thinks food
and drink are abundant, like grass during the rainy season, this is the place that he should savour. Where there is
inauspicious danger, one should control one’s pride. It is best not to act in excess, or try to establish superiority
over other people. If one is not tormented because another one proclaims one’s superiority, if one does not enjoy
the property of brahmanas, food offered by such a person is regarded as acceptable by the righteous. A dog always
eats its own vomit and causes injury to its own self. Like that, those who proclaim their own valour, eat their own
vomit. A brahmana thinks that his conduct should always be unknown. Even if he dwells among his relatives,
nothing will be known about him. What other brahmana is capable of destroying his inner soul? O kshatriya! It is
because of such conduct that he can visualize the brahman that dwells inside him. He is never exhausted. He is honoured because he does not accept gifts from others. He never causes impediments. He is well versed, even if he
does not seem to be well versed. Such a wise brahmana knows the brahman. These brahmanas are not rich in the
wealth of men. They are rich because of the Vedas. They are difﬁcult to assail. They are difﬁcult to shake. Know
that because of knowledge, they have the brahman in their bodies. Because he has to exert himself, a person, who
knows that sacriﬁces have been performed to all the gods, is not the equal of a brahmana.9 One who is honoured,
though he does not exert himself, is truly honoured. When honoured, he does not think about it. Nor does he suffer
because he is not honoured. One who is honoured should think that only the learned show honours. If one is not
honoured, one should not think that stupid ones, skilled in adharma and adept in the ways of the world, do not
know how to honour a revered person. Honour and silence10 cannot travel together. Know that this world is that of
honour and that one is of silence. Prosperity is the abode of happiness, though it runs counter to the objective.11 O
kshatriya! For someone who is devoid of wisdom, the prosperity of the brahman is extremely difﬁcult to obtain.
Virtuous ones have spoken of many different kinds of doors to that, all difﬁcult to uphold. There are six that
counter pride and delusion—truth, uprightness, modesty, self-control, purity and knowledge.”’
706(43)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “There may be a brahmana who has learnt the chants of the Rig, the Yajur and the Sama
Veda. If he performs a sin, will he be tainted, or will he not be tainted?”
‘Sanatsujata replied, “One who is learned in the chants of the Sama, the Rig and the Yajur will not be saved
from his evil deeds. I am not speaking a falsehood to you. The metres do not save a deceitful one, who has resorted
to deceit, from sin. When their wings have grown, birds ﬂee a nest. Like that, the metres desert one whose time of
destruction has come.”
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O learned one! If the Vedas are incapable of saving one who is without dharma, why have
the brahmanas eternally talked about them?”
‘Sanatsujata replied, “The austerities performed in this world are seen to yield fruits in another. When they are
established in rich austerities, brahmanas obtain those worlds.”
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “How can austerities be prosperous and how can they fail to be so? O Sanatsujata! Tell me
this, so that we may get to know.”
‘Sanatsujata replied, “O king! There are twelve vices like anger and another six like cruelty. Brahmanas who
know about the sacred texts are knowledgeable about the qualities that prevent dharma—anger, desire, avarice,
delusion, possessiveness, compassion,12 discontent, pride, sorrow, lust, jealousy and aversion—these are the
twelve human vices that men must always avoid. O Indra among kings! Every single one of them waits for a weakness in a man, like a hunter waits for a deer. Maligning others,13 covetousness, vanity, vindictiveness, anger and
ﬁckleness—if these six vices are left uncontrolled, they incite men towards evil in their dharma. They do not perform any good in extremely difﬁcult situations. Scheming to enjoy, hatred, pride in deceit, regrets after giving, the

weakness of miserliness, praise of one’s kin and hatred of women—these are the seven cruel vices. Dharma, truthfulness, self-control, austerities, lack of envy, modesty, forgiveness, contentment, sacriﬁces, generosity, fortitude
and learning—these are the twelve great vows for a brahmana. If one dwells with these twelve, one is capable of
ruling the entire earth. Even if one is distinguished by the presence of three, two or only one of these, know that
one does not possess anything. Self-control, renunciation and lack of ignorance—immortality is vested in these.
Learned brahmanas say that truthfulness is the foremost. There are eighteen qualities that work against self-control
—perverseness in what is done or not done, falsehood, discontent, desire, acquisitiveness, covetousness, anger,
sorrow, thirst, desire, treachery, jealousy, possessiveness, regret, gloating, forgetfulness, slander and vanity. The
learned say that one who is free from these vices is self-controlled. There are six types of renunciation regarded as
superior—lack of rejoicing when one obtains something pleasant; lack of misery when something unpleasant is
generated; giving to worthy supplicants without being asked for, as long as it is not a beloved wife or sons. Even if
one is asked for what should not be asked, this is known as the third quality. Relinquishment of objects, non-fulﬁlment of desire and giving up the fruits of deeds14—if one possesses these qualities, even if one possesses objects, a
man is one who renounces, with the intelligence of a student. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There are eight
vices that lead to ignorance and these vices must be avoided—those that come from the ﬁve senses, the mind, the
past and the future. A person who is freed from these is happy. Only austerities which are free from these vices,
and are united with the qualities, become prosperous and successful. O Indra among kings! This is what you asked
me. What else do you wish to hear?”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “Some people have said that there are ﬁve Vedas, with ancient accounts as the ﬁfth.15 Others
say that there are four Vedas and still others say that there are three Vedas. Others say that there are two Vedas and
still others say that there is one Veda. There are others who accept no hymns. O brahmana! Therefore, what should
I now regard as the true Veda?”
‘Sanatsujata replied, “Because there is ignorance about the single Veda, many Vedas have been thought of. O
Indra among kings! There is one truth and all of them are established in that truth. Ignoring the Vedas, wisdom is
sought in the great one.16 If gifts, studying and sacriﬁces are followed out of greed, the resolutions of those proud
ones deviate from the truth. Therefore, one should undertake a sacriﬁce only for the sake of the truth. When a man
performs this with the mind, speech and deeds, he is successful in his intentions and is established in his intentions.
Without being secretive, one should be consecrated in a rite. The word satyam is derived from the root sat17 and is
the supreme objective and truth. The results of knowledge are direct. Those of austerities are generated indirectly.
A brahmana who recites a lot, should only be known as one who recites a lot. O kshatriya! Therefore, do not regard a brahmana to be superior only because he recites. He who has not deviated from the truth should be known
as a brahmana. O kshatriya! When the class of rishis was created, Atharvan18 chanted these ancient hymns. Those
who learnt them were known as those who recited hymns. But they do not know the one19 who should be known
through the Vedas. O king! There are some who know the Vedas and there are some who know what should be
known through the Vedas. He who knows the Vedas knows what should be known through the Vedas. He who
knows what should be known through the Vedas is established in truth. I know him to be a brahmana who explains
skilfully and is capable of removing doubts, having dispelled all his own doubts. The One20 cannot be found by
going to the east or the south, or the west, or diagonally, or in any direction at all. One should think about this
while meditating in silence, being immobile even in one’s thoughts. The brahman that is established in the inner
soul will then manifest itself. He who maintains silence is a muni;21 one does not become a muni by residing in the
forest. He who knows the one without decay is said to be the supreme hermit. One who knows the grammar behind
everything is said to be a grammarian. But a man who can directly see all the worlds is a man who sees everything.
O kshatriya! A brahmana who is established in the truth sees the brahman, by following in due order, what is prescribed in the Vedas. This is what I am telling you. Know this.”’
707(44)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanatsujata! These supreme words that you have spoken about the brahman have the form
of the entire universe. These supreme words are extremely rare among desirable objects. O young one! Therefore,
speak to me.”

‘Sanatsujata replied, “You have happily asked me about the brahman, but it is not something that can be obtained in a hurry. I will tell you the ancient knowledge about the one who is not manifest. This can be successfully
known through the practice of brahmacharya.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “You have said that the eternal knowledge about the one who is not manifest can be successfully obtained through the practice of brahmacharya and not through the performance of acts at prescribed points
in time. How does one then obtain the immortality of the brahman?”
‘Sanatsujata replied, “Those who conquer their desires in this world, while patiently establishing themselves on
the brahman, are ﬁrmly based on truth, and pluck the soul out of the body, like a stalk of munja grass.22 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The father and the mother create the body. But the birth instructed by the preceptor is
the true birth, because that is free of age or death.23 Those who enter a preceptor’s womb and become embryos
there, observing brahmacharya, become learned in the sacred texts in this world and attain supreme yoga after they
give up their bodies. The preceptor ﬁlls the ears with the truth, practises truth and confers immortality. He should
be regarded as the father and the mother. Knowing of his deeds, one should not cause him any injury. A disciple
must always show respect to his preceptor. Pure and without distraction, he should study. His pride should not be
annoyed, nor should he be angered, at tasks he is asked to perform. This is the ﬁrst quarter of brahmacharya. Doing
what pleases the preceptor, in deeds, thoughts and speech, even at the expense of life and riches, is said to be the
second quarter. The conduct towards the preceptor should be the same as that towards the preceptor’s wife, acting
as one is instructed and performing what is pleasant. This is said to be the third quarter. Thinking oneself to be
wise, one should never tell a preceptor that one isn’t responsible for a deed. Even if one thinks this, one should not
say it. This is the fourth quarter of brahmacharya. One should dwell by presenting to the preceptor whatever objects one obtains. For those who are righteous and possess many qualities, the conduct should be the same towards
the preceptor’s son. When one dwells in this way, one prospers in this world. One obtains many sons and fame. All
the directions shower down upon him and many people dwell with him in turn, for the sake of brahmacharya. It is
through such brahmacharya that the gods attained divinity, the immensely fortunate and learned rishis attained the
world of Brahma and the gandharvas and the apsaras obtained their beauty. It was with such brahmacharya that the
sun was born earlier. O king! He who lies down and torments his entire body with austerities, will transcend childishness and become learned. In due course of time, he will conquer death. O kshatriya! The worlds that people
conquer through deeds they have performed are ﬁnite. But through knowledge, one obtains the entire brahman.
There is no other path to traverse.”
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “Does he24 appear white or red? Is he dark, black like collyrium, or brown? In what form
does a righteous and learned brahmana visualize the seat of that immortal and undecaying one?”
‘Sanatsujata replied, “He does not appear as white or red, as black, or with the complexion of iron. Nor does he
have the complexion of the sun. He is not established in the earth or the sky. He is not to be found in the waters of
the ocean. He does not resort to the stars, or the lightning. His form cannot be seen in the clouds. He cannot be
found in the wind or the gods, nor can he be seen in the moon or the sun. He is not the mantras of the Rig Veda, the
Yajur Veda or the Atharva Veda, nor can he be seen in the unblemished Sama Veda. O king! It is certain that he
cannot be seen in great vows and in rathantara and barhata.25 He is the darkness that is impossible to cross. He is
beyond death and beyond destruction. His form cannot be seen, it is as thin as a razor’s edge, but he is also larger
in form than the mountains. He is the foundation. He is immortality. He is the worlds. He is the brahman. He is
fame. He is the source of all beings and at the time of destruction, he is the one into whom they ﬂow. He is without
division and gigantic. His fame soars up. The words of the wise say that he is immutable. Everything in the universe is established in him. Those who know him become immortal.”’
708(45)

‘Sanatsujata said, “He is the seed and is a great and blazing light. He is the resplendent one whose fame is great.
He is the one whom the gods worship. It is because of him that the sun shines. He is the one whom the yogis see.
He is the eternal and illustrious lord. Everything originates with the brahman’s seed. It is because of the brahman’s
seed that everything ﬂourishes. It is because of the seed that stars burn in the middle of the sky and the sun obtains
its radiance. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. It is because of him that there

is water in the middle of the ocean. It is because of him that the two gods are in the ﬁrmament.26 They hold up
what ﬂows in and what ﬂows out, in the earth and in heaven.27 He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal
and illustrious lord. Both these gods carry earth and heaven. The seed bears the directions and the universe. The
rivers ﬂow from those directions and the great oceans are created from these. He is the one whom the yogis see. He
is the eternal and illustrious lord. Based on the wheels, the steady chariot ceaselessly works. He has a ﬂaming crest
and the celestial and ageless horses bear him in the sky.28 He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and
illustrious lord. There is no form that is similar to his. He can never be seen with the eyes. Learned ones who get to
know him through their minds and their hearts, become immortal. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the
eternal and illustrious lord. There is a terrible river with twelve ﬂows protected by the gods and one drinks from
it.29 He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. Like a bee, there are those who drink
the honey only for half a month.30 He is the lord who has ordained oblations for all beings. He is the one whom the
yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. There is an ashvattha tree with golden foliage. They alight like
featherless birds there. Having obtained feathers, they ﬂy out in different directions.31 He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. The complete is taken out from the complete. It is from the complete
that the complete universe is created. The complete is taken from the complete. But it is the complete that
remains.32 He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. The wind is created from him
and it in him that it subsides. Agni and soma were created from him. All life depends on him. One knows everything through him. One is incapable of describing him. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. Apana dissolves into prana, prana dissolves into the moon.33 The moon dissolves into the sun. The
sun dissolves into the supreme. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. When it
ascends out of the water, the swan does not raise one foot. If it did raise it,34 there would be no death, nor immortality.35 He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. There is one great-souled god. He
is the being who swallows the ﬁre. If one knows this being, one’s soul will never come to any harm. He is the one
whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. Even if the thousands and thousands of wings are spread
out to ﬂy, they must return to the centre and what is in the centre, with the speed of thought.36 He is the one whom
the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. His form is stationed beyond the range of sight. Only those who
are extremely pure in soul can see him. A wise one desiring welfare sees him through the mind. Those who resort
to him, become immortal. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. Because of their
own learning and their own conduct, mortal ones hide him, like snakes in their holes. But only foolish ones are deluded by this and deceived and confounded, follow the dangerous road. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is
the eternal and illustrious lord. There is neither existence, nor is there non-existence. Therefore, what source can
give rise to death or immortality? Both truth and falsehood are based on the same truth. Truth and falsehood originate in the same womb. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. Among men,
whether they are righteous or wicked, these are not seen in an equal way.37 Having been united with the divine
knowledge of immortality, one should taste that honey. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. The heart is not tormented because of abuse.38 Nor do lack of studying and lack of agnihotra matter.
The mind becomes as light as the brahman. Those who are wise and persevering obtain him. He is the one whom
the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. Thus, one sees one’s own soul in all beings, all engaged in various tasks. After this, why should there be any sorrow? There is a great deal of water in a well that overﬂows in all
the directions. Like that, brahmanas who wish to know can use all the Vedas.39 The great-souled being is the size
of a thumb. Though he resides in the heart, he cannot be seen. He is unborn. He ceaselessly roams, throughout
night and day. Knowing this, a wise one is full of bliss. I am I. I am also the mother, the father and the son. I am
the soul of everything, whether I exist or whether I do not exist. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I am the ancient grandfather,40 the father and the son. You dwell in my soul. But you are not mine and I am not yours. The
soul is the foundation. The soul is the birth. I am the foundation without decay that the Vedas speak about. I am
subtler than the most subtle. With excellent intelligence, I am awake in all beings. Know him to be the father of all
beings, dwelling in the lotus in all beings.”’41

Section Fifty-Three
Yana-Sandhi Parva
This section had 726 shlokas and twenty-four chapters.
Chapter 709(46): 17 shlokas
Chapter 710(47): 103 shlokas
Chapter 711(48): 47 shlokas
Chapter 712(49): 45 shlokas
Chapter 713(50): 61 shlokas
Chapter 714(51): 19 shlokas
Chapter 715(52): 16 shlokas
Chapter 716(53): 19 shlokas
Chapter 717(54): 66 shlokas
Chapter 718(55): 16 shlokas
Chapter 719(56): 60 shlokas
Chapter 720(57): 29 shlokas
Chapter 721(58): 30 shlokas
Chapter 722(59): 23 shlokas
Chapter 723(60): 29 shlokas
Chapter 724(61): 18 shlokas
Chapter 725(62): 31 shlokas
Chapter 726(63): 16 shlokas
Chapter 727(64): 15 shlokas
Chapter 728(65): 9 shlokas
Chapter 729(66): 15 shlokas
Chapter 730(67): 21 shlokas
Chapter 731(68): 14 shlokas
Chapter 732(69): 7 shlokas
Yana means moving or journey as a verb and conveyance as a noun. Sandhi means both connection and peace or alliance. So the name of this
parva can be interpreted in two different ways, and both are correct. First, there is the straightforward meaning of a journey (Sanjaya’s) for peace.
Second, this section is the connecting section between two separate journeys, Sanjaya’s and Krishna’s. Sanjaya conveys Arjuna’s message and
there is a discussion in the assembly of the Kurus. Karna refuses to ﬁght until Bhishma has fallen. The section ends inconclusively, with a reference to Krishna’s impending mission.
709(46)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Thus, the king1 conversed with Sanatsujata and the intelligent Vidura and the night passed.
When the night had passed, all the kings entered the assembly hall and were delighted to see the suta.2 With Dhritarashtra at the forefront, all of them went to the king’s splendid assembly hall, desiring to hear the words the
Parthas had sent, in conformity with dharma and artha. The extensive arena was plastered white and was decorated
with gold. It was extremely beautiful, like the rays of the moon, and was sprinkled with excellent water. It was
strewn with beautiful seats made of gold, wood, stone and ivory, which were covered with excellent cushions.
‘O bull among the Bharata lineage! Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Shalya, Kritavarma, Jayadratha, Ashvatthama,
Vikarna, Somadatta, Bahlika, the immensely wise Vidura, maharatha Yuyutsu—all these assembled together with
other royal warriors. Having placed Dhritarashtra at their head, they entered the splendid assembly hall. O king!
Duhshasana, Chitrasena, Shakuni Soubala, Durmukha, Duhsaha, Karna, Uluka and Vivimshati placed the intolerant Duryodhana, king of the Kurus, at their head and entered the assembly hall, like gods entering Shakra’s abode.

O king! O king! When those brave ones, with arms like clubs, entered the assembly hall, it looked like a mountainous cavern full of lions. Having entered the assembly hall, those great archers, who adorned any gathering and
were as radiant as the sun, seated themselves on extremely expensive seats. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
When all the kings were seated, the gatekeeper informed them that the son of the suta had arrived. “Our messenger
has swiftly returned on the chariot, drawn by Saindhava horses that can bear loads well, from the Pandavas.”
Wearing his earrings, he3 quickly descended from the chariot and entered the assembly hall, which was full of
great-souled lords of the earth.
‘Sanjaya said, “O Kouravas! Know that I have returned after having gone and met the Pandavas. Know that the
Pandavas salute all the Kurus, in accordance with their ages. They honour the elders according to age and those
who are of the same age as friends. According to age, they honour those who are their juniors. O lords of the earth!
On the instructions of Dhritarashtra, I earlier went from here to visit the Pandavas, and listen to what I have to
say.”’
710(47)

son!4

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! O
I am asking you in the midst of these kings about the words spoken by the
great-souled Dhananjaya, indomitable in spirit, foremost in battle, and the destroyer of the lives of evil-souled
ones.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “Let Duryodhana listen to my words about what Arjuna spoke. The great-souled Dhananjaya is
ready for battle. He said this with Yudhishthira’s permission and in Keshava’s hearing. Knowing the strength of his
arms, he does not have the slightest fear. Kiriti is steadfast and ready to do battle. In Vasudeva’s presence, he told
me, ‘Tell Dhritarashtra’s son in the midst of the Kurus and in the hearing of the kings who have assembled to kill
the Pandavas. Tell them all the words that I have spoken, so that the king5 and his advisers hear it.’ Just as all the
gods listen to the words of the king of the gods, the wielder of the vajra, in that way, all the Pandavas6 and Srinjayas listened to the capable words spoken by Kiriti. ‘Arjuna, the wielder of the Gandiva, is ready to do battle.’
With eyes like red lotuses, he spoke these words.
‘“‘If Dhritarashtra’s son does not give the kingdom to King Yudhishthira Ajamidha, then it is certain that the
evil deeds committed by the sons of Dhritarashtra earlier will remain unaccounted.7 If there is a desire to ﬁght with
Bhima and Arjuna, the sons of the Ashvins8 and Vasudeva, with Shini’s son9 who has raised his weapons, with
Dhrishtadyumna and Shikhandi, with Yudhishthira, who is equal to Indra and can burn up earth and heaven with
the ire of his thoughts—if Dhritarashtra’s son wishes to ﬁght with these, then all the objectives of the Pandavas
will be successful. Do not act so as to ensure the objectives of the Pandavas. Instead, should you so wish, come
and ﬁght.10 Pandava,11 who acts in accordance with dharma, was banished to the forest and slept on a bed of grief.
Dhritarashtra’s son will lie down and die on a more miserable bed and that will be his ﬁnal one. The evil-souled
son of Dhritarashtra governed the Kurus and the Pandavas through evil conduct. But he12 possessed modesty, wisdom, austerities and self-control and conquered his anger through the protection of dharma. Though he was deceived, he was respectful and upright. He possessed austerities, self-control and the protection of dharma. He
spoke the truth and was pleasant, even when he was deceived. He endured the inﬁnite hardships. The eldest Pandava has controlled his soul. He has controlled his anger for many terrible years. If that is unleashed on the Kurus,
Dhritarashtra’s son will repent his decision to ﬁght. When a ﬁre with its black trails is kindled during the summer,
it burns down the dry wood. Thus will Yudhishthira’s angry and blazing glance burn down the armies of Dhritarashtra’s son.
‘“‘When Dhritarashtra’s son sees the intolerant Pandava Bhimasena in battle, terrible in speed and with a club in
his hand, vomiting the poison of his anger, he will then repent this ﬁght. When he sees Bhima, terrible in form and
with a club in his hand, begin to kill, like a mighty lion entering a pen of cows, Dhritarashtra’s son will regret this
war. He is extremely fearsome and is without fear. He is skilled in the use of weapons. He will slay the assembled
enemy forces. He will counter an ocean of chariots on a single chariot. He will destroy a mass of infantry with his
club. He will swiftly destroy many soldiers. That brave one will bring down the soldiers of Dhritarashtra’s son, like
a forest sliced down with an axe. Then Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war. Dhritarashtra’s son will see his
mighty army scattered, like a village that is mostly made of straw burnt by a ﬁre, or ripe grain burnt by lightning.

With the foremost warriors dead, the terriﬁed soldiers will be reluctant. They will mostly be in ﬂight, with no one
left with any enterprise. They will be burnt by Bhimasena’s weapons. Then Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war.
Nakula, skilled and foremost charioteer among all charioteers, will use his right hand and shoot down hundreds of
enemy soldiers. Then Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war. Though he was earlier used to happiness, Nakula
slept on a bed of unhappiness in the forest for a very long time. He will sigh hard, like an enraged serpent. Then
Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war. He will see kings who are willing to ﬁght on Dharmaraja’s instructions, ride
white chariots and attack his soldiers. He will see them abandon his side. Thereafter, Dhritarashtra’s son will repent. The Kourava will see ﬁve brave ones, who are children, but not like children in their skill with weapons.13
They will give up their lives to ﬁght the Kekayas.14 Then Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war. Sahadeva, the
killer, will mount a chariot that is adorned with golden stars. Its wheels make no noise and it is yoked to welltrained horses. He will slice off the heads of kings with ﬂoods of arrows. Dhritarashtra’s son will see him mounted
on the chariot, skilled in the use of weapons, and attacking in all the directions in that extremely fearful war. On
seeing him in battle, Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war. Sahadeva is spirited and swift to act. He is restrained
by modesty, skilled and truthful. He is extremely strong and steadfast in all dharma. He will terribly slaughter soldiers as he ﬁnds his way towards the one from Gandhara.15 When he sees Droupadi’s sons, brave and great archers
who are skilled in the use of weapons, expert in ﬁghting with chariots, advance in battle, like terrible and poisonous serpents, then will Dhritarashtra’s son regret the war. Abhimanyu is the slayer of enemy heroes. He will
shower arrows on enemies, like a cloud showering rain. Soubhadra16 is skilled in the use of his arms and is like
Krishna’s equal. When he advances, Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war. He will see Soubhadra, who is a child,
but is not like a child in valour. He will descend on that mass of enemies, like death itself. He is skilled in the use
of weapons and is Indra’s equal. Then Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war.
‘“‘The young Prabhadrakas are swift to act and skilled.17 Their valour is like that of lions. They will strike the
sons of Dhritarashtra, together with their soldiers. Then Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war. The aged Virata
and Drupada are maharathas. Each will advance with his soldiers against the enemy, when they see Dhritarashtra’s
son, together with his soldiers. Then Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war. Drupada is skilled in the use of
weapons. He will be enraged in battle. Mounted on his chariot, he will use arrows to slice off the heads of younger
ones. Then Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war. Virata is the slayer of enemy heroes. He will penetrate the enemy army in its weak spots. He will be at the forefront of the Matsyas, who are terrible in form. Then Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war. Matysa Virata’s eldest son18 is terrible in form and is foremost among warriors. He
has donned armour for the sake of the Pandavas. When he sees him, Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war. When
Shantanu’s virtuous son,19 foremost among the Kouravas, has been killed in battle by Shikhandi, I tell you truthfully and without any doubt, that none of our enemies will be alive any more. Shikhandi will be on a chariot drawn by
celestial horses and protected well. He will advance towards Bhishma on his chariot and will mow down masses of
chariots. Then Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war. He will see the resplendent Dhrishtadyumna, at the forefront
of the Srinjaya forces. The intelligent Drona instructed him about secret weapons.20 Dhritarashtra’s son will repent
then. He21 is the immeasurable general. He will vanquish the sons of Dhritarashtra. He is capable of withstanding
enemies and will advance against Drona in battle. Then Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war. He is modest,
learned, strong and intelligent. He is blessed by prosperity and he is foremost among the Somakas.22 Since our
leader is the foremost among the lions of the Vrishni lineage,23 our enemies will not be able to withstand us. Tell
him this also.24 There is no need to look for anyone else. We have chosen Shini’s grandson, Satyaki, as our adviser.
He is a charioteer and is without a rival in battle. He is immensely strong, without fear and skilled in the use of
weapons. When instructed by me, the lord of the Shinis will shower arrows on the enemy, like a cloud showering
rain. He will envelope the warriors with a net of arrows. Then Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war. When he desires to ﬁght, he is steady. The great-souled one’s arms are long and his bow is ﬁrm. The enemies will be like ashes
in a ﬁre. They will be like cows that have scented a lion. The great-souled one’s arms are long and his bow is ﬁrm.
He can shatter the mountains and destroy all the worlds. He is skilled in the use of weapons and has dextrous
hands. He is radiant like the sun stationed in the ﬁrmament. The Yadava, the lion of the Vrishni lineage, is skilled
and subtle in his knowledge of the yoga of weapons. He has been instructed in what is said to be the most famous

yoga. All the qualities exist in Satyaki’s form. Satyaki Madhava’s golden chariot is yoked to four white horses.
When Suyodhana sees it in the ﬁeld of battle, the evil one, who has no control over his soul, will repent.
‘“‘He will see the chariot studded with gold and gems. It is yoked to white horses and has a monkey on its banner. He will see it, driven in the battle by Keshava. Then the evil one, who has no control over his soul, will repent.
The evil-minded one will hear the great sound of Gandiva, as it is brandished by me in that great battle. The sound
will be like thunder, when the string of the bow strikes against my wrist guards. Then Dhritarashtra’s stupid and
evil-minded son, with wicked companions, will regret the war. He will see his soldiers destroyed by that dark
shower of arrows in the battle, like a herd of cows. Like lightning emerging from the clouds, they will kill thousands of enemies in the encounter. My arrows will pierce the bones and penetrate the hearts. Then Dhritarashtra’s
son will regret the war. He will see masses of arrows, released from Gandiva’s string, descend with sharp tips and
destroy horses, elephants and armoured soldiers. Then Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war. The evil one will see
the arrows of our enemies countered and repulsed by my arrows. They will be obliquely sliced by my arrows with
razor tips. Then Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war. The arrows released from my arms will strike down the
heads of his young warriors, like birds plucking fruit from the top of a tree. Then Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the
war. He will see warriors brought down from chariots, giant elephants and horses. They will be slain and brought
down by my arrows in the arena. Then Dhritarashtra’s son will regret the war. Like death with a gaping mouth, the
ﬂaming shower of arrows released by me will bring down the enemy assassins, the masses of infantry and masses
of chariots in every direction. Then the evil-minded one will repent. The dust from my chariot will cover every direction. He will see his own soldiers completely bewildered, oppressed by Gandiva. After that, the evil-minded
one will repent. Duryodhana will see all his soldiers, bereft of their senses, shattered in their limbs and overwhelmed. Their horses, warriors, kings and elephants will be slain. They will be thirsty, exhausted and terriﬁed.
Killed, or about to be killed, they will lament piteously. Hair, bones and skulls will be scattered around, as if Prajapati25 left his work incomplete. On seeing this, the evil-minded one will repent. In that battle, Dhritarashtra’s son
will see Gandiva, Vasudeva, the divine conch shell Panchajanya, Devadatta, the inexhaustible quivers and me on
my chariot.26 In destroying the Kouravas, in burning that assembled mass of bandits,27 I will burn like a ﬁre, like
the one between the end of a yuga and the onset of another yuga. Then Dhritarashtra’s son will repent, together
with his sons. Having been overcome by anger, with his brothers, with his sons and with his soldiers, the weakminded one will see his prosperity destroyed. He will tremble when his insolence has been destroyed. Thereafter,
Dhritarashtra’s wicked son will repent.
‘“‘On an earlier occasion, I had ﬁnished my meditations in the morning. When I arose from the water, a brahmana spoke these pleasant words. “O Partha! You will have to perform an extremely difﬁcult task. O Savyasachi!
You will have to ﬁght with your enemies. Destroying the enemies, Indra, with the vajra in his hand and drawn by
tawny horses, will lead from the forefront in this battle. Alternatively, Krishna Vasudeva will protect your rear, on
a chariot yoked to Sugriva.”28 In this battle, I have chosen Vasudeva as my aide, in preference to the great Indra,
with the vajra in his hand. I have obtained Krishna so as to slay the dasyus. But I think the gods have ordained this
for me. Though he has resolved not to ﬁght, a man whom Krishna wishes to triumph will be victorious over all his
enemies, be they Indra with the gods, or men. There is no need to worry. One who wishes to defeat the brave and
spirited Vasudeva Krishna in a battle is like one who desires to swim across the ocean, the great store of immeasurable waters, with his bare arms. Mount Shveta is high and lofty with rocks and it is like trying to shatter it with
one’s arms. The hands, with their nails, will be split. But nothing will happen to the mountain. Instead of vanquishing Vasudeva in battle, one should try to pacify a blazing ﬁre with one’s hands, restrain the sun and the moon, or
rob the gods of amrita. Alone on a chariot, he destroyed the kingdom of the king and abducted Rukmini of
Bhoja.29 He obtained a resplendent and famous wife and she bore him the great-souled Roukmineya.30 Having defeated all of Nagnajit’s sons, he spiritedly churned Gandhara and forcibly freed Sudarshaniya, beloved of the gods,
from bondage.31 He killed Pandya by striking him on the chest.32 He vanquished the Kalingas in Dantakura. He
burnt down the city of Varanasi, which remained for many years without a protector.33 He was challenged by
Ekalavya, the king of Nishadha, who was thought to be invincible. But Krishna killed him and robbed him of his
life, forcefully smashing him against a rock, like Jambha.34 With Baladeva as a second, he killed Ugrasena’s extremely wicked son,35 who was radiant in the midst of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, and returned the kingdom to

Ugrasena. He battled Soubha, which travelled in the sky, and the terrible King Shalva, who used maya.36 At Soubha’s gates, he grasped the one who had killed one hundred.37 Is there any mortal one who can withstand him?
There was the terrible and impregnable fortress city Pragjyotisha of the asuras. The extremely strong Naraka, born
of the earth, stole Aditi’s beautiful and bejewelled earrings. Together with Shakra, the gods tried to get them back.
But they could not match him, and ﬂed, terriﬁed. However, they witnessed Keshava’s valour and strength and his
irresistible weapons. Knowing Keshava’s true nature, they entrusted Krishna with the task of killing the dasyus.38
Vasudeva pledged to perform that extremely difﬁcult task, since he possessed the wealth of success. Piercing with
lances and striking with razors, he killed six thousand in Nirmochana. He killed Mura and he killed rakshasa warriors. Then the brave one entered Nirmochana. There, a great battle took place between the immensely strong
one39 and the even stronger Vishnu. He was killed by Krishna and was robbed of his life. He was like a karnikara
tree uprooted by the wind. Having regained the bejewelled earrings, having killed the earth-born Naraka and Mura,
the wise one was surrounded by prosperity and fame. The one with the unmatched power returned. On witnessing
the terrible deed he had wrought in battle, the gods then granted him boons. “When you battle, you will not be
overtaken by fatigue. You will face no impediments in the sky and in the water. Weapons will never penetrate your
body.” Krishna was gratiﬁed at these. The immensely strong and immeasurable Vasudeva is like this. He always
possesses the qualities. Vishnu is unassailable and inﬁnitely valorous. Dhritarashtra’s son wishes to vanquish him.
Though the evil-souled one doubts him, looking towards us, he40 has ignored it. If he thinks that he will be able to
engender a quarrel between Krishna and me and make it ﬂourish, and thus become capable of robbing the Pandavas, he will know what is true when he goes to war.
‘“‘I convey my respects to the king who is Shantanu’s son, to Drona and his son, and to the unrivalled son of
Sharadvat.41 Wishing to obtain the kingdom, I will ﬁght them. I think that dharma will direct weapons at those
who ﬁght against the Pandavas, who have conducted themselves in accordance with dharma. The sons of Pandu
were vanquished through deceit by violent ones and have waited for a long period of twelve years, spending a life
of hardship, as promised, in the forest. We have lived one year of concealment. While the Pandavas are still alive,
how can the sons of Dhritarashtra suddenly rob them of their station? If they conquer us in a battle, with the gods
headed by Indra as aides, the practice of adharma will be superior to that of dharma. Then it will be certain that being virtuous is pointless. If he thinks that a man is not bound down by his deeds, and if he does not think that we
are superior to him, then, with Vasudeva as a second, I hope to kill Duryodhana and his companions. If a man is
tied down by his karma, and even if a man is not tied down by his own karma, looking towards both of these possibilities, the defeat of Dhritarashtra’s son is proper. O Kurus! I am telling you what is evident. The sons of Dhritarashtra will be destroyed in this war. If the Kurus seek to attain their objectives without a war and if they do not
ﬁght, they will then survive. Having killed the sons of Dhritarashtra and Karna, I will conquer the entire kingdom
of the Kurus. Do whatever you can, according to your capacity. With your wives and your sons, enjoy whatever is
sweet. There are aged brahmanas among us. They are extremely learned, and possess virtuous conduct and noble
lineage. They are acquainted with the astrology of the years and are certain about the knowledge of the nakshatras,
the high and low of the mysteries of destiny, divine questions, mrigachakra42 and muhurtas. They have predicted
the victory of the Pandavas and the great destruction of the Kurus and the Srinjayas.43 Ajatashatru44 already thinks
that success has been obtained in defeating our enemies. Janardana, lion among the Vrishnis, knows what is hidden
and does not see any reason for doubt. Without being distracted, I myself know and see the shape of the future. My
ancient foresight has not suffered. The sons of Dhritarashtra will die in this war. The Gandiva bow yawns without
being touched. Without being touched, the strings of the bow shudder. The arrows jump out from the mouths of the
quivers and repeatedly wish to ﬂy out at every instant. My happy steel45 emerges from its scabbard, like a snake
that has discarded its old skin. Terrible voices are heard from my standard, “O Kiriti! When will your chariot be
yoked?” Crowds of jackals are howling in the night. Rakshasas fall down from the ﬁrmament. Deer, jackals, whitenecked ones,46 crows, vultures, cranes and hyenas are emerging. On seeing my chariot yoked with the white
steeds, birds47 are ﬂying at the back. I will alone shower down arrows and convey the warrior kings to the world of
the dead. I will separately despatch each weapon along its route, like a ﬁre that consumes a forest during the summer—Sthunakarna, the terrible Pashupata and Brahmastra48—all of which were given to me by Shakra. I will
swiftly release them for the sake of slaying. No remnants will be left of any of the beings. I will obtain peace and

supreme bliss. O son of Gavalgana!49 Tell them that is my ﬁrm resolution. Look at the delusion of Dhritarashtra’s
son. He seeks to quarrel with those who have always been his aides when he has confronted his enemies, even if
the gods, with Indra at the forefront, were on their side.50 Shantanu’s son, the aged Bhishma, Kripa, Drona and his
son and the intelligent Vidura—all of them have said this. Let it be that way. Let all the Kurus enjoy long lives.’”’
711(48)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When all the kings had assembled, Shantanu’s son,
Bhishma, spoke these words to Duryodhana. “Once, Brihaspati and Ushanas51 presented themselves before Brahma. So did Indra with the Maruts, the Vasus, the Ashvins, the Adityas, the Sadhyas, the celestial saptarshis, the
gandharva Vishvavasu and the masses of beautiful apsaras. They bowed in obeisance before the ancient grandfather of the worlds. The denizens of heaven surrounded the lord of the universe. Then the ancient gods, the two
rishis Nara and Narayana, departed—as if drawing out the minds and energy of the residents of heaven. Brihaspati
asked Brahma, ‘O grandfather! Who are these two? Tell us. They do not worship you.’ Brahma replied, ‘These two
ascetics illuminate heaven and earth. They are blazing and resplendent, pervasive and extremely strong. They are
Nara and Narayana, who travel from one world to another world. Because of the fruits of their austerities, they
possess great energy and valour. Through their deeds, these two certainly bring delight to the worlds. They are
worshipped by the gods and the gandharvas, for the destruction of the asuras.’ Having heard this, together with the
masses of all the gods, with Brihaspati at the forefront, Shakra went to the place where these two were performing
their austerities. At that time, the residents of heaven were terriﬁed because of the war between the gods and the
asuras. They desired a boon from the great-souled Nara and Narayana. O supreme among the Bharata lineage!
They asked Shakra to choose a boon. When he asked for their help, they told Shakra that they would act according
to his wishes. With their help, Shakra conquered the daityas and the danavas. In a battle for Indra’s cause, Nara,
the scorcher of enemies, killed hundreds and thousands of his enemies, the Poulamas and the Kalakhanjas.52 Stationed on a chariot that whirled around in the ﬁeld of battle, Arjuna used his arrows to kill Jambha, who was ready
to swallow the sacriﬁce. He penetrated Hiranyapura, which was on the other side of the ocean, after vanquishing
sixty thousand Nivatakavachas in battle. This scorcher of enemy cities has vanquished the gods, together with Indra. The mighty-armed Arjuna satisﬁed the god of ﬁre.53 In the same way, Narayana killed many others in that battle. Behold! These two immensely valorous ones have arrived as the maharatha warriors Vasudeva and Arjuna. It is
said that they are the ancient gods Nara and Narayana. They are invincible in the world of men, and even against
Indra, the gods and the asuras. It is said that Narayana is Krishna and Phalguna54 is Nara. Narayana and Nara are
one being, but have been divided into two. They have earned eternal and indestructible worlds because of their
deeds. When the time for war has arrived, they are repeatedly born there and here. This is the task that they have to
perform. That is what Narada, knowledgeable about the Vedas, told the assembled circle of the Vrishnis. O Duryodhana! O son!55 When you see Keshava with the conch shell, chakra and club in his hands, the terrible archer Arjuna grasping his weapons, and the two eternal and great-souled Krishnas56 stationed on a single chariot, you will
then remember my words. Why else has this destruction of the Kurus presented itself? O son!57 Your intelligence
has turned away from dharma and artha. If you do not heed my words, you will hear that many have been killed.
All the Kurus pay attention to your inclinations alone. O bull among the Bharata lineage! You follow the instructions of only three people—the low-born son of a suta, Karna, who was cursed by Rama;58 Shakuni Soubala; and
your mean and wicked brother Duhshasana.”
‘Karna replied, “O grandfather! You have lived for a long time. You should not speak in this way. I have been
established in the dharma of kshatriyas and have not given up my own dharma. What is the evil conduct for which
you are censuring me? The sons of Dhritarashtra know that there is no sin in me. Instead, in every deed, I have
sought to please King Dhritarashtra and Duryodhana, because he is the one who rules the kingdom.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing Karna’s words, Shantanu’s son, Bhishma, again spoke to the great king Dhritarashtra. “He always speaks about killing the Pandavas. But he is not a sixteenth part59 of the great-souled Pandavas. Know that the calamity that is about to confront your evil-souled sons is the work of this evil-minded son of
a suta. Your evil-minded son Suyodhana depends on him. He ignores those brave sons of the gods, the destroyers
of enemies.60 What extremely difﬁcult task has he61 accomplished in the past that can rival any one deed accom-

plished by any one of the Pandavas earlier? In Virata’s city, he saw his own beloved brother killed through
Dhananjaya’s valour.62 What did he do then? Dhananjaya attacked all the Kurus together, defeated them and won
back the cattle. Was he not there then? In the expedition over the cattle, your son was captured by the
gandharvas.63 The son of a suta is behaving like a bull now. Where was he then? Wasn’t it Partha and the greatsouled Bhima, together with the twins, who defeated the gandharvas then? O bull among the Bharata lineage! O
fortunate one! He is deﬁcient in dharma and artha and has always spoken many such falsehoods.” When the greatsouled Bharadvaja64 heard Bhishma’s words, he showed his respects to Dhritarashtra in the midst of those kings
and said, “O king! O best of the Bharata lineage! Act in accordance with what Bhishma has said. You should not
follow the advice of those who are greedy for kama and artha. Before embarking on a battle, I think that we should
negotiate with the Pandavas. I know that Pandava Arjuna will do everything that he has spoken in the words reported by Sanjaya. There is no archer who is his equal in the three worlds.” But ignoring the superior words spoken by Bhishma and Drona, the king asked Sanjaya about the Pandavas. When the king did not properly answer
Bhishma and Drona, all the Kurus lost any hope of remaining alive then.’
712(49)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “What did the king, Pandava, Dharma’s son, say when he heard that many soldiers had assembled against him? O suta! How is Yudhishthira preparing himself for the war? When he is worried, among his
brothers and sons, whose face does he look at? Is there any among them who strives to pacify the war? He is
knowledgeable about dharma and follows dharma. However, he has been enraged by the wicked deceipt.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “The Panchalas and Pandavas look towards the king’s face. O fortunate one! Yudhishthira
rules all of them. The separate arrays of chariots of the Pandavas and the Panchalas salute Kunti’s son, Yudhishthira, when he arrives. Kounteya’s radiant energy is like the sun rising out of darkness and the Panchalas honour this
mass of energy. The Panchalas, Kekayas, Matsyas, even cowherds and shepherds, worship Pandava Yudhishthira,
who brings them delight. Brahmana women, princesses and the daughters of vaishyas, when they are sporting, assemble to see Partha, when he is clad in his armour.”
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O Sanjaya! What forces have the Pandavas gathered against us? How are Dhrishtadyumna and his soldiers? What is the strength of the Somakas?”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Thus questioned in the assembly hall where the Kurus had gathered, Gavalgana’s son repeatedly heaved deep sighs and seemed to be lost in thought. Then, as if determined by destiny, the suta fell unconscious. In that assembly hall where the kings had gathered, a man said, “O great king! Sanjaya is unconscious and
has fallen down on the ground. He is bereft of his senses and his wisdom and cannot utter a word.” Dhritarashtra
replied, “Sanjaya has seen the maharatha sons of Kunti. His mind must have been agitated at the sight of those
tigers among men.” Sanjaya regained consciousness.
‘Having been comforted, he told the great king Dhritarashtra in the assembly hall where the Kurus had gathered,
“O Indra among kings! I have seen the maharatha sons of Kunti. They are lean because of the restraints they faced
while dwelling in the abode of the king of Matsya. O great king! Listen to the ones the Pandavas have gathered
against you. There is Ajatashatru, supreme among those who uphold dharma. O great king! He is the one against
whom dharma is measured. He has dharma in his soul and never deviates from truth for the sake of anger, fear, desire, objectives, or any other reason. The Pandavas have gathered him against you. The Pandavas have gathered
Bhimasena against you. There is no one on earth who is his equal in the strength of arms. That archer brought all
the lords of the earth under his suzerainty. After escaping from the house of lac, Vrikodara, Kunti’s son, was their
protector and saved them from the man-eating Hidimba.65 When Yajnaseni was abducted by the king of Sindhu,
Vrikodara, Kunti’s son, was their protector.66 When all the Pandavas were being burnt in Varanavata, he is the one
who freed them.67 He has been gathered against you. He is the one who killed the Krodhavashas and penetrated
the uneven and terrible Mount Gandhamadana in order to please Krishna.68 The substance and valour of ten thousand elephants is in his arms. He has been gathered against you. The Pandavas have gathered Vijaya69 against you
in battle. In earlier times, with Krishna as a second, the brave and valorous one defeated Purandara in battle and
satisﬁed the god of ﬁre.70 He satisﬁed in battle Mahadeva himself, the god of the gods, the consort of Uma,
Girisha, the wielder of the trident.71 That archer has subjugated all the lords of the world. The Pandavas have gath-

ered Vijaya against you. Nakula is a warrior who uses wonderful weapons in battle. He conquered the western regions, populated by masses of mlecchas. He is brave and handsome and is supreme among archers. O Kouravya!
The Pandavas have gathered Madri’s son against you. The Pandavas have gathered Sahadeva against you. In battle,
he conquered Kashi, Anga, Magadha and Kalinga. There are only four men on earth who are his equal in valour—
Ashvatthama, Dhrishtaketu, Pradyumna and Rukmi.72 The Pandavas have gathered that Sahadeva against you. He
is the youngest and a brave one amongst men. He brought delight to Madri. O Kurus! Shikhandi, skilled in the use
of weapons, has been gathered against you. In earlier times, she was the daughter of the king of Kashi and performed great austerities, desiring to kill Bhishma.73 O bull among the Bharata lineage! When she died, she was
born as the daughter of Panchala and, by destiny, became a man. O tiger among men! He knows about the qualities
and taints of both women and men. That Panchala is unassailable in battle and conquered Kalinga. We have heard
that a yaksha turned her into a man for the sake of killing Bhishma. The Pandavas have gathered that terrible and
great archer against you. There are ﬁve brothers who are Kekaya princes and are great archers. They are warriors
with beautiful armour. They have been gathered against you. Yuyudhana,74 the Vrishni warrior, has long arms and
is swift in the use of weapons. He is steadfast and truth is his valour. He is against you. The Pandavas have gathered Virata against you in battle. The great-souled one offered refuge to the Pandavas for some time. The maharatha lord of Kashi, who is king in Varanasi, has become a warrior on their side and has been gathered against
you. Though they are children, Droupadi’s great-souled sons are invincible in battle. Their touch is like that of virulent serpents and the Pandavas have gathered them against you. The Pandavas have gathered Abhimanyu against
you in battle. He is Krishna’s equal in valour and Yudhishthira’s equal in self-control. The Pandavas have gathered
Dhrishtaketu, the king of Chedi, against you. He is unmatched in renown and valour and is immensely famous.
That maharatha is invincible when he is enraged in battle and he is Shishupala’s son. The Pandavas have gathered
Vasudeva against you. He is the refuge of the Pandavas, just as Vasava is of the gods. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! They have Sharabha, the brother of the king of Chedi, together with Karakarsha, and have gathered them
against you. They have Jarasandha’s son, Sahadeva, and Jayatsena. There is the extremely energetic Drupada, with
a large army. He is ready to give up his life for the sake of the Pandavas and is gathered against you. These and
many other lords of the earth have come from the east and the north. With hundreds of them, Dharmaraja is prepared.”’
713(50)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “All the ones that you have named possess great enterprise. But Bhima alone is equal to all of
them together. O son!75 The angry and intolerant Bhimasena creates as great a fear in me, as that of a great ruru
deer at the sight of a tiger. I am awake throughout the night, letting out deep and warm sighs. O son!76 I am as terriﬁed of Vrikodara as a weak animal is of a lion. This mighty-armed one is Shakra’s equal in his energy. I do not
see anyone in this army who can withstand him in battle. That intolerant son of Kunti and Pandu is ﬁrm in his enmity. He does not smile, even in jest. He is mad. He has a sidelong glance. He has a loud voice. He is great in his
speed. He is great in his enterprise. He has mighty arms. He is immensely strong. He will destroy my wicked sons
in battle. Vrikodara is a bull in the Kuru lineage. When he brandishes his club in battle, like the god of death wielding his staff, the thighs of the enemies give away. I can see that terrible club in my mind’s eye, made of steel77 and
burnished with gold, like Brahma’s upraised staff. Like a strong lion wandering around among herds of deer, Bhima will roam around amidst my forces. He is a voracious eater and intolerant. His valour is cruel. Ever since his
childhood, alone, he has exhibited violence towards my sons. My heart was upset, when during childhood, Duryodhana and the others were oppressed by him, like a ﬁghting elephant. My sons have always been oppressed by his
valour. Bhima, terrible in valour, has been the cause of this dissension. I can see Bhima before me in the ﬁeld of
battle, senseless in rage and devouring arrays of men, elephants and horses. He is the equal of Drona and Arjuna in
weapons. His speed is equal to the wind. O Sanjaya! Tell me about the brave and intolerant Bhimasena. I think it
was a great gain that this intelligent one, the destroyer of enemies, did not kill all my sons at that time. Through his
terrible strength, he has slaughtered yakshas and rakshasas earlier. Which man can withstand his force in battle? O
Sanjaya! Even as a child, he was never under my control. How can the Pandava be under my control when my evil
sons have made him suffer? He is cruel. Because of that cruelty, he will break, but he will not bend. He has a side-

long glance. His brows are furrowed. How can Vrikodara be paciﬁed? His shoulders are wide. He is irresistible. He
is fair and is as tall as a palm tree. In height, Bhimasena is a pradesha78 taller than Arjuna. He surpasses horses in
speed. He surpasses elephants in strength. He has a rumble in his voice. The medium Pandava is strong and has
eyes that have the complexion of honey. I have earlier heard from the mouth of Vyasa, that the Pandava was like
that in form and strength, even when he was a child.79 Bhima is supreme among warriors. Enraged in battle, he
will use his iron club to destroy chariots, elephants, horses and men. He is always intolerant, angry and fearsome.
His valour is cruel. O son!80 Because he has acted against my wishes, he has been insulted earlier. That iron club is
heavy and decorated with gold. It has excellent sides and excellent rings. It is capable of killing one hundred.
When it is swung, with a hundred roars, how will my sons bear it? The ocean known as Bhimasena has no shores.
It cannot be crossed and is unfathomable. It is impenetrable. It has the arrows as its waves. O son!81 Only fools can
seek to cross it. Those children think themselves to be learned and do not heed my words. Seeing only the honey,
they do not think of the fall that will come. They wish to ﬁght against a wind in the form of a man. The creator
controls them, like great deer by a lion. O son!82 The club is made of steel.83 It is four cubits84 long and has six
sides. It is inﬁnitely energetic. It is terrible to the touch. When it is ﬂung, how will my sons withstand it? He will
whirl it around and smash the heads of elephants. He will lick the corners of his mouth and repeatedly shed tears of
rage. He will utter a terrible roar when he counters the elephants that attack him. He will roar back at those mad
and descending elephants. He will penetrate the paths followed by chariots and destroy the best soldiers. He will
blaze like a ﬁre. Which of my sons will escape? The mighty-armed one will carve out a path by driving back my
army. He will seem to be dancing, with a club in his hand, as if displaying the end of the era. He will be like a rutting elephant that destroys trees in blossom. In battle, Vrikodara will rout the soldiers of my sons. He will rob chariots of their men and pennants. He will shatter the drums. That tiger among men will dislodge charioteers and riders, like the torrents of the Ganga ﬂooding the banks and uprooting many trees. O Sanjaya! He will destroy the
great army of my sons. O Sanjaya! Oppressed by Bhimasena’s strength, my sons, their servants and the kings will
come under his power. With Vasudeva at his aide, it was he who penetrated the inner quarters of the immensely
valorous King Jarasandha, and killed him. This entire goddess earth had been conquered by the strong and intelligent Jarasandha, the Indra of Magadha, who then oppressed her. Because of Bhishma’s prowess, the Kurus, and
the Andhakas and the Vrishnis, because of their policies, did not come under his85 sway. Perhaps it was destined
that way. With the strength of his arms, Pandu’s son swiftly went there. Without any weapons, the brave one killed
him. What can be greater than that? He is like a snake that has accumulated its poison for a long time. O Sanjaya!
In battle, he will release that energy against my sons. With the club in his hand, Bhimasena will kill my sons, like
the great Indra, supreme among the gods, once killed the danavas with the vajra. I can see the irresistible and inevitable Vrikodara, ﬁerce in speed and valour. His eyes are more red than copper and he will descend. Who can
stand in front of that man, even if he ﬁghts with his bare arms, without a club, without a bow, without a chariot and
without armour?
‘“Bhishma, the brahmana Drona and Sharadvat’s son, Kripa, know about the valour of that intelligent one, just
as I do. Knowing the vow of aryas and unwilling to break their agreements, those bulls among men will establish
themselves at the forefront of my army. Destiny is always powerful, especially over men. I can see them triumph,
but I cannot restrain my sons. Those great archers will station themselves on the ancient path followed by Indra.
They will give up their lives in the turmoil and protect their fame on earth. O son!86 The Pandavas are to them just
as my sons are. They are Bhishma’s grandsons and the pupils of Drona and Kripa. O Sanjaya! Because they are
aryas, these three aged men will certainly repay whatever refuge and gifts we have offered them. When a brahmana takes up weapons and wishes to follow the dharma of kshatriyas, it is said that death is the supreme objective. However, I grieve for all those who wish to ﬁght with the Pandavas. The danger foretold by Vidura at the beginning has now arrived. O Sanjaya! I do not think that knowledge can counter misery. Instead, when sorrow is excessive, it overwhelms knowledge. Even free rishis, who watch over the travails of the world, rejoice at its happiness and sorrow over its unhappiness. Why should I not be affected? I am a thousand times more attached to my
sons, my kingdom, my wife, my grandsons and my relatives. I have great doubts about whether I will see supreme
peace in the future. I think and see the destruction of the Kurus. This great destruction of the Kurus seems to have
started with the game of dice. This evil act was performed by that wicked one out of greed and desire for prosperi-

ty. I think that this is the dharma of time, which extends beyond the end. Everyone is afﬁxed, like a rim to a
wheel,87 and no one is capable of running away. O Sanjaya! What can I do? How can I do it? Where will I go? Because they have come under the clutches of time, the wicked Kurus will be destroyed. O son!88 I am helpless before the destruction of one hundred of my sons. I can hear the lamentations of the women. How is death going to
touch me? Like a blazing ﬁre during summer is urged by the wind and burns the deadwood, the Pandava will wield
the club in his hand, and assisted by Arjuna, will slay my own.”’
714(51)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “We have never heard false words from him.89 He has Dhananjaya as his warrior and can rule
over the three worlds. Even though I think about it continually, I do not see any charioteer who can counter the
wielder of the Gandiva in battle. He will shoot shafted and hollow arrows that will traverse their paths and penetrate the heart. There is no one who can counter the wielder of the Gandiva in battle. Drona and Karna are brave
bulls among men. They may be able to withstand him because of their greatness. But there is no doubt that I will
not have victory in this world. Karna is compassionate, but he is rash. The preceptor is senior and aged. The powerful Partha wields a ﬁrm bow and has conquered all exhaustion. He is capable of countering them and there will
be a terrible battle, with both sides undefeated. All of them are warriors who are knowledgeable about weapons
and all of them have attained great fame. They may possess the riches of all the gods, but they will not obtain victory. There can certainly be peace if both of them90 are killed, or if Phalguna is. But Arjuna’s defeat will not happen. Nor is there anyone who can kill him. How can his rage, which has arisen against the wicked ones, be paciﬁed? There are others who know about weapons. They conquer and are conquered. But it has been heard that Phalguna only has victory as the outcome. He challenged the thirty-three gods and satisﬁed Agni in Khandava. He defeated all the gods. I know of no instance of his defeat. His charioteer is Hrishikesha, who is his equal in character
and conduct. O son!91 His victory is certain, just as Indra’s victory is. We have heard that three forces have come
together on a single chariot now, the two Krishnas92 and the stringed Gandiva bow. There is no bow like that, nor a
warrior, or a charioteer. But the wicked ones who follow Duryodhana do not know this. O Sanjaya! O son!93 When
the blazing thunderbolt descends on the head, it may leave a residue, but the arrows released by Kiriti leave no
remnant. I can already see Phalguna blazing forth. He severs the heads from the trunks with his shower of arrows.
The energy of his arrows radiates in all the directions. Ignited by Gandiva, they burn down the armies of my sons.
They are terriﬁed at the roar of Savyasachi’s chariot. I can see the large army of the Bharatas tremble and ﬂee. Like
a large ﬁre burns down deadwood and grows and spreads everywhere, with large ﬂames fanned by the wind, he
will consume those who are mine. In battle, the assassin Kiriti will release a large number of sharp arrows. He will
be like death, who robs everything, and has been ordained by the creator to slaughter everything. I see and hear of
many kinds of omens in the abode of the Kurus and around them, before the start of the war. Destruction certainly
confronts the Bharatas.”’
715(52)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “All the Pandavas are brave and desire victory. Their followers have also resolved to give up
their lives and have set their sights on victory. You yourself have spoken about those mighty enemies of mine—the
Panchalas, the Kekayas, the Matsyas, the Magadhas and the kings of Vatsa. There is also the powerful one, who if
he so wishes, can subjugate all the worlds, together with Indra. Krishna is supreme in the universe and he is also
set on victory for the Pandavas. Satyaki swiftly obtained all knowledge from Arjuna.94 Shini’s son will be stationed in the ﬁeld of battle and will shower arrows, like seeds. Dhrishtadyumna of Panchala is a maharatha and is
the performer of cruel deeds. He is strong in the knowledge of supreme weapons and will ﬁght my armies in the
war. O son!95 Great fear is generated in me from Yudhishthira’s anger, Arjuna’s valour and the twins and Bhimasena. Those Indras among men will cast out a superhuman net over my soldiers. O Sanjaya! That is the reason I am
lamenting. Pandu’s son96 is handsome and intelligent. He possesses the signs of prosperity and the radiance of
brahmanas. He is wise and his insight is excellent. He has dharma in his soul. He is surrounded by excellent
friends and advisers and he has horses to yoke and those who will yoke them. His brothers, fathers-in-law and sons
are maharathas. The Pandava, tiger among men, possesses fortitude and can maintain secrecy. He is non-violent,

generous and modest, and truth is his valour. He is extremely learned and has perfected his soul. He serves the
aged and has conquered his senses. He has all the qualities. Which wicked one will burn himself by descending
into that kindled ﬁre, like an insect? One with stupid intelligence is certain to die if he doesn’t avoid the Pandava’s
ﬁre. The king is like a tall and thin ﬂame, with a complexion of pure gold. He will bring about the destruction of
my wicked sons in battle. I think that it is best not to ﬁght. O Kurus! Listen to me. If there is a war, it is certain that
the entire lineage will be destroyed. This is supreme peace and it will pacify my mind. If you do not wish for war,
let us try for peace. If you try for this, Yudhishthira will not ignore you. He abhors adharma and blames me as having been the cause.”’
716(53)

‘Sanjaya said, “O great king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is exactly as you have said. It can be seen
that Gandiva will destroy the kshatriyas in battle. You have always been wise. But I do not know how, despite
knowing the spirit of Savyasachi, you have allowed yourself to be controlled by your sons. O great king! There is
no time now. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Right from the beginning, you yourself have always maltreated
the Parthas. A father who guides with his heart is always the best well-wisher. He should practise what is beneﬁcial. One who disregards this cannot be called a superior. O great king! When you heard that they had been defeated at the game of dice, you laughed like a child and exclaimed, ‘We have won! We have gained!’ When harsh
words were addressed towards the Parthas earlier, you ignored them. Though you knew that they had conquered
the kingdom for themselves, you did not foresee your own downfall. O great king! Only the ancestral kingdom and
Kurujangala are yours. It was only later that you obtained the entire earth, when those brave ones conquered it.
The Parthas won the earth with the valour of their arms and handed it over to you. O supreme among kings! But
you think that you obtained it yourself. O supreme among kings! When your sons were grasped by the king of the
gandharvas and were drowning in a sea without bows, it was the Parthas who brought them back. O king! You
laughed like a child when the Pandavas were deceitfully defeated in the game of dice and had to repeatedly roam
around in the forest. When Arjuna showers his many sharp arrows, even the oceans dry up, not to speak of those
who are born from ﬂesh. Phalguna is the best among archers. Gandiva is supreme among bows, Keshava among all
beings, Sudarshana97 among all chakras. Among all standards, the standard that bears the monkey is supreme.98
The one with the white steeds will bear these on his chariot in the ﬁeld of battle and destroy us. O king! He will
ﬂing us away, like the upraised wheel of time. O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! The entire earth now belongs to him. O supreme among kings! He who has Bhima and Arjuna as his warriors, is the king. Attacked by
Bhima, your army will be almost submerged. With Duryodhana at the forefront, the Kouravas will see this and
confront destruction. O great king! Your sons, and the kings who follow them, will be oppressed by fear of Bhima.
O lord! They will not be victorious. The Matsyas no longer revere you, nor do the Panchalas and the Kekayas. All
the Shalveyas and Shurasenas hate you and have gone over to the Parthas, knowing the valour of that intelligent
one.99 They are united with dharma and do not deserve to be killed or injured. That evil man,100 together with his
followers, must be restrained in every way. O great king! You should not grieve over your son. At the time of the
game with the dice, I told you, and so did the intelligent Vidura. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O Indra
among kings! All your lamentations about the Pandavas, as if you are incapable, are pointless.”’
717(54)

‘Duryodhana said, “O great king! Do not be frightened. Do not sorrow on our account. O king! O lord! We are capable of defeating our enemies in war. When the Parthas were exiled to the forest, Madhusudana went to them with
a large army that had subjugated the kingdoms of enemies. The Kekayas, Dhrishtaketu, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna
and many other kings followed the Parthas. The maharathas assembled, not far away from Indraprastha. Having
assembled together, they censured you, together with the Kurus. Yudhishthira was near them, seated on an antelope
skin. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With Krishna at the forefront, they showed him homage. The kings said
that he should act so as to take back the kingdom. They desired to uproot you, together with your followers. O
king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! When I heard this, I was scared that my relatives would be destroyed and
told Bhishma, Drona and Kripa then, ‘It is my view that the Pandavas will stick to the time they have agreed to.

Vasudeva desires that we should be completely exterminated. It is my view that, with the exception of Vidura, all
of you great-souled ones will be slain. Dhritarashtra is knowledgeable about dharma. That supreme among Kurus
cannot be slain. O father!101 Having uprooted all of us entirely, Janardana wishes to hand over the entire kingdom
of the Kurus to Yudhishthira. Has the time come for submission and running away? Will we ﬁght against the enemy and give up our lives? If we ﬁght against them, defeat will certainly be ours, because all the lords of the earth
are under Yudhishthira’s suzerainty. The kingdom is dissatisﬁed with us and all our friends are enraged. We are being censured by all the kings and all our relatives. There is no taint in submitting to our relatives for an eternal period. But I grieve for my father. He is a lord of men and has wisdom as his sight. Is it because of my deeds that he
faces this unhappiness and endless hardships. Indeed, your sons restrained the others in order to bring me pleasure.
O supreme among men! You have always known this from earlier times. Driven by enmity and revenge, the maharatha Pandavas will exterminate the lineage of King Dhritarashtra and his advisers.’ O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! At that, on seeing that I was extremely worried, with my senses tortured, Drona, Bhishma, Kripa and
Drona’s son replied, ‘O scorcher of enemies! There is nothing to fear if we are attacked by others. O lord of men!
The others are not capable of vanquishing us in battle. Each one of us is alone capable of vanquishing all the lords
of the earth. Let them advance. We will demolish their pride with sharp arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In earlier times, when his father had died, the angry Bhishma had defeated all the lords of the earth, alone on
a single chariot. Enraged, the best of the Kuru lineage had killed many of them and terriﬁed, they had sought
refuge with Devavrata.102 When supported by us in battle, Bhishma is alone capable of defeating the enemy. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! Therefore, give up your fear.’ At that time, this was the determination of these inﬁnitely energetic ones. In earlier times, the entire earth was under the control of the enemies.
‘“They are now incapable of defeating us in battle. The enemies have lost their allies and the Pandavas have lost
their valour. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The earth is now under our subjugation. The kings have joined
with us, in happiness and in grief. O scorcher of enemies! For my sake, all the kings are prepared to enter the ﬁre
and the ocean. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! You should know this. They are laughing at you because of
your grief and your many terriﬁed lamentations when you praise the enemy, thinking you to be mad. Each of these
kings is alone capable of countering the Pandavas. Each one thinks that to be true of himself. Dispel your fear.
Even Vasava is incapable of vanquishing our entire army. It cannot be destroyed even by Brahma, the one who created himself. O lord! Yudhishthira is frightened of my army and my prowess. Earlier, he only asked for ﬁve
villages.
‘“You think Kunti’s son, Vrikodara, to be capable. But that has no basis. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
You do not know my prowess. There is no one on earth who is my match in ﬁghting with the club. There has never
been an equal and there will never be one. I undertook a lot of hardships to reach those shores of learning. Therefore, I have nothing to fear from Bhima, or anyone else. O fortunate one! When I studied under him,
Samkarshana103 said, ‘It is certain that there is no one who is equal to Duryodhana in wielding the club.’ I am
Samkarshana’s equal in battle. And in might, I am his superior on earth. Bhima will not be able to withstand the
blows of my club in battle. O king! With one angry, severe and swift blow, I will dispatch Bhima to
Vaivasvata’s104 domain. O king! I wish to see Vrikodara with the club in his hand. This has been my wish and the
desire of my heart for a very long time. Slain by my club, Partha Vrikodara will fall down lifeless on the ground,
with his body shattered. Struck by the force of my club, even the Himalaya Mountains will shatter into one hundred thousand pieces. He105 knows it, and so do Vasudeva and Arjuna—there is no one equal to Duryodhana in
ﬁghting with the club. Therefore, shed your fear of Vrikodara in the great battle. O king! I will kill him. Do not be
distracted.
‘“O bull among the Bharata lineage! After he has been slain by me, many charioteers who are Arjuna’s equal or
superior will swiftly overpower him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Drona’s son,
Karna, Bhurishrava, the lord of Pragjyotisha, Shalya and Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu—each one of them is
alone capable of killing the Pandavas. They will swiftly despatch them to Yama’s abode. Why should the soldiers
of all the kings be unable to defeat Partha Dhananjaya alone? That is not reasonable. Hundreds and thousands of
arrows showered by Bhishma, Drona, Drona’s son and Kripa will despatch Partha to Yama’s abode. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! The grandfather106 was born from Ganga and Shantanu and is like a brahmarshi, difﬁcult

for even the gods to overcome. His father was pleased and told him, ‘You will not die unless you wish to do so.’
Drona was born in a wooden vessel, from the brahmarshi Bharadvaja. O great king! Drona’s son, supremely
skilled in the use of weapons, has been born from Drona. Kripa is foremost among preceptors and was born
through maharshi Goutama in a clump of reeds. I think that this illustrious one cannot be killed. These three, Ashvatthama’s father, mother and maternal uncle, were not born from human wombs.107 O great king! That brave one
is also on my side. O great king! All these maharathas are the equals of the gods. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In a battle, they can even oppress Shakra. In my view, Karna is the equal of Bhishma, Drona and Kripa. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Rama108 has told him that he is his equal. Karna possessed beautiful and radiant
earrings that he was born with. The great Indra obtained these from the scorcher of enemies for the sake of
Shachi.109 O great king! He obtained a supreme, terrible and infallible spear in return. When struck by that spear,
how can Dhananjaya survive? O king! My victory is certain, like a fruit in my hand. The complete defeat of our
enemies on earth is certain.
‘“O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On a single day, Bhishma alone will kill ten thousand. Drona, Drona’s
son and Kripa are great archers who are his equal. O scorcher of enemies! The band of samshaptaka kshatriyas110
have resolved, ‘Arjuna will kill us, or we will kill Dhananjaya.’ O lord! The kings think that they are capable of
killing Savyasachi. O king! Why do you then suffer from this grief? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When
Bhimasena has been killed, which of the others will continue to ﬁght? O scorcher of enemies! If you know of anyone amongst the enemy, tell me about him. There are the ﬁve brothers, Dhrishtadyumna and Satyaki. O king!
These seven warriors are the prime strength of the enemy. O lord of the earth! But our superior ones are Bhishma,
Drona, Kripa and the others—Drona’s son, Vaikartana Karna, Somadatta, Bahlika, the king of Pragjyotisha,
Shalya, the king of Avanti, Jayadratha, Duhshasana, Durmukha, Duhsaha, Shrutayu, Chitrasena, Purumitra,
Vivimshati, Shala, Bhurishrava and your son Vikarna. O king! I have assembled eleven akshouhinis. With seven,
the enemy has fewer. How can there be defeat? Brihaspati has said that an army that is weaker by one-third, can be
fought. O king! My soldiers outnumber the enemy by one-third. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I see that the
enemy lacks in many qualities. O lord of the earth! I see that we possess many qualities. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! On knowing all this, the superiority of our army and the inferiority of the Pandavas, you should
not be prey to this confusion.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having spoken thus, that destroyer of enemy cities
questioned Sanjaya again, because he wished to know about what was appropriate for the time.’
718(55)

‘Duryodhana said, “O Sanjaya! Kounteya Yudhishthira has obtained seven akshouhinis. Together with the kings,
what does he plan to do in preparation for the war?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! In great happiness, Yudhishthira is preparing for the war. Bhimasena, Arjuna and the
twins are not scared. Bibhatsu Kounteya has yoked his divine chariot and, invoking mantras, is radiating in all the
directions. We have seen him ready, like a cloud tinged with lightning. After invoking the mantras, he happily told
me, ‘O Sanjaya! Behold the portents. We will be victorious.’ Bibhatsu told me this and I also saw this to be true.”
‘Duryodhana said, “You happily praise the Parthas, who were defeated in the game of dice. Tell me. What kind
of chariot does Arjuna possess? What is the nature of his standard?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O lord of the earth! O lord! Together with Shakra, Tvashta and the creator, Bhouvana thought
of and created many beautiful things.111 With their celestial maya, they created many beautiful forms for the standard—extremely expensive, celestial, heavy and light. In all directions, sideways and upwards, his standard is one
yojana long. It is not entangled, even if it is surrounded by trees. Such is the maya that Bhouvana has created.
Shakra’s bow112 sparkles in the sky in many hues and we do not know what it is. Such is the standard that Bhouvana has created. It can be seen in many forms. From a ﬁre, smoke ascends up into the sky. It has energy as its
body, but has many forms. Such is the standard that Bhouvana has created. It has no weight and it does not face
any impediments. He has excellent and white horses that are as ﬂeet as the wind. They are divine and a gift from
Chitraratha.113 Even when some are killed, one hundred will always remain. This was the boon that was granted
earlier. The king114 has large and ivory-coloured horses yoked to his chariot, a match for his valour. In battle, Bhi-

masena has mounts that are as swift as the wind and have the hue of antelopes. Sahadeva has mounts with speckled
bodies, with backs that have the colour of partridges. In affection and delight, his brother Phalguna gave them to
him. These horses are superior to those of his brave brother. Madri’s son, Nakula Ajamidha,115 has supreme and
bay horses that were given by the great Indra. They are equal to the wind in strength and speed and they bear the
brave one, like Indra, the slayer of Vritra. There are horses that are their equal in age and valour. They are well
trained and have no equals in their speed. They bear Subhadra’s son and Droupadi’s sons. These are large horses
that were given by the gods.”’
719(56)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! Whom else did you see assembled there, to ﬁght for the sake of the Pandavas
against the army of my sons?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “I saw Krishna, the foremost of the Andhakas and the Vrishnis arrive, and Chekitana and
Yuyudhana Satyaki. These two maharathas pride themselves on their manliness and have joined the Pandavas with
one akshouhini each. The king of Panchala came, surrounded by one akshouhini and his ten brave sons, Satyajit
and the others, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront. Drupada increased their fame and they are protected by
Shikhandi. He covered the bodies of all his soldiers.116 Virata arrived with his sons, Shankha and Uttara, with
Suryadatta and the other brave ones, Madirashva leading the way. The lord of the earth was surrounded by his
brothers and sons and joined the Parthas, surrounded by one akshouhini of soldiers. Jarasandha’s son from Magadha and Dhrishtaketu, the king of Chedi, arrived, each followed and surrounded by one akshouhini. All the ﬁve
brothers from Kekaya, with red standards, were surrounded by one akshouhini and joined the Pandavas. These are
the numbers that I saw assembled there, for the sake of the Pandavas, and wishing to ﬁght with the army of the
sons of Dhritarashtra. The immensely intelligent Dhrishtadyumna is the army’s general. He knows about the battle
formations used by men, gods, gandharvas and asuras. O king! Shikhandi has been given the task of killing Bhishma, Shantanu’s son. He will be supported by Virata and the warriors from Matsya. The powerful king of Madra
has been assigned to the eldest son of Pandu.117 But there were some who held the view that the two are mismatched. Duryodhana, with his sons and one hundred brothers, and the kings who have come from the east and the
south, are Bhimasena’s share. It has been held that Arjuna’s share is Vaikartana Karna, Ashvatthama, Vikarna and
Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu. Partha Arjuna has also accepted as his share all those on earth who pride themselves on their bravery and think themselves to be invincible. The ﬁve great archers, the princes from Kekaya,
have accepted as their share the Kekayas who will ﬁght in the battle.118 The Malavas, Shalvas and Kekayas are
part of their share too, as are the two foremost ones from Trigarta who are samshaptakas.119 All of Duryodhana
and Duhshasana’s sons have been accepted by Subhadra’s son as his share, and also King Brihadbala.120 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, the mighty archers who are Droupadi’s sons
and have standards decorated with gold, will attack Drona. Chekitana wishes to ﬁght Somadatta in a duel of chariots. Yuyudhana wishes to ﬁght with Kritavarma, from the Bhoja lineage. Madri’s brave son Sahadeva, who roars in
battle, has accepted as his share the task of killing your brother-in-law, the son of Subala.121 The deceitful Uluka
and the masses of Sarasvatas have been thought of as the share of Nakula, Madri’s son. O king! There are other
kings who will ﬁght in the battle. The sons of Pandu have assigned them, depending on who challenges whom.
This is the way in which the army has been divided into parts. You and your son must do whatever has to be done,
swiftly.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “All my sons are stupid. They are deceitful gamblers. They are lost, because they will have
to ﬁght the powerful Bhima in the forefront of the battle. All the kings of the earth have been assigned according to
the dharma of time. They will enter the ﬁre of Gandiva, like insects entering a ﬂame. I can see my enemy destroyed by those great-souled ones, who have been made enemies. In a battle, who will follow those who have
been shattered by the Pandavas in a ﬁght? All of them are brave atirathas.122 They are famous in their deeds and
powerful. Each is equal in energy to the sun and the ﬁre. They are victorious in battle. Yudhishthira is their leader
and they are protected by Madhusudana. Those two brave Pandavas, Savyasachi and Vrikodara, Nakula, Sahadeva,
Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, Drupada, Dhrishtadyumna’s son, Uttamouja from Panchala, the invincible
Yudhamanyu, Shikhandi, Kshatradeva, Virata’s son Uttara, those from Kashi, Chedi and Matsya, all the Srinjayas,

Virata’s son Babhru, the Panchalas and the Prabhadrakas, from whom Indra himself cannot steal the earth if they
are unwilling—all of these are brave ones who are steady in war. They can shatter the mountains. All these are
powerful men who possess all the qualities. O Sanjaya! While I grieve, these are the ones my wicked sons wish to
ﬁght.”
‘Duryodhana said, “Both the sides come from the same lineage. Both the sides walk on earth. Why do you then
think that only the Pandavas can be victorious? The grandfather,123 Drona, Kripa, the invincible Karna, Jayadratha,
Somadatta and Ashvatthama are extremely intelligent and great archers. O father! Forget the Pandavas. Even the
immortals, led by Indra, are incapable of vanquishing them in a ﬁght. O father! The brave Pandavas are aryas in
conduct, they are like the ﬁre. But the entire earth is on my side and against them. The Pandavas are incapable of
even looking at my army. I am sufﬁciently powerful to challenge the Pandavas, together with their sons, in a battle.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All these kings wish to do that which ensures me pleasure. They will restrain
them, like deer caught in a net. Through my great collection of chariots and net of arrows, the Panchalas and the
Pandavas will be subjugated.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! My son is raving like a lunatic. He will not be able to vanquish Dharmaraja
Yudhishthira in battle. Bhishma has always known how famous the great-souled Pandavas are, their knowledge of
dharma and their strength, together with that of their sons. That is the reason I do not wish to ﬁght with those
great-souled ones. O Sanjaya! But tell me again about their efforts. Who is igniting the swift Pandavas? They are
great and ﬂaming archers. Who is offering oblations into those who are like ﬁre?”
‘Sanjaya said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dhrishtadyumna always incites them and says, ‘O supreme
among the Bharata lineage! Fight and do not be frightened of the war. There are kings who have surrounded Dhritarashtra’s son and will assemble in that tumultuous battle, like a lake of armour. Those angry ones will gather for
that battle, with their followers. But I alone will devour them, like a whale devours ﬁsh in the ocean. I will restrain
Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna, Drona’s son, Shalya and Suyodhana—just as the shoreline restrains the abode of
the sharks.’124 When he spoke in this way, King Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul, told him, ‘The Panchalas
and the Pandavas together depend on your fortitude and valour in this war. Save all of us in this battle. O mightyarmed one! I know that you are always established in the dharma of kshatriyas. You are alone capable of countering the belligerent Kouravas. O scorcher of enemies! Whatever you decide, will be for our welfare. There are those
who are shattered and running away from the ﬁeld of battle, seek refuge. It is better to purchase a man who stands
his ground and shows his valour and manliness than one thousand of those others. You know that policy. O bull
among men! You are courageous. You are brave. You are valorous. There is no doubt that you are the saviour of
those who are frightened in battle.’ When Kounteya Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul, spoke these words,
without any fear, Dhrishtadyumna addressed me in this way. ‘O suta! Tell all those who have come as Duryodhana’s warriors from different countries—Bahlikas, Kurus who are descended from Pratipa’s lineage, the Sharadvats, the son of the suta, Drona and his son, Jayadratha, Duhshasana, Vikarna, King Duryodhana and Bhishma.
Without any delay, go swiftly and tell them this. It is best that you come to peace with Yudhishthira. Otherwise,
Arjuna, protected by the gods, will kill you. Swiftly give Pandava, the brave one in the world, what he wants.
There is no warrior on earth who is Savyasachi Pandava’s equal. He is supreme in the use of weapons in the proper
way. The celestial chariot of the wielder of the Gandiva is protected by the gods. No man can defeat him. Do not
even think about ﬁghting against him.’”’
720(57)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “Since his childhood, the brahmachari Pandava has possessed the energy of kshatriyas. Despite
my lamentations, these stupid ones wish to ﬁght him. O Duryodhana! O best of the Bharata lineage! Refrain from
war. O destroyer of enemies! There are no circumstances under which war is praised. Together with your advisers,
half the earth should be enough for you to live on. O destroyer of enemies! Give Pandu’s sons what is due to them.
All the Kurus think that it is in accordance with dharma that you should make peace with the great-souled sons of
Pandu. O son! Look at the different constituents of your army. This has been created for your detriment. But because of your folly, you do not realize this. I do not want a war. Nor does Bahlika want it. Nor do Bhishma, Drona,
Ashvatthama, Sanjaya, Somadatta, Shalya, Kripa, Satyavrata, Purumitra, Jaya and Bhurishrava desire war. When

they are oppressed by enemies, these are the ones the Kurus seek refuge with. O son! They do not applaud this war
and you should ﬁnd that acceptable. You yourself do not desire it. Karna is making you do this, and Duhshasana,
with evil in his soul, and Shakuni Soubala.”
‘Duryodhana replied, “When I challenge them, I am not placing the burden of the war on you, Drona, Ashvatthama, Sanjaya, Vikarna, Kamboja, Kripa, Bahlika, Satyavrata, Purumitra, Bhurishrava, or any of the others on
your side. O father! Karna and I will perform this sacriﬁce of the war. O bull among the Bharata lineage! We have
been consecrated and Yudhishthira will be the sacriﬁcial animal. The chariot will be the altar, the sword will be the
ladle, the club will be the larger ladle and the armour will be the assisting priests. The horses will be the four ofﬁciating priests. The arrows will be the darbha grass. Fame will be the oblations. O king! Having sacriﬁced ourselves to Vaivasvata125 in this war, we will return in triumph, having slain our enemies and surrounded by prosperity. O father! Three of us—Karna, my brother Duhshasana and I, will kill the Pandavas in battle. I will kill the Pandavas and rule over this earth. Or the sons of Pandu will enjoy the earth after having killed me. O king! I can give
up my life, my riches and my kingdom. O king! O one without decay! But I cannot live together with the Pandavas. O venerable one! I will not give up to the Pandavas as much of land as can be pricked with the point of a
sharp needle.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “O son! I sorrow for all you kings who are following this stupid one to the eternal world of
Vaivasvata. Duryodhana has been disowned by me. These supreme warriors will be like tigers among herds of ruru
deer. The Pandavas will gather together and kill the best of your warriors. It seems to me that the army of the
Bharatas is like a frightened woman who has fallen down and has been molested by one with long arms. Increasing
the overﬂowing strength that Partha already possessed, Shini’s son, Madhava,126 will station himself in the ﬁeld of
battle, showering arrows like seeds. Bhimasena will be at the forefront of the army and he will be a rampart, behind which, all of them will fearlessly seek refuge. When you see the elephants brought down by Bhima in battle,
their tusks shattered, their temples broken and blood oozing, they will seem to be like splintered mountains. When
you are frightened at Bhima’s touch, you will then remember my words. You will see your army burned down by
Bhimasena. The charioteers and elephants will be slain. You will see that destruction, like the trail of a ﬁre, and remember my words. If you do not have peace with the Pandavas, you will confront a great danger. You will ﬁnd
peace only when Bhimasena kills you with the club. When you see the army of the Kurus brought down in battle,
like a large forest that has been destroyed, you will then remember my words.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O great king! After the king had spoken in this way to all the kings, he again turned to
Sanjaya and asked him …’
721(58)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “What did those two great-souled ones, Vasudeva and Arjuna, say? O immensely wise one!
Tell me. I wish to listen to your words.”
‘Sanjaya said, “O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen to me and I will tell you how I found
Krishna and Dhananjaya and what those two brave ones said. O king! After purifying myself, I entered the quarters of those gods among men, looking at my toes and joining my hands in salutation. Abhimanyu and the twins
are not allowed entry into the abode where the two Krishnas, and Krishna127 and the beautiful Satyabhama, reside.
Both of them were drunk with liquor and both had their bodies smeared with sandalwood. They wore garlands, excellent garments and were adorned with divine ornmanets. The two destroyers of enemies were seated on a large
and golden couch, which was covered with many carpets. I saw that Keshava’s feet were on Arjuna’s lap, while the
great-souled Arjuna’s were on Krishna and Satya.128 Partha pointed out a golden footstool to me. After touching it
with my hands, I seated myself on the ground.129 When Partha removed his feet from the footstool, I saw two longitudinal auspicious marks on the soles of his pure feet. Having seen those two dark, large and young men seated
on the same seat, like the trunks of shala trees, I was struck by great fear. They were like Indra and Vishnu together. The evil-souled one130 does not understand this, because he depends on Drona and Bhishma and listens to Karna’s bragging. Since these two obeyed Dharmaraja’s instructions, I became convinced in my mind that his desires
would be met. Having been honoured with food and drink and a garment, and having been shown respect, I placed
my hands on my head131 and conveyed the message. Partha’s hand bore the auspicious marks made by a bow and

arrows. With this, he nudged Keshava’s feet, prompting him to reply. Krishna is like Indra in his valour. He was
adorned with all the ornaments and he was as upright as Indra’s standard. The most eloquent of speakers spoke
these words. They were appropriate and pleasant words. But though they were mild, they were extremely terrible
and frightening for Dhritarashtra’s sons. I listened to the words of the one who should be heard. The syllables were
trained and clear. They were meant for everyone’s welfare. But at the end, they dried up my heart.”
‘“Vasudeva said, ‘O Sanjaya! In the presence of the foremost among the Kurus and in Drona’s hearing, speak
these words to the intelligent Dhritarashtra. “Offer a large number of sacriﬁces and donate stipends to the brahmanas. Enjoy yourselves with your sons and wives. A great danger confronts you. Distribute your riches among
deserving ones. Have sons born out of love. Do good deeds towards those you love. The king132 will soon be victorious. That old debt is still impaled in my heart, because I have not repaid it. When I was far away, Krishna cried
out, ‘Govinda!’133 Savyasachi’s Gandiva bow is full of power and is invincible. He has an enmity with you and
that is the reason I am helping him now. With me as an aide, who wishes to challenge Partha, even if it were to be
Purandara himself, unless because of destiny, his time has come? He can raise the earth with his arms. He can angrily burn down these beings. He can dislodge the thirty gods from heaven. Who can defeat Arjuna in battle?
Among the gods, asuras, men, yakshas, gandharvas and serpents, I do not see anyone who is capable of withstanding the Pandava in battle. An extraordinary wonder in the city of Virata is spoken about and is sufﬁcient example,
when a single one was enough to counter many. Faced with Pandu’s son alone in the city of Virata, they were shattered and ﬂed in all the directions. This is sufﬁcient example. Such strength, valour, energy, speed, dexterity of
hand, perseverance and fortitude are found in no one other than Partha.”’”
‘Sanjaya said, “Thus spoke Hrishikesha, delighting Partha with words that roared like the chastiser of Paka134 in
the sky, when it is the time for rains. After having heard Keshava’s words, Kiriti Arjuna, the one with the white
horses, himself spoke words that were extremely terrifying.”’
722(59)

Vaishampayana said, ‘The lord of men possessed the eyesight of wisdom. Having heard Sanjaya’s words, he began
to consider the pros and cons of the war. The intelligent one considered them in detail, the good and the bad. He
reﬂected on them, wishing for victory for his sons. The intelligent lord of men reﬂected on the strengths and the
weaknesses, the powers of the two sides in battle. He concluded that the Pandavas possessed superior strength and
energy, both divine and human and that the Kurus were weaker in strength.
‘He addressed Duryodhana. “O Duryodhana! This anxiety does not leave my mind. I know this to be the truth,
and do not deduce it from my imagination. All beings have excessive affection towards their sons and, according
to capacity, do everything to please them and ensure their welfare. In a similar way, it is usually seen that those
who have been beneﬁted wish to bring great pleasure to their benefactors in return. Therefore, remembering the
good deeds performed by Arjuna in Khandava, Agni will help him in the terrible encounter between the Kurus and
the Pandavas. Dharma and many other residents of heaven will be invoked and be on the side of the Pandavas, out
of affection for their sons. Desiring to protect them from the fear of Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and the others, I think
that their wrath will be ignited, like lightning. The Parthas are tigers among men. They have human valour and are
skilled in the use of weapons. With the gods as their aides, they cannot be repulsed. He possesses the supreme and
celestial bow Gandiva, which is irresistible. He has Varuna’s divine and great inexhaustible quivers, always ﬁlled
with arrows. He possesses the monkey on his celestial standard, which blazes trails of smoke. His chariot has no
equal in the four corners of earth. It has the roar of a giant cloud and when men hear its giant, fearful and thunderous roar, the enemies are terriﬁed. The worlds know him for his superhuman valour. The kings know him to be one
who can vanquish the gods in battle. He has been seen to grasp ﬁve hundred arrows and release them in an instant,
so that they descend a long distance away. Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Drona’s son, King Shalya of Madra and men
who are neutral declare that when Partha is stationed in battle, even superhuman kings cannot counter him. He is a
tiger among men and is a destroyer of enemies. In a single burst, he unleashes ﬁve hundred swift arrows. The Pandava is Kartavirya’s135 equal in the valour of his arms. This Arjuna is a great archer and is protected by the great
Indra and Upendra.136 I see us being slaughtered by him in the great battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I
think about these things throughout day and night. I remain sleepless and without happiness, thinking about peace

for the Kurus. A great destruction has presented itself before the Kurus. O son! I have always favoured peace with
the Parthas, and not this war. I have always thought that the Pandavas have greater strength than the Kurus.”’
723(60)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing his father’s words, Dhritarashtra’s intolerant son was extremely angered and
again said, “O supreme among kings! If you think that the Parthas cannot be countered because they are helped by
the gods, throw away your fears. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The gods obtained their divinity because
they are impervious to love, hatred, malice and avarice and because they ignore all sentiments. Dvaipayana Vyasa
and the immensely ascetic Narada have told us this in earlier times, and so has Rama, Jamadagni’s son.137 O bull
among the Bharata lineage! The gods never act like humans, driven by love, hatred, malice and avarice. If Agni,
Vayu, Dharma, Indra and the Ashvins favour the Parthas because of their affection, they would not have faced
hardships.138 Therefore, you should not have any worries on this account. The gods always ignore sentiments that
have nothing to do with divine affairs. Their divinity would be called into question if the gods were seen to be motivated by love, hatred and avarice. When the ﬁre wishes to burn the worlds and surrounds them in all the directions, wishing to burn them down, I can invoke mantras and it praises me. The energy that the residents of heaven
possess is supreme. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But the gods cannot match me and they know it. O king!
While the worlds look on, with my mantras, I can establish the shattered mountains and summits of the earth.
When the sensate and insensate, the mobile and immobile, face destruction and there is a terrible and large roar,
with a shower of rocks and a gale, driven by compassion for all beings, I can pacify everything, while the universe
looks on. Chariots and infantry can march over the water I have solidiﬁed. I am the one who directs the affairs of
the gods and the asuras. When I go with my akshouhinis to any country, whatever be the reason, there the waters
follow my instructions and my desires. O king! There is no fear from snakes and other beings within my dominion.
When beings are asleep, they do not face terrible violence. O king! Parjanya139 showers down on those who reside
there, without their asking for it. All the subjects are based on dharma and they are not afﬂicted by anything. The
Ashvins, Vayu, Agni, the Maruts, the slayer of Vritra and Dharma are unable to protect those whom I hate. If they
had been capable of saving my enemies with their great powers, the Parthas would not have endured unhappiness
for thirteen years. I tell you truthfully. The gods, the gandharvas, the asuras and the rakshasas are not capable of
saving the ones whom I hate. It has never been the case that the good and evil I respectively wish to bestow on
both my friends and enemies have failed to materialize. O scorcher of enemies! Whatever I have mentioned as inevitable, has never failed to happen. That is the reason I am known as one who speaks the truth. The world is a
witness to my greatness and it is famous everywhere. O king! I have said all this to reassure you and not because I
wish to praise myself. O king! I have never indulged in self-praise earlier. One who praises one’s own self is inferior. You will hear that I have defeated the Pandavas, together with the Matsyas, Panchalas, Kekayas, Satyaki and
Vasudeva. Rivers are destroyed when they reach the ocean. Like that, they and their followers will be destroyed
when they reach me. I possess supreme intelligence. I possess supreme energy. My valour is supreme. I possess
supreme learning. I possess supreme yoga. All these distinguish me over them. Whatever the grandfather,140
Drona, Kripa, Shalya and Shala know about weapons—all that is vested in me.” O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having spoken thus, wishing to ﬁght, the scorcher of enemies questioned Sanjaya, to determine the time to
accomplish different tasks.’
724(61)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Disregarding Vichitravirya’s son,141 who kept reﬂecting on the Parthas, Karna addressed
Dhritarashtra’s son142 in the assembly of Kouravas, so as to cheer him up. “In earlier times, when Rama found that
I had obtained the brahmastra weapon from him under false pretences, he told me, ‘When your end has come, it
will not appear before you.’143 The maharshi possessed ﬁerce energy and was capable of burning up the entire
earth, along with her oceans. I had committed a grave crime. But even when the maharshi imposed that grave
curse, he did it pleasantly. Because of my servitude and manliness, his mind was gratiﬁed by me. I still possess the
weapon and I still have some life left. Therefore, the burden is mine and I am capable of bearing it. Through the
favours of the rishi, I will kill the Panchalas, the Karushas and the Matsyas in an instant. I will kill the Parthas,

with their sons and grandsons. I will give you the worlds I will obtain with my weapons. Let grandfather,144 Drona
and all the foremost among kings stay with you. I will go with the best soldiers and kill the Parthas. That is my
burden.” While he was saying this, Bhishma responded, “What are you saying? Your intelligence has been numbed
by destiny. O Karna! Do you not know that once the foremost ones have been killed, Dhritarashtra’s sons will be
dead? With Krishna as his second, Dhananjaya burnt down Khandava. Hearing about that should be sufﬁcient to
restrain your soul and those of your relatives. The great-souled, illustrious and great Indra, the lord of the thirty
gods, bestowed a spear on you. In battle, you will see it shattered and reduced to ashes, struck down by Keshava’s
chakra. There is a radiant arrow with the mouth of a serpent.145 You have always honoured and protected it with
the best of garlands. It will be struck by the arrows of Pandu’s sons. O Karna! Together with you, it will be destroyed. O Karna! Vasudeva, who killed Bana and Bhoumya,146 himself protects Kiriti. In tumultuous battles, he
has killed many enemies who are your equal and superior.” Karna said, “There is no doubt that the great-souled
lord of the Vrishnis is as you have described him, and even greater. But let me respond to the harsh words that the
grandfather has spoken. Let him listen to the consequences. The grandfather will see me in the assembly hall, but
not in the war. But until he has obtained peace, I will lay down my weapons and all the kings of the earth will not
witness my power.”147 The great archer spoke in this way. He left the assembly hall and went to his own residence.
O king! Amidst the Kurus, Bhishma laughed and told Duryodhana, “This son of a suta is sworn to the truth. How
will he now discharge his burden? He will witness battle formations and counter battle formations and heads shattered, as there is a destruction of the world by Bhimasena. ‘While Avanti, Kalinga, Jayadratha, Bahlika and Vedidhvaja are stationed, I will kill thousands and tens of thousands of enemy soldiers.’148 When he obtained weapons
from the unblemished and illustrious Rama through deceit, proclaiming himself to be a brahmana, Vaikartana, the
worst of men, destroyed his dharma and his austerities.” When Bhishma, Indra among kings, had spoken, and Karna had departed after laying down his weapons, Duryodhana, Vichitravirya’s foolish descendant, spoke to Shantanu’s son.’
725(62)

‘Duryodhana said, “All the Parthas have been born like other men. Why do you think that they alone can be victorious? All of us have been born in the same way. All of us are from human wombs. O grandfather! How do you
know that the Parthas will be victorious? For victory, I do not depend on you, or Drona, Kripa and Bahlika, or the
other Indras among men. I, Vaikartana Karna and my brother Duhshasana will kill the ﬁve Pandavas in battle with
sharp arrows. O king! I will then perform a great sacriﬁce and offer a large quantity of stipends. I will satisfy the
brahmanas with cattle, horses and riches.”
‘Vidura replied, “O son!149 We have heard the aged ones tell us the story of a fowler who spread his net out on
the ground to catch birds. Two equally strong birds were captured in that net. But they grasped the net and took to
the sky. When the fowler saw them rise up into the sky, he did not lose his senses, but dashed after them. There
was a sage in a hermitage, and he had ﬁnished his ablutions, when he saw the fowler running after the birds that he
was trying to catch. They were in the sky and he was swiftly following them on the ground. O Kouravya! The sage
then addressed him with this shloka. ‘O hunter! It seems to me extraordinary that with your feet on the ground, you
are chasing those in the sky.’ The fowler replied, ‘Together, these two are carrying my net away. But once they begin to quarrel, they will come under my control.’ Doomed to die, the birds began to quarrel. When they quarrelled,
the stupid ones fell down on the ground. Ensnared by the noose of death, they began to ﬁght ferociously with each
other. Undetected, the fowler approached them and caught them. In a similar way, relatives who ﬁght over possessions are overcome by their enemies, like those birds. Relatives should eat together, converse together, ask about
each other and assemble together. They should never quarrel. As long as they serve their elders with excellent intentions, they are as invisible as a forest protected by lions. O bull among the Bharata lineage! But those who have
obtained extensive prosperity, but continue to remain mean, hand over their riches to those who hate them. O son
of Dhritarashtra! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Relatives are like kindling that smoke when separated. But
when they are together, they blaze away. I will tell you about something that I once saw on a mountain. O
Kouravya! When you have heard this, do what you think is best. Together with kiratas and brahmanas, the equals
of the gods, who were learned in incantations and medicines, we once travelled to the northern mountains. We

went to Mount Gandhamadana, which is like a grove. It was lit up with a large quantity of herbs and was frequented by siddhas and gandharvas. All of us saw some yellow honey there, but it didn’t come from bees. It was placed
in an uneven mountainous crevice and was as large as the amount a pot can hold. This was Kubera’s favourite
drink and was guarded by virulent serpents. On drinking it, a mortal man becomes immortal. One without sight
gets his eyesight back. One who is aged becomes young. This is what those brahmanas, conversant with herbs, told
us. O lord of the earth! When the kiratas saw it, they wished to grasp it. They were destroyed in that mountainous
cavern that was full of snakes. In that way, this son of yours wishes for the earth alone.150 Because of his delusion,
he sees the honey, but does not see the downfall. Duryodhana wishes to ﬁght with Savyasachi in battle. But I do
not see that he possesses the requisite energy and valour. On a single chariot, he151 conquered the entire earth. Patiently, that brave one is looking towards you and is waiting. Drupada, king of the Matsyas, and an enraged
Dhananjaya will be like ﬁres fanned by the wind and will leave no remnants in battle. O Dhritarashtra! Take King
Yudhishthira on your lap. When two sides ﬁght in battle, there is no clear victory for either side.”’
726(63)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Duryodhana! O son! Think about what I am telling you. Like one who does not know the
route, you think that the wrong path is the right one. You wish to envelope the energy of the ﬁve great-souled sons
of Pandu. But it is as great as the ﬁve elements. Kounteya Yudhishthira is established in supreme dharma. Without
attaining the supreme objective,152 you cannot know him. Kounteya Bhimasena has no one equal to him in
strength. He is a killer in battle. But you are challenging him, like a tree against a great storm. Which intelligent
one wishes to ﬁght against the warrior who is the wielder of Gandiva? He is supreme among those who know all
the weapons, like Meru is among mountains. Whom can Panchala Dhrishtadyumna not vanquish? He releases arrows in the midst of the enemy, like the king of the gods with the vajra. Satyaki is also invincible and is revered by
the Andhakas and Vrishnis. He is always engaged in the welfare of the Pandavas and will destroy your soldiers.
Then again, which intelligent person will ﬁght with Krishna Pundarikaksha,153 who is superior to the three worlds?
His wives, relatives, kin, his own self and the earth are on one side and Dhananjaya alone on the other. The invincible Vasudeva, in control of his soul, is where the Pandava is. His154 forces, impossible for the earth to withstand,
are where Keshava is. O son! Abide by the words your virtuous well-wishers have spoken for your welfare. Listen
to the aged grandfather Bhishma, Shantanu’s son. Listen to what I have said for the welfare of the Kurus. Drona,
Kripa, Vikarna and the great king Bahlika think the same way that I do. You should listen to them. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! All of them are learned in dharma and are equally affectionate towards you. Your forces, together with those of your brothers, were scattered in Virata’s city. Before your eyes, they had to relinquish the cattle in a great ﬁght. We have heard the extraordinary account told about that city, where one was enough for many.
That is sufﬁcient proof. This is what Arjuna alone accomplished. What will all of them do together? Know them to
be your brothers and give them a means of sustenance.”’
727(64)

Vaishampayana said, ‘The immensely wise Dhritarashtra spoke to Suyodhana in this way. He again asked the immensely fortunate Sanjaya. “O Sanjaya! Tell me what else Arjuna said after Vasudeva had spoken. I am extremely
curious.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “After hearing Vasudeva’s words, in Vasudeva’s hearing, the invincible Dhananjaya, Kunti’s
son, spoke these words at that time. ‘O Sanjaya! Go to the grandfather who is Shantanu’s son, Dhritarashtra,
Drona, Karna, the great king Bahlika, Drona’s son, Somadatta, Shakuni Soubala, Duhshasana, Shala, Purumitra,
Vivimshati, Vikarna, Chitrasena, the king Jayatsena, Vinda, Anuvinda, the two from Avanti, the Kourava Durmukha, the invincible Saindhava,155 Bhurishrava, King Bhagadatta, King Jalasandha and all the other kings who
have assembled to ﬁght for the cause of the Kouravas. O suta! Having gathered for the sake of Dhritarashtra’s son,
they are destined to die in the blazing ﬁre of the Pandavas. As is proper, honour them and ask about their welfare.
When they have assembled, tell them my words. O Sanjaya! Tell this in the midst of that assembly of kings to Suyodhana, foremost among wicked ones. “The prince is intolerant and evil-minded. Dhritarashtra’s son is avaricious
and wicked in his soul.” O Sanjaya! Tell him my complete words, while he listens with his advisers.’ Having thus

started, the wise Partha Dhananjaya, with long and red eyes, looked towards Vasudeva and told me these words
that were full of dharma and artha. ‘You have listened attentively to the words spoken by the great-souled chief of
the Madhus. Those words are mine too and convey them to all the assembled kings. Let all the assembled ones endeavour so that there isn’t a great sacriﬁce of battle, with arrows as the smoke of ﬁre, chariots as chants and the ladle of the bow pouring oblations on your soldiers. Since you did not return to Yudhishthira, the destroyer of enemies, what he desires as his share, I will use my sharp arrows to send you, with your horses, infantry and elephants, to the pure region of the ancestors.’156 Then I quickly took my leave of Dhananjaya and the four-armed
Hari.157 I returned with the radiance of the immortals, to report those great words to you.”’
728(65)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When Dhritarashtra’s son, Duryodhana, refused to accept those words, all those lords among
men stood up and were silent. O great king! After all the kings of the earth had arisen, the king questioned Sanjaya
in private. He was under the control of his sons and wished for their victory. He tried to arrive at a conclusion
about himself, the others and the Pandavas. Dhritarashtra said, “O son of Gavalgana! Tell me about the strength
and the weakness of our own army. You know everything about the Pandavas. How are they superior? In which
way are they inferior? You know everything about the strengths of both sides. You are skilled about the decisions
that bring dharma and artha. O Sanjaya! I am asking you. Tell me everything. Which of the two sides will cease to
exist in the battle?” Sanjaya replied, “I will tell you, as long as it is not in secret. O king! Otherwise, you will hold
that against me. O Ajamidha! Bring your father,158 who is great in his vows, and Queen Gandhari. O Indra among
men! They are knowledgeable about dharma and skilled in their determination. They will dispel any hatred you
might feel. It is only in their presence that I will tell you everything about Vasudeva and Arjuna’s thoughts.” Having got to know159 about the intentions of Sanjaya and his son, the immensely wise Krishna Dvaipayana arrived
there and said, “O Sanjaya! Tell Dhritarashtra what he has asked. Answer his question completely. In this connection, tell him everything exactly as you know it, about Vasudeva and Arjuna.”’
729(66)

‘Sanjaya said, “Arjuna and Vasudeva are supremely honoured archers. They have everything in them and have
been born in this way because of their own wishes. O lord! The intelligent Vasudeva’s chakra is hidden in the ﬁrmament and works through the powers of maya. It may be hidden from the Pandavas, but the Pandavas honour it. I
am brieﬂy telling you about their strengths and weaknesses. Listen. As if in play, the immensely strong Janardana
Madhava defeated Naraka, Shambara, Kamsa and the king of Chedi, who was terrible in form. Purushottama160
pervades the earth, the sky and heaven. He is supreme in his soul and everything is under his control. O king! You
have repeatedly asked me about the Pandavas, wishing to know about the strengths and weaknesses of their forces.
If you place the entire universe on one side and Janardana on the other, Janardana will exceed the essence of the
entire universe. Through his mind, Janardana can reduce the entire universe to ashes. But nothing in the universe
can reduce Janardana to ashes. Wherever there is truth, wherever there is dharma, wherever there is modesty,
wherever there is uprightness, Govinda is present there. Wherever there is Krishna, victory exists there. As if in
play, Purushottama Janardana, the soul of all beings, guides the earth, the sky and heaven. Using the Pandavas as
his instruments and keeping the world in delusion, he wishes to burn down your stupid sons, who are devoted to
adharma. Through his own yoga, the illustrious Keshava makes the wheel of time, the wheel of the universe and
the wheel of the yugas ceaselessly go round and round. I tell you truthfully that the illustrious lord alone governs
time and death, the mobile and the immobile. Hari, the great yogi, is the lord of everything in the universe. But he
yet undertakes tasks, like any ordinary tiller of the soil. Thus, Keshava deceives the world with the maya of his
yoga. But men who seek refuge with him are not deluded.”’
730(67)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! How is it that you know Madhava as the great lord of all the worlds? Why do I
not know that? Tell me this.”

‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! You do not possess the knowledge. But my knowledge is not lacking. Devoid of
knowledge and overcome by darkness, you do not know Keshava. O father!161 Through this knowledge, I know
Madhusudana of the three yugas162 as the god who is the creator and the end of all beings, though he has himself
not been created.”
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O son of Gavalgana! What is the extent of the faith that you always have in Janardana, as
a result of which you know the Madusudana of the three yugas?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O fortunate one! I do not fall prey to maya. I do not pretend to act in accordance with dharma.
I become pure in sentiments through my faith. I know Janardana from the sacred texts.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Duryodhana! Resort to Hrishikesha Janardana. O son! We have trust in Sanjaya. Seek
refuge with Keshava.”
‘Duryodhana replied, “If Keshava, Devaki’s illustrious son, wishes to destroy the worlds, because of his avowed
friendship with Arjuna, I will not seek refuge with him, not even now.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Gandhari! This son of yours is extremely evil in his mind. He is envious, wicked in soul
and insolently ignores the words of his superiors. He is proceeding towards his downfall.”
‘Gandhari said, “O one who is evil in soul!163 You desire for prosperity. You do not listen to the instructions of
the seniors. You will lose your prosperity and your life. You do not pay heed to your father and me. You increase
the delight of your enemies and you also increase my sorrow. When you are killed by Bhimasena, you will remember these words of your father.”
‘Vyasa said, “O king! O Dhritarashtra! Listen to me. You are loved by Krishna. Sanjaya is your messenger and
he will yoke you to what will ensure your welfare. He knows the ancient and the new Hrishikesha.164 Listen to him
with great attention. He will free you from this great danger. O Vichitravirya’s son! Men are confounded by the
darkness of anger and delight. Bound down by many different kinds of nooses, they are not content with their own
riches. Because of desire and ignorance, they repeatedly come under Yama’s control. They are like ones without
eyes being led by ones without eyes and are borne by their own deeds. There is only one path followed by learned
ones. When one sees it, one overcomes death. Such a great person does not become attached.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! Tell me about the path along which there is no danger, traversing along which,
one attains Hrishikesha and obtains supreme peace.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “A man who has not controlled his soul cannot know Janardana, whose soul is controlled.
Without controlling the soul and without restraining the senses, the performance of rites is inappropriate. There is
no doubt that the unwavering renunciation of the senses, the steady abandonment of desire and the constant avoidance of violence constitute the womb of knowledge. O king! Constantly and steadily restrain your senses. Do not
permit your intelligence to deviate. Control and direct it. Learned brahmanas say that the mastering of the senses is
the certain path to knowledge. This is knowledge and the path that the learned ones traverse. O king! Keshava cannot be attained by those who have not controlled their senses. One who has controlled himself through yoga, and
knows the sacred texts, is one who is favoured.”’
731(68)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! I am asking you. Tell me again about Pundarikaksha. O son!165 When I know the
meanings of his names and his deeds, I will be able to obtain Purushuttoma.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “I have heard Vasudeva’s auspicious names recited. From that, as far as I can make out, Keshava cannot be measured. Because he clothes all beings, because he is the womb of all the gods, he is known as Vasudeva.166 He is known as Vishnu because he is virile.167 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Know that he is
known as Madhava because of his silence, his meditation and his yoga.168 Because he has the essence of everything within himself, and because he killed Madhu, he is known as Madhusudana.169 The word krishi means the
earth, while na means bliss. Since Krishna means the combination of these two, he is the eternal Krishna. Pundarika means the supreme region that is eternal, without decay and is everlasting. Because his nature is like that, he is
known as Pundarikaksha. He is Janardana because he oppresses dasyus.170 Because he never lacks in vigour,171
because his vigour never diminishes, he is known as Satvata because of vigour. Because he is like a bull, he is
known as Vrishabhekshana.172 Since he has not been born from a mother, the one who is the destroyer of armies is

known as Aja.173 He is self-resplendent and because he controls174 the gods, he is known as Damodara. Because of
his delight and happiness and because he is the lord of happiness and prosperity, he is known as Hrishikesha.175
Because he bears up heaven and earth in his arms, he is known as Mahabahu.176 Since he never falls
downwards,177 he is known as Adokshaja. He is known as Narayana because he is the path followed by men.178
He is Purushottama because he ﬁlls up179 and destroys again. He is Sarva180 because he is the origin and the dissolution of everything that exists and does not exist, and because he is a witness to everything. Krishna is established
in truth and truth is established in him. Govinda is the truth that is beyond truth and that is the reason he has the
name of Satya.181 The god is known as Vishnu because of his valour. He is known as Jishnu182 because of his triumphs. He is Ananta183 because he is eternal. He is Govinda because he knows about the cattle.184 He can make
the unreal appear as real. Thus, he deludes all beings. Such is he, the illustrious one who is always with hermits.
He is always based in dharma. The mighty-armed Achyuta will arrive185 to prevent violence.”’
732(69)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! I envy those who have eyes, because they can see Vasudeva before them. His
supreme and radiant form illuminates the direction and the sub-directions. He will speak words that deserve to be
honoured, because they will be for the good of the Bharatas and the Srinjayas. Those unblemished words should be
accepted by those who wish to live, though they need not be accepted by those who are doomed. He will come to
us, the solitary champion of the Satvatas. He is the bull who guides the Yadavas. He destroys enemies and causes
terror among them. He takes away fame from those who hate him. The assembled Kurus will see the great-souled
and venerable destroyer of enemies. That best of the Vrishni lineage will speak words of non-violence and thus
win over my side. He is the eternal and wise rishi. He is an ocean of words. He is a pot among all ascetics. He will
come with the golden-feathered Garuda Arishtanemi.186 He is the lord of all beings and the refuge of the universe.
He is the ancient being with one thousand heads. He has no beginning, no middle and no end. His deeds are inﬁnite. He is the one who places the seed. Though without birth, he is the creator. He is supreme and higher than the
supreme. I seek refuge with him. He is the creator who made the three worlds, the gods, the asuras, the serpents
and the rakshasas. He is foremost among wise lords of men. He is Indra’s younger brother. I seek refuge with
him.”’

Section Fifty-Four
Bhagavat-Yana Parva
This section has 2055 shlokas and sixty-eight chapters
Chapter 733(70): 93 shlokas
Chapter 734(71): 37 shlokas
Chapter 735(72): 23 shlokas
Chapter 736(73): 23 shlokas
Chapter 737(74): 18 shlokas
Chapter 738(75): 20 shlokas
Chapter 739(76): 20 shlokas
Chapter 740(77): 21 shlokas
Chapter 741(78): 18 shlokas
Chapter 742(79): 9 shlokas
Chapter 743(80): 49 shlokas
Chapter 744(81): 72 shlokas
Chapter 745(82): 29 shlokas
Chapter 746(83): 18 shlokas
Chapter 747(84): 21 shlokas
Chapter 748(85): 17 shlokas
Chapter 749(86): 23 shlokas
Chapter 750(87): 26 shlokas
Chapter 751(88): 104 shlokas
Chapter 752(89): 41 shlokas
Chapter 753(90): 28 shlokas
Chapter 754(91): 22 shlokas
Chapter 755(92): 53 shlokas
Chapter 756(93): 62 shlokas
Chapter 757(94): 45 shlokas
Chapter 758(95): 21 shlokas
Chapter 759(96): 25 shlokas
Chapter 760(97): 20 shlokas
Chapter 761(98): 19 shlokas
Chapter 762(99): 16 shlokas
Chapter 763(100): 15 shlokas
Chapter 764(101): 23 shlokas
Chapter 765(102): 29 shlokas
Chapter 766(103): 38 shlokas
Chapter 767(104): 26 shlokas
Chapter 768(105): 18 shlokas
Chapter 769(106): 18 shlokas
Chapter 770(107): 21 shlokas
Chapter 771(108): 19 shlokas
Chapter 772(109): 26 shlokas
Chapter 773(110): 22 shlokas
Chapter 774(111): 23 shlokas
Chapter 775(112): 20 shlokas
Chapter 776(113): 21 shlokas
Chapter 777(114): 22 shlokas
Chapter 778(115): 18 shlokas
Chapter 779(116): 21 shlokas
Chapter 780(117): 23 shlokas

Chapter 781(118): 22 shlokas
Chapter 782(119): 28 shlokas
Chapter 783(120): 18 shlokas
Chapter 784(121): 22 shlokas
Chapter 785(122): 61 shlokas
Chapter 786(123): 27 shlokas
Chapter 787(124): 18 shlokas
Chapter 788(125): 26 shlokas
Chapter 789(126): 49 shlokas
Chapter 790(127): 53 shlokas
Chapter 791(128): 52 shlokas
Chapter 792(129): 34 shlokas
Chapter 793(130): 31 shlokas
Chapter 794(131): 42 shlokas
Chapter 795(132): 40 shlokas
Chapter 796(133): 37 shlokas
Chapter 797(134): 21 shlokas
Chapter 798(135): 30 shlokas
Chapter 799(136): 26 shlokas
Chapter 800(137): 22 shlokas
Yana means moving or journey as a verb and conveyance as a noun. The parva is so named because Krishna (Bhagavan) goes as a messenger to
the Kurus. There are the stories of Dambhodbhava, Matali’s search for a son-in-law, Galava’s obstinacy, Yayati and Vidula and her son. However,
Krishna fails and war is inevitable.
733(70)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When Sanjaya had returned, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira told Dasharha, the bull among the
Satvatas. “O Janardana! The time has arrived for friends. I can see no one other than you who can help to tide over
our difﬁculties. O Madhava! It is only by resorting to you that we can fearlessly obtain our share from the son of
Dhritarashtra. He is insolent because of his delusion and his advisers. O destroyer of enemies! Just as you protect
the Vrishni’s from all hardships, you should also protect the Pandavas. Save us from this great danger.” Bhagavan1
replied, “O mighty-armed one! I am present. Tell me what you wish to say. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I
will do everything that you ask for.”
‘Yudhishthira said, “You have heard what Dhritarashtra and his sons wish to do. O Krishna! What Sanjaya told
me, is exactly what Dhritarashtra is thinking. His soul stands revealed. A messenger says what he is told to speak.
If he speaks otherwise, he should be killed. He wishes for peace with us without returning our kingdom. He is
greedy and wicked in his mind. He treats others worse than his own self. On Dhritarashtra’s instructions, we have
lived in the forest for twelve years, and yet another autumn in concealment. O lord! We did that under the assumption that Dhritarashtra would abide by the agreement with us. O Krishna! The brahmanas who are with us know
that we have not broken the covenant. The aged King Dhritarashtra cannot see his own dharma. Or even if he sees
it, out of affection, he follows the instructions of his evil son. O Janardana! The king follows Suyodhana’s counsel.
He is greedy and deceitful, because he acts so as to ensure his own welfare. O Janardana! What can be more miserable than my not being able to take care of my mother and friends? O Madhusudana! The Kashis, Chedis, Panchalas and Matysas are on my side and you are our protector. O Govinda! But I only asked for ﬁve villages—
Kushasthala, Vrikasthala, Masandi, Varanavata and any other village as the ﬁfth and last one. ‘O father!2 Give us
any ﬁve villages or towns, where we can reside together and sustain a living without difﬁculty.’ But the evil-souled
Dhritarashtra did not grant even this, thinking that everything belongs to him.3 What can be more miserable than
that? When a man is born and brought up in a noble lineage, but covets the possessions of others, avarice destroys
his wisdom. When wisdom is destroyed, so is modesty. When modesty is destroyed, dharma is constrained. When
dharma is destroyed, prosperity is destroyed. When prosperity is destroyed, a man is killed. Lack of prosperity is
like death to a man. O son!4 Relatives, well-wishers and brahmanas turn away from one who has no riches, like
birds ﬂy away from a tree that has no blossoms or fruit. O son! In my view, this is like death. When a man has fallen and his relatives turn away from him, it is like the spirit and breath of life leaving one who is dead. Shambara5
has said that there is nothing worse for a man than a situation where he cannot see how food can be obtained, today
or tomorrow. Riches are said to constitute supreme dharma. Everything is established in prosperity. The rich live in
this world. Men who do not possess riches are dead. If one resorts to one’s strength and robs a man of his riches,

along with him, one destroys his dharma, artha and kama too. Having reached that state, some men prefer death.
Others resort to villages, still others resort to forests. Some wander around, seeking to destroy themselves. Some
become insane. Others come under the control of their enemies. Still others become slaves, so as to obtain the riches of others. For a man, the destruction of prosperity is a worse calamity than death. Prosperity is the source of
dharma and kama. Death is the eternal dharma of the world. It is the end of all beings and there is no one who is an
exception. O Krishna! A man who has naturally been poor, does not suffer as much as one who has possessed fortune and prosperity and enjoyed happiness, having subsequently descended to an inferior state. When one faces
great hardships because of one’s own crimes, one blames Indra and the other gods, but never one’s own self. Familiarity with all the sacred texts cannot reduce that suffering. Sometimes, he is angry with his servants. Sometimes, he censures his well-wishers. He is always subject to anger and loses his senses. Having come under the
control of confusion, he resorts to cruel deeds. From these evil deeds, mixed births6 result. Mixed births are the
way to hell and are the ﬁnal outcome of evildoers. O Krishna! If he does not wake up on time, he goes to hell. Wisdom alone is the awakening. The eye of wisdom can save him. When a man regains his wisdom, he looks towards
the sacred texts. When he is established in the sacred texts, he regains dharma and modesty becomes his best limb.
A modest man avoids evil and his prosperity increases. When he obtains prosperity, he truly becomes a man. He is
always established in dharma and he is calm in his soul. He is always engaged in deeds and does not follow adharma. His intelligence does not turn towards evil. One who is without modesty and without senses, is neither a
woman, nor a man. According to dharma, he has no rights and is just like a shudra. A man who is modest satisﬁes
the gods, the ancestors and his own self. He becomes immortal because of this. This is the ultimate objective for
those who perform pure deeds.
‘“O Madhusudana! You have seen all this directly in me. You have seen how I have spent those nights, deprived
of the kingdom. There is no way for us to give up that prosperity. It would be better for us to die, while striving towards that. O Madhava! Our ﬁrst intention is that we should enjoy that common prosperity, in peace with each other and treating each other equally. The stage that comes beyond that is terrible and will lead to the destruction of
deeds, if we are to obtain the kingdom after killing the Kouravas. O Krishna! No enemy deserves to be killed, even
if he is not related and even if he is not an arya. On the contrary, they are our relatives and our seniors are their
aides. Their death will be evil. How can a war be desirable? That is the evil dharma of kshatriyas. But we have
been born as kshatriyas. It happens to be our dharma, even if it is adharma. Any other form of conduct is not recommended for us. A shudra performs servitude. A vaishya lives by selling goods. Killing is the means of livelihood for us, while begging is the conduct for brahmanas. A kshatriya kills another kshatriya. A ﬁsh lives on another ﬁsh. A dog kills another dog. O Dasharha! Behold how each follows the decreed dharma. O Krishna! Dissension
is always present in a ﬁght. Lives are lost in a battle. In spite of strength and adherence to policy, there can be victory or defeat in a battle. Life and death are not determined by a being. O supreme among the Yadu lineage! Until
the right time has come, one does not ﬁnd happiness or unhappiness. One man may kill many. Many may unite to
kill a single man. A coward may kill a brave one. An infamous one may kill one who is famous. Victory may go to
either side. Either side may confront defeat. This is also true of destruction. If one tries to ﬂee, there will be death
and destruction. But in all cases, a war should be avoided. Where is the killer who is not killed in return? O
Hrishikesha! For one who has been killed, victory and defeat are equal. I do not think that defeat is different from
death. O Krishna! It is certain that one who is victorious also suffers from a loss. At the end, a beloved one will be
killed by someone from the other side. O Krishna! When he is rendered weak because he can no longer see his
sons or brothers, he will be completely overwhelmed by a disdain for life. Those who are modest, brave, aryas and
compassionate are killed in battle. But an inferior one may escape. O Janardana! Even after killing others, we are
overcome by remorse. There is evil, even for those who survive. The survivors gather their strength so as to destroy those who remain. In a desire to end the enmity, they seek complete annihilation. But victory engenders enmity, because those who are defeated are unhappy. A man who can cast aside victory and defeat is both happy and
peaceful. But a man who has created enmity always sleeps in misery. He doesn’t have ease of mind, like living in a
house full of snakes. He who annihilates everybody is bereft of fame and always obtain ill fame among all beings.
Enmity is not paciﬁed and is sustained for a long period of time. There are those who remain to recount it to men
who are born in the lineage. O Keshava! Enmity is never settled through another enmity. O Krishna! It becomes

stronger, like ﬁre fed with oblations. There is no exception to this and peace will always remain unattainable. This
is the continual taint in those who seek to establish their own superiority. Manliness is a strong weakness in the
heart. One can ﬁnd peace only by completely casting it aside from one’s mind. O Madhusudana! By uprooting the
enemy by the roots, we may be able to accomplish our objective. But that will be crueller still. We can gain peace
by giving up our claim, but that will be like death. There is no doubt that this leaves the prospect of destruction, for
our enemies and our own side.7 We do not wish to give that up. Nor do we desire a destruction of the lineage.
Peace through submission is desirable. There are those who are striving in a desire to avoid the war. If those attempts at paciﬁcation fail, a war is unavoidable and is not a sign of weakness. When attempts at paciﬁcation fail,
the results are terrible. Learned ones have seen these signs in a quarrel between dogs. There is a wagging of tails
ﬁrst. Then there is a bark. Then there is a bark in return. After that, there is a retreat and the display of teeth. Then
there is loud barking and the quarrel. O Krishna! The stronger one wins and eats the other one’s ﬂesh. That is the
case with men too and there is no difference. The stronger always acts in the same way with the weak. There is disregard and aggression and the weak one surrenders to the strong. It is always appropriate that a father, a king and
an aged one should be revered. O Janardana! That is the reason Dhritarashtra is worthy of our honour and worship.
O Madhava! But Dhritarashtra’s affection towards his son is strong. As long as he is under his son’s control, he
will laugh at our submission. O Krishna! Now that the time has come, what do you think should be done next? O
Madhava! How can we avoid the diminishing of artha and dharma? O Madhusudana! O supreme among men! In
this difﬁcult situation, you are the most appropriate person for us to consult. You are our friend. You wish us well.
You know the consequences of all deeds. O Krishna! You are our well-wisher and you know the answer to everything.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Thus addressed, Janardana replied to Dharmaraja. “For the welfare of both the sides, I
will myself go to the assembly of the Kurus. O king! If I succeed in obtaining peace without giving up your interests, I will obtain great merits and the deed will have great consequences. I will free the masses of Kurus and Srinjayas from the noose of death. I will also free the Pandavas, the sons of Dhritarashtra and the entire earth.” Yudhishthira said, “O Krishna! It is not my view that you should go to the Kurus. However well you articulate your
words, Suyodhana will not listen to them. All the assembled kshatriya kings follow Suyodhana. O Krishna! It does
not appeal to me that you should arrive in their midst. O Madhava! If hatred is exhibited towards you, we will not
obtain any pleasure from gaining objects, or happiness from attaining divinity, or the prosperity of all the immortals.” Bhagavan replied, “O great king! I know the wicked nature of Dhritarashtra’s son. But through this, we will
not be blamed by all the kings of the world. All the kings of the earth combined are not enough to withstand me, if
I am enraged in battle, like inferior animals before a lion. If they act against me in any way, I will burn up all the
Kurus. That is my intention. O Partha! My going there will not be fruitless. There will be some gain in going there,
since we will not be blamed by the others.” Yudhishthira said, “O Krishna! If it pleases you, then go in peace to the
Kouravas. Perhaps there will be some gain from it. I will see you again when you return. O lord! O Vishvaksena!8
Go to the Kurus and bring peace among the Bharatas. Let us all live in peace, with happy minds and happy hearts.
You are a brother. You are a friend. You are dear to Bibhatsu and to me. We have no doubt that you wish us well.
Go safely for our welfare. You know us and you know the others. You know artha. You know how to speak. O
Krishna! Tell Suyodhana what will be good for us. O Keshava! You can tell them whatever is in conformity with
dharma, whether it is for peace, or whether it is for enmity.”’
734(71)

‘Bhagavan said, “I have listened to Sanjaya’s words and I have also heard your words. I know everything about
their intentions and I also know what you have in mind. Your intelligence is based on dharma. Their minds are
turned towards enmity. You will cherish everything that can be gained without resorting to a war. O lord of the
earth! But following rituals is not the task of a kshatriya. In all the stages of life, it has been said that a kshatriya
should not resort to begging for a livelihood. Victory or death on the ﬁeld of battle has been eternally ordained by
the creator. This is the natural dharma of kshatriyas and weakness in that is not praised. O Yudhishthira! It is not
possible to have a livelihood by resorting to weakness. O mighty-armed one! Display your valour. O scorcher of
enemies! Conquer the foes. O scorcher of enemies! The sons of Dhritarashtra are extremely avaricious. They have

obtained affection, they have obtained friends and they have obtained strength by living with them9 for a long
time. O lord of the earth! Therefore, peace with the Kurus is not desirable. Because of Bhisma, Drona, Kripa and
the others, they think themselves to be stronger. O king! As long as you act mildly towards them, they will take
your kingdom away. O destroyer of enemies! Dhritarashtra’s son will not do what you wish, because of kindness,
because of compassion, or because of dharma and artha. O destroyer of enemies! O Pandava! This alone is proof,
that they left you in a loincloth, and did not repent their evil deed. In the sight of the grandfather, Drona, the intelligent Vidura and the foremost among the Kurus, who knew exactly what had happened, that wicked one did not repent his cruel deeds. You are generous, mild, self-controlled and follow dharma. O king! But he used deceit to defeat you in a game of dice. O king! When one’s conduct is of this nature, do not resort to affection. They deserve to
be killed by all the worlds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Why not by you? Insolent and delighted, he eloquently maligned you and your brothers and told his brothers, ‘The Pandavas have nothing that they can call their
own now. Their names and their lineages will not survive either. After a long period of time has passed, they will
confront defeat. Their subjects will no longer honour them. Their natural subjects have also been destroyed.’ He
uttered such harsh words and many others. He boasted among his relatives, when you were banished to the forest.
Those who were assembled there, saw that you were without blame. They were seated in the assembly hall, their
throats choked with tears and they wept. The kings and the brahmanas did not praise him then. All the courtiers
censured Duryodhana. O destroyer of enemies! For someone born in a noble lineage, there can be censure and
there can be death. O king! But death is several times superior to a reviled and wicked life. O king! He has been
dead since the instant he was censured for his shamelessness before all the kings of the earth. O great king! One
whose conduct is of this nature can be killed effortlessly, like a tree whose roots have been severed, so that it is
precariously balanced on its trunk. The evil-minded one is ignoble to all the worlds and should be killed, like a
snake. O destroyer of enemies! O king! Therefore, kill him and do not hesitate.
‘“O unblemished one! But it pleases me, and is also worthy of you, that you should bow in obeisance and show
your respects to your father10 and Bhishma. O king! I will myself go and resolve the doubts of all those who are in
two minds about Duryodhana. In the midst of the kings, I will expound your manly qualities and his transgressions
of these. On hearing my words, in conformity with dharma and artha, the lords of the earth and the kings from the
various countries will recognize you to possess dharma in your soul, and one who speaks the truth. They will know
that he acts out of avarice. When the four varnas are assembled, among the old and the young, among inhabitants
of the town and the country, I will censure him. When you are striving for peace, no adharma will be attached to
you. The kings will blame the Kurus and Dhritarashtra. When he is forsaken by all the worlds, what will be left to
be done? O king! With Duryodhana slain, there remains nothing else to be done. With this intention, I will go the
Kurus. I will not relinquish your objective. I will strive for peace and notice their intentions. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Having observed the conduct and preparations of the Kouravas for war, I will leave and return to
ensure your victory. In every way, I expect a war with the enemies. It seems to me that all the portents indicate
that. The beasts and the birds are making terrible sounds. When it is night, the foremost of elephants and horses are
assuming terrible forms. Signifying evil, the ﬁre is assuming many colourful and terrible forms. Had death not arrived to destroy the world of men, this would not have been the case. Ready the weapons, arrows, armour, chariots,
elephants and standards. Let all the warriors be trained. Let them ready the horses, elephants and chariots. O Indra
among men! Let everything be ready for battle. Let everything be kept ready. O king! O foremost among the Pandavas! As long as he lives, Duryodhana is incapable of returning the prosperous kingdom that was once yours, and
which he robbed in the gambling with the dice.”’
735(72)

‘Bhimasena said, “O Madhusudana! You should speak in such a way that the Kurus resort to peace. Do not frighten them with war. He is intolerant and is always angry. That extremely spirited one hates prosperity in others. One
should not address strong words towards Duryodhana. One should act peacefully towards him. His disposition is
naturally wicked. His mind is equal to that of a dasyu. He is intoxicated with prosperity and bears enmity towards
the Pandavas. He does not have far-sightedness and is cruel. He is deceitful and wicked in his valour. His anger
lasts for a long time and the evil-souled one is fond of deceit. Even if he dies, he will not surrender, or give up

what he thinks belongs to him. O Krishna! I think that peace with someone like that is extremely difﬁcult. He does
not listen to the words of his well-wishers. He has discarded dharma. He loves falsehood. He goes against the
words and intentions of his well-wishers. Overcome by anger, his nature is based on wickedness. His natural
wickedness is like that of a snake provoked with a straw. You know everything about Duryodhana’s soldiers, their
conduct, their nature, their strength and their valour. In earlier times, the Kurus, together with their sons, were content and so were we. We rejoiced with our relatives, like Indra’s seniors. O Madhusudana! But because of Duryodhana’s anger, the Bharatas will burn, like a forest burns with ﬁre at the end of winter.
‘“O Madhusudana! Eighteen kings are famous as those who annihilated their kin, their well-wishes and their relatives. At the end of the period of dharma,11 Bali was born among the asuras. He was prosperous and blazed in his
energy. Udavarta was born among the Haihayas, Janamejaya among the Nipas, Bahula among the Talajanghas, the
insolent Vasu among the Krimis, Ajabindu among the Suviras, Kusharddhika among the Surashtras, Arkaja among
the Balihas, Dhoutamulaka among the Chinas, Hayagriva among the Videhas, Varapra among the Mahoujasas,
Bahu among the Sundaravegas, Pururava among the Diptakshas, Sahaja among the Chedi-Matysas, Brihadbala
among the Prachetas, Dharana among the Indra-Vatsas, Vigahana among the Mukutas and Shama among the Nandivegas. They deﬁled their lineages. O Krishna! They were the worst of men and were born at the end of the yuga.
At the end of a yuga,12 driven by destiny, Duryodhana has now been born in the lineage of the Kurus. He is the
worst of his lineage. He is a wicked and evil man. Therefore, speak softly to him, in conformity with dharma and
artha. Act generally in accordance with his desires and do not exhibit terrible valour before him. O Krishna! We
would rather follow Duryodhana and be under his control, than let the lineage of the Bharatas be destroyed. O Vasudeva! Act so that he and the other Kurus become indifferent towards us. Otherwise, the Kurus will be destroyed.
O Krishna! Speak to the aged grandfather and the courtiers, so that there is fraternity among the brothers and Dhritarashtra’s son is paciﬁed. This is why I say and the king13 approves. Arjuna has never been in favour of war, because there is great compassion in Arjuna.”’
736(73)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the mighty-armed Keshava heard these words of Bhima, which were without precedence in terms of their mildness, he laughed. The mountains seemed to have become light. The ﬁre seemed to have
become cold. That is what Rama’s younger brother, Shouri, the wielder of the Sharnga bow, thought.14 Vrikodara
Bhimasena was seated, overcome with compassion. To incite him, like a wind fanning the ﬁre, he said, “O Bhimasena! On other occasions, you have advocated war. You have desired to suppress the cruel sons of Dhritarashtra,
who ﬁnd delight in murders. O scorcher of enemies! You do not sleep. You lie down and remain awake, with your
face downwards. You have always spoken terrible, violent and harsh words. When you sigh, your breath burns like
the ﬁre. O Bhima! Your mind is not at peace, like a ﬁre with smoke. You lie down alone and groan, like a weak
person unable to bear a load. People who do not know the reason think that you are mad. O Bhima! You are like a
roaming elephant, which uproots trees, groans and stamps down on the ground with its feet. You ﬁnd no pleasure
in the company of people. O Pandava! You stay away from them. Whether it is night or day, you do not welcome
anyone. You suddenly smile, or weep because of a mysterious reason. You are sometimes seated, resting your head
on your thighs. Or you are seen, sometimes frowning, or licking your lips. O Bhima! All this is because you are
angry. ‘As certainly as the sun rises in the east with its light, as certainly as it sets in the west, circling the pole star
with its rays, thus do I swear and there will be no deviation from my vow. I will attack the intolerant Duryodhana
and kill him with a club.’ This is what you swore on your club earlier, in the midst of your brothers. O scorcher of
enemies! Is it the same mind that now turns towards paciﬁcation? Now that the time for war has arrived, those who
wished war are turning away. O Bhima! Are you frightened? O Partha! Or is it that you have seen portents, when
you are asleep or when you are awake, and those make you turn towards peace? You do not show any manliness in
you. You are like a eunuch. You have been overcome by cowardice. That is the reason your mind has swerved.
Your heart trembles and your mind is full of despair. Your thighs are paralysed. That is the reason you want peace.
O Partha! The minds of mortal men are inconstant and ﬁckle, like the kernel of a shalmali tree that is swayed by
the wind. This distorted intelligence is as rare in you as human speech is in cows. The minds of the sons of Pandu
will be immersed, like a boat in water. That Bhimasena should speak words like these, is as extraordinary to me as

mountains moving around. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Look back at your own deeds and the lineage into
which you have been born. Arise! Do not yield to despair. O brave one! Be steady. O scorcher of enemies! This
lassitude is not like you. A kshatriya does not obtain that which he does not seize through his energy.”’
737(74)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When Vasudeva spoke to him in this way, the one who was always angry and intolerant,
controlled himself like a well-trained horse and instantly replied, “O Achyuta! You have not completely understood what I wish to do. Truth is my valour and I am delighted at the prospect of war. O Dasharha! Because you
have lived with me for a long time, you know my spirit. Or is it that you do not know me at all, like one swimming
in a lake without a boat? Is that the reason you are censuring me with words that are off the mark? O Madhava!
How can someone who knows me, Bhimasena, speak in the perverse way that you have chosen to do? O descendant of the Vrishni lineage! Therefore, let me tell you a few words about my own manliness and my strength.
These are not equalled by anyone else. It is always the case that an arya should not praise himself. But because you
have excessively reviled me, I will tell you about my own strength. O Krishna! Behold. This is earth and that is
heaven, from which, all beings and all immobile objects have originated. It is the mother of everything. If these
two15 suddenly collide in anger, like mountains, I will hold them apart with my arms, with all their mobile and immobile objects. Behold the space between my two arms. They are like giant clubs. I do not see a man who can escape after having been grasped by them. The Himalaya mountains, the oceans and the wielder of the vajra and the
killer of Bala himself—even if all three try together, they cannot free one whom I have grasped with my strength. I
call kill all the kshatriyas who have assembled for the war, wishing to kill the Pandavas. I can ﬂing them down on
the ground and trample them with my feet. O Achutya! You are not unfamiliar with my valour and the way in
which I defeated all the kings and brought them under my control. O Janardana! If it is the case that you do not
know me, with radiance like that of the rising sun, you will ﬁnd out when you see me in the ﬁerce turmoil of battle.
O unblemished one! Why have you pierced me with harsh words, like pricking a boil with a needle? I have told
you what I think I am. But know that I am greater than that. You will see me when the turmoil of battle begins.
You will see elephants, charioteers and riders destroyed by me. You and the worlds will see me angrily kill men
and bulls among the kshatriyas, destroying the supreme among the best. My marrow has not wasted away and my
mind is not trembling. Even if all the worlds are enraged, I have no fear. O Madhusudana! It is only because of
goodness of heart that I have shown compassion and have patiently endured all the hardships, so that the Bharatas
are not annihilated because of us.”’
738(75)

‘Bhagavan said, “To determine your intentions, I spoke to you out of affection, not to belittle you, or to display my
learning, or out of anger, or because I doubted you. I know your greatness of spirit. I know the strength you possess. I know your deeds and I am not trying to ﬁnd fault with you. O Pandava! The qualities I see in you are a
thousand times more than those you see yourself. You have been born in a lineage that is worshipped by all the
kings. You are surrounded by relatives and well-wishers. O Bhima! That is the kind of person you are. O Vrikodara! There are those who question dharma and seeking to draw a distinction between destiny and human endeavour, fail to arrive at a conclusion. The same reasons that lead a man to succeed also bring about his failure. The
consequences of human action are always uncertain. Even wise ones, competent to judge matters, may decide in
one way, though the consequences are the opposite. This is like the changing direction of the wind in the sky. The
deeds performed by a man may be well thought out, well advised and conducted well. But destiny may act in a
contrary way. Then again, human endeavour can counter what destiny has done, or not done. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! This is like cold and heat, hunger and thirst.16 And yet again, a man may undertake deeds that are
thought out well and these are not countered by destiny. These are the signs of destiny and human endeavour.17 O
Pandava! The world cannot sustain itself through anything other than action. A man who knows this will act, regardless of the fruits, determined by both endeavour and destiny. He who possesses this intelligence will engage in
his own deeds. He will not suffer from failure, or exult at success. O Bhimasena! This is all that I meant to say. We

cannot be certain of complete success in a battle with the Kurus. Since destiny constantly changes, one should not
let go of the reins. Nor should one fall prey to despair and exhaustion. That is all that I meant to say.
‘“O Pandava! I will go to Dhritarashtra tomorrow morning. I will try to bring about peace without sacriﬁcing
your interests. If I succeed in obtaining peace, I will attain inﬁnite fame. Your desires will be satisﬁed and their
supreme welfare will be ensured. But if the Kurus stick to their resolution and do not listen to my words, there will
be war and terrible deeds will ensue. O Bhimasena! In that war the burden will be on you. Arjuna will have the responsibility of guiding the chariot and the others will be dragged along. I will be Bibhatsu’s charioteer in that war.
That is what Arjuna desires, because I do not myself wish to ﬁght. O Vrikodara! It was because I had some doubt
about your intentions that I provoked you and addressed you as an eunuch. It was to ignite your energy.”’
739(76)

‘Arjuna said, “O Janardana! Yudhishthira has said everything that there is to be said. O scorcher of enemies! O
lord! But listening to your words, it seems to me that you think that peace will not be obtained easily. That may be
because of the avarice of Dhritarashtra’s son, or because of our weakness. You also think that human valour may
be fruitless and that human endeavour may not bear fruit, even when it is accompanied with deeds. What you have
said may be true, or it may not be true. But there is nothing that should be looked upon as impossible. You think
that our hardships have not been good for our cause. But they have performed deeds and have no fruits to show for
it. O lord! When performed correctly, deeds do bear fruit. O Krishna! Therefore, act so that we may ﬁnd refuge
with the others. You are the foremost well-wisher of the Pandavas and the Kurus, just as the brave Prajapati is of
the gods and the asuras. Do what is healthy for the Kurus and the Pandavas. I think that it will not be difﬁcult for
you to accomplish what is good for us. O Janardana! If that is the case, your task will be carried out. There is no
doubt that you will accomplish this merely through the act of going there. O brave one! Deal with that evil-souled
one as you deem appropriate. Do everything depending on what you think is proper. O Krishna! Whether you want
us to seek refuge with them, or whatever else it is that you desire, the matter will have weight. Does that evilsouled one not deserve death, together with his relatives? O Madhusudana! He could not tolerate the prosperity he
saw with Dharma’s son.18 Unable to ﬁnd a way that was in conformity with dharma, he violently stole it, with the
aid of one who was deceitful with dice. How can a man who is an archer and a kshatriya refuse when he is challenged, even if it means the loss of his life? O Varshneya! When I saw us vanquished through adharma and exiled
to the forest, Suyodhana became mine to kill. O Krishna! It is not strange that you should wish to do something for
your friends. But how will the chief task be implemented, through mildness or enmity? If you think that their immediate slaughter is better, let it be instantly done, without any more reﬂection. You know how Droupadi was molested by the evil-minded one in the midst of the assembly hall and that the others tolerated it. O Madhava! I do not
think that such a person will treat the Pandavas fairly. Good counsel to him will be like seed sown on barren land.
Therefore, do what you think is best for the welfare of the Pandavas. O Varshneya! Let us act swiftly on whatever
needs to be done next.”’
740(77)

‘Bhagavan said, “O mighty-armed one! O Pandava! It will be as you say. O Bibhatsu! Everything depends on two
courses of action.19 A ﬁeld may be cleared and made fertile by a farmer. O Kounteya! But if it does not rain in the
right season, there will be no fruit. It is said that man may make efforts, such as through irrigation. But even there,
it is certain that there can be a drought because of destiny. Our great-souled ancestors have decided this in their
wisdom—the affairs of the world depend on both human effort and destiny. I will exert myself to the best of human endeavour. But there is nothing that I can do to counteract destiny. The evil-minded one acts after discarding
both dharma and truth. And he does not repent that kind of conduct. His wicked intentions are encouraged by his
advisers—Shakuni, the son of the suta and his brother Duhshasana. He will not give up the kingdom for the sake
of obtaining peace. O Partha! Not unless Suyodhana and his relatives are killed. Even if Dharmaraja gives everything up and surrenders to him, the evil-minded one will not hand over the kingdom he is asking for. I do not think
there is any point in telling him what Yudhishthira wants. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dharmaraja has
himself stated the reasons. The Kourava will do everything that is wicked. Because he will act in this way, he de-

serves to be killed by anyone in this world. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He deserves to be killed by me,
or anyone in this world. He maltreated all of you when you were children. The cruel and evil-minded one wrested
your kingdom. The wicked one had no peace, once he saw Yudhishthira’s prosperity. O Partha! He has repeatedly
tried to create dissension between you and me, but I have never accepted his evil intentions. O mighty-armed one!
You also know his supreme desire and that I always seek to ensure Dharmaraja’s welfare. O Arjuna! Knowing his
intentions and my supreme desires, why are you suddenly suspicious, as if you do not know? O Partha! You also
know the supreme destiny that has been ordained. How can you then think that one should surrender to the enemy?
O Pandava! O Partha! Through word and deed, I will do whatever it is possible for me to do. But I do not expect
peace with the enemy. Is this not the supremely beneﬁcial peace that Bhishma desired, when the cattle were
robbed? A year has passed, but has it been accomplished?20 Once you had decided, they were defeated then. Suyodhana will not be satisﬁed with parting with the smallest bit for the shortest period of time. I will always act in accordance with Dharmaraja’s instructions. But the wicked deeds of that evil-souled one will also have to be considered.”’
741(78)

‘Nakula said, “O Madhava! Dharmaraja knows about dharma and is also generous. He has spoken many words
that are in conformity with dharma. O Madhava! Bhimasena knows the king’s mind. O Madhava! He has spoken
about peace, but also about the strength of his arms. In the same way, you have heard what Phalguna had to say. O
brave one! You have also spoken about your own views. O Purushottama! Having heard what everyone has to say,
at the appropriate time, you should do what you think to be the best. O Keshava! Different views are expressed at
different times. O scorcher of enemies! But at the right time, a man himself has to decide on the task. Something
may be thought of in one way, but actually happens in another way. O Purushottama! Therefore, in this world, the
views of men change. When we lived in the forest, we had one kind of view. O Krishna! We had another when we
lived in concealment, and yet another when we revealed ourselves. O Varshneya! The love for the kingdom that we
have now, did not exist as much when we roamed around in the forest. O brave one! O Janardana! When you heard
that our period of exile in the forest was over, these seven akshouhinis have been assembled through your grace.
These tigers among men have strength and manliness that is impossible to think of. On seeing them take up arms
in battle, which man will not tremble? Therefore, in the midst of the Kurus, you should speak words of paciﬁcation. Speak words such that the evil Suyodhana is not hurt and frightened. Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, the unvanquished Bibhatsu, Sahadeva, I, Rama,21 Keshava, the immensely valorous Satyaki, Virata and his sons, Drupada
and his advisers, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, the brave king of Kashi and Dhrishtaketu of Chedi are here. Which
mortal man of ﬂesh and blood will ﬁght them on the ﬁeld of battle? O mighty-armed one! There is no doubt that
you will accomplish the objectives of Dharmaraja merely through the act of going there. O unblemished one!
Vidura, Bhishma, Drona and Bahlika are capable of understanding what is good for them, when you explain it to
them. They are the ones who will persuade Dhritarashtra, lord of men, and the wicked Suyodhana and his advisers.
O Janardana! With you speaking and Vidura listening, what can the two of you not counter and prevent from deviating from the path?”’
742(79)

‘Sahadeva said, “What the king has said is eternal dharma. O scorcher of enemies! But you should act in such a
way that there is war. O Dasharha! Even if the Kurus wish for peace with the Pandavas, you should provoke them
to war. On having seen Panchali molested in the assembly hall, how can my anger towards Suyodhana be paciﬁed
without him being killed? O Krishna! If Bhima, Arjuna and Dharmaraja wish to stick to dharma, I will give up
dharma and wish to ﬁght them in battle.”
‘Satyaki said, “O mighty-armed one! The immensely intelligent Sahadeva has spoken the truth. My anger at
Duryodhana will only be paciﬁed after he has been killed. When you saw the wretched Pandavas in the forest, clad
in bark and deerskin, you know that your anger was ignited. O Purushottama! Therefore, what Madri’s brave son,
bull among men, has said is the view of all the warriors.”’

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the immensely intelligent Yuyudhana was speaking these words, a terrible roar, like
that from lions, arose from all the warriors who were there. All the brave ones applauded his words in every direction, saying that he was right. In their desire for war, they gladdened the heart of Shini’s descendant.’
743(80)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing the king’s words, which were in conformity with dharma and artha and ensured
welfare, Krishna22 was afﬂicted with grief. She spoke to Dasharha, who was seated there. King Drupada’s daughter possessed long and black hair. She applauded the words of Sahadeva and maharatha Satyaki. On seeing that
even Bhimasena spoke in favour of peace, she was extremely dejected. With tears in her eyes, the spirited one
spoke these words.
‘“O Madhusudana! O mighty-armed one! You know about dharma. O Janardana! You know how the Pandavas
were deprived of their happiness through the deceit of Dhritarashtra’s son and his advisers. You know about the
advice that the king secretly gave to Sanjaya. O Dasharha! You know what Yudhishthira told Sanjaya. You have
heard everything. ‘O immensely radiant one!23 O father! O mighty-armed one! Give us ﬁve villages—Kushasthala,
Vrikasthala, Masandi, Varanavata and whichever other village you decide as the ﬁfth and the last, for us to live in.’
O Keshava! Duryodhana and his advisers were to be addressed in these words. O Krishna! O Dasharha! Yudhishthira was modest and desired peace. But though he heard these words, Suyodhana did not comply.24 O
Krishna! If Suyodhana desires peace without returning the kingdom, there is no point in going there to strive for
peace. O mighty-armed one! Together with the Srinjayas, the Pandavas are capable of withstanding the terrible and
angry forces of Dhritarashtra’s son. Our objectives are incapable of being obtained through conciliation and generosity. O Madhusudana! Therefore, you should not show any compassion towards them. O Krishna! If we wish to
save our lives, enemies who cannot be paciﬁed through conciliation and generosity should be chastised through the
staff. O Achyuta! O mighty-armed one! Therefore, swiftly hurl a mighty staff at them, together with the Pandavas
and the Srinjayas. The Parthas are capable of doing this and it will bring you fame. O Krishna! Do what will bring
happiness to the kshatriyas. O Dasharha! If a kshatriya follows his own dharma, he should kill a kshatriya who has
become avaricious, and even a non-kshatriya. O father!25 The only exception is a brahmana, even if he commits
every kind of sin. The brahmana is the preceptor of all the varnas and has precedence in everything. O Janardana!
Those who know dharma know that while it is a sin to kill someone who should not be killed, it is also a sin not to
kill someone who should be killed. O Krishna! O Dasharha! Act so that this sin does not touch you, together with
the Pandavas and the Srinjayas and their soldiers. O Janardana! Because of my faith, I will say what has often been
said earlier. O Keshava! Has there been a woman like me on earth? I am the daughter of King Drupada and have
arisen from the middle of a sacriﬁcial altar. O Krishna! I am Dhrishtadyumna’s sister and your beloved friend. I
have become a member of the Ajamidha lineage and am the daughter-in-law of the great-souled Pandu. I am wife
to the ﬁve sons of Pandu, who are like ﬁve Indras in their radiance. Through these ﬁve maharathas, I have given
birth to ﬁve brave sons. O Krishna! Under dharma, they bear the same relationship towards you that Abhimanyu
does. O Keshava! Such a woman was grabbed by the hair and was molested when she went to the assembly hall,
while the sons of Pandu looked on and you were still alive. While the Kouravas,26 the Panchalas and the Vrishnis
were alive, I was brought to the middle of the assembly hall and made a servant maid to those evil ones. The Pandus looked at me, without any anger and without making any effort. O Govinda! I thought of you in my mind,
wishing that you might save me. The illustrious king, who is my father-in-law, told me, ‘O Panchali! It is my view
that you deserve to have a boon. Ask for a boon.’ I replied, ‘Let the Pandavas, with their chariots and their
weapons, be freed from servitude.’ O Keshava! They were freed at my words, but were sent to dwell in the forest.
O Janardana! You are aware of these and other hardships. O lotus-eyed one! Save me, along with my brothers, my
kin and my relatives. O Krishna! According to dharma, I am the daughter-in-law of both Bhishma and Dhritarashtra. Yet, I was forcibly made a slave. O Krishna! If Duryodhana remains alive for a single instant, shame on Bhimasena’s strength, shame on Partha’s skill with the bow. O Krishna! If you wish to show favours towards me, if
you are compassionate towards me, you should direct your entire wrath at Dhritarashtra’s sons.”
‘Having said this, the black-eyed one with the beautiful hips used her left hand to gather the side of her hair. It
was soft and curled at the tips and was beautiful to see. It was extremely dark and was perfumed with sacred fra-

grances. It bore all the auspicious marks and shone like a giant snake. The lotus-eyed one approached Pundarikaksha with the gait of an elephant. Her eyes ﬁlled with tears, Krishna27 told Krishna, “O Pundarikaksha! This was
grasped by Duhshasana. You should remember this at all times, when you seek to bring about a peace with the enemy. O Krishna! If Bhima and Arjuna are so mean as to desire peace, my aged father will ﬁght, with his maharatha
sons. O Madhusudana! With Abhimanyu at the forefront, my ﬁve immensely valiant sons will also ﬁght with the
Kurus. How can my heart have any peace until I see Duhshasana’s dark hand severed and covered with dust? Thirteen years have passed, while I have waited. I have hidden my anger in my heart, like a kindled ﬁre. My heart has
been pierced and oppressed by the stake of Bhima’s words. The mighty-armed one can only see dharma now.” Her
throat choked with tears, the long-eyed one spoke in this way. Krishna trembled and wept, her voice choked with
tears. Hot tears ﬂowed down from the eyes of the one with the beautiful hips and moistened her large breasts.
‘The mighty-armed Keshava comforted her. “O Krishna! You will soon see the women of the Bharata lineage
weep. O timid one! O beautiful one! They will weep as you are crying now, because their kin and relatives will be
slain, with their friends killed and their soldiers killed. Together with Bhima, Arjuna and the twins, I will act in accordance with Yudhishthira’s instructions and according to what destiny has ordained. Cooked by destiny, if the
sons of Dhritarashtra do not listen to my words, they will be killed and will lie down on the ground, food for dogs
and jackals. The Himalaya mountains may move. The earth may shatter into a hundred fragments. The sky, with
all its nakshatras, may fall down. But my words will not be false. O Krishna! I am telling you this truthfully. Control your tears. With the enemies killed, you will soon see your husbands united with prosperity.”’
744(81)

‘Arjuna said, “You are the supreme well-wisher of all the Kurus. As a relative, you have always been loved by
both the sides. O Keshava! You are capable of restoring health to the Pandavas and the sons of Dhritarashtra and
bringing about peace and you must act accordingly. O Pundarikaksha! You should go to the intolerant Suyodhana
for the sake of peace. O destroyer of enemies! Tell the Bharatas what must be said. If you speak to him words that
are in conformity with dharma and artha, auspicious and directed towards health, and the foolish one does not accept them, he will fall prey to destiny.”
‘Bhagavan said, “I will go to King Dhritarashtra with a desire to accomplish what is in accordance with dharma,
and what is good for the health of the Kurus.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘When darkness had passed and the clear sun had risen, at the muhurta of maitra, when the
sun’s rays were mild, in the month of Koumuda and the nakshatra of Revati, when autumn was over and winter
had arrived, in a season when there is an abundance of crops and happiness, the foremost among spirited ones got
ready.28 He listened to the auspicious and sacred benedictions pronounced by happy and well-trained brahmanas,
like Vasava listening to the benedictions of rishis. He performed the morning ablutions and bathed. He puriﬁed and
ornamented himself. Janardana worshipped the sun and the ﬁre. He touched a bull on its tail and showed his respects to the brahmanas. He circumambulated the ﬁre and looked at all the auspicious objects that were before
him. He acknowledged Pandava’s words. Satyaki, Shini’s grandson, was seated and he addressed him. “Ready the
chariot, with the conch shell, the chakra and the club. Also include the quivers, the spears and all kinds of
weapons. Duryodhana, Karna and Soubala are evil in their souls. A stronger person should not ignore an enemy,
however weak he might be.” Knowing Keshava’s instructions, his servants rushed to prepare and yoke the chariot
of the one who wields the chakra and the club. It was as radiant as the ﬁre of destruction. It could travel in the sky.
It was adorned with two wheels that were like the sun and the moon. It was decorated with ﬁgures of half-moons,
full moons, ﬁsh, animals, birds and many different kinds of ﬂowers and was embellished with gems and jewels. It
was large and beautiful and was as radiant as the rising sun. It had excellent ﬂags and excellent pennants, decorated with jewels and gold. It was invincible and was full of objects, and was covered with tiger skins. It diminished
the fame of enemies and increased the delight of the Yadu lineage. They yoked it to the horses Sainya, Sugriva,
Meghapushpa and Balahaka, all of whom had been bathed and dressed in excellent harnesses. There was a standard with the Indra among birds29 on it and the chariot uttered an excellent roar, thereby increasing Krishna’s glory. Shouri ascended the chariot, like the performers of pure deeds ascend vimanas. It was like a summit of Mount
Meru and roared like clouds or battle drums.

‘Purushottama made Satyaki ascend the chariot and departed. The earth and the sky resounded with the sound of
the chariot. In an instant, everything was clear and the sky was bereft of clouds. Auspicious winds began to blow.
The dust settled down. Auspicious birds and animals circled and followed Vasudeva’s departure. Cranes, woodpeckers and swans circled and followed Madhusudana, voicing auspicious sounds in every direction. To the chanting of mantras, great oblations were offered into the ﬁre. There was no smoke and ﬂames circled around. Vasishtha,
Vamadeva, Bhuridyumna, Gaya, Kratha, Shukra, Narada, Valmika, Maruta, Kushika and Bhrigu, devarshis and
brahmarshis, circled Indra’s younger brother Krishna, who had brought happiness to the Yadu lineage. Thus honoured by masses of immensely fortunate maharshis, Krishna left for the abode of the Kurus. As he left, Kunti’s
son, Yudhishthira, followed him, and so did Bhimasena, Arjuna, the twins who were the sons of Madri and Pandu,
the valiant Chekitana, King Dhrishtaketu from Chedi, Drupada, the king of Kashi, the maharatha Shikhandi,
Dhrishtadyumna, Virata and his sons and the Kekayas. To ensure success, all these kshatriyas followed the bull
among the kshatriyas.
‘In the presence of the kings, having followed Govinda for some distance, the resplendent Dharmaraja Yudhishthira spoke these words to Keshava, who is the lord of all beings and is the eternal god of the gods. He is
learned about dharma, steadfast and is wise about all beings. He is constant in his intelligence and does not follow
wrong conduct because of desire, fear, greed or selﬁshness. He has all the qualities and is marked with the srivatsa
sign.30 Kounteya embraced him and gave him a message. “The lady31 has reared us from childhood. Fasts and austerities are her nature and she is always devoted to auspicious rites. She is devoted in worship to gods and guests
and servitude towards her elders. O Janardana! She is affectionate towards her sons and is loved by us. O destroyer
of enemies! She has saved us from fear of Suyodhana and great death, like a boat saves one in the terrible ocean. O
Madhava! She has always suffered hardships, though she does not deserve it. You should ask about her welfare.
Comfort her, because she is overcome with grief over her sons. When you have greeted her, embrace her and tell
her about the Pandavas. O destroyer of enemies! She did not deserve unhappiness. But ever since she got married,
she has suffered from hardships and deceit in her father-in-law’s house. O Krishna! O destroyer of enemies! My
mother has suffered a lot. Will there be a time when this tide of suffering will turn, so that I can give her happiness? When we were exiled, out of affection for her sons, she was miserable and ran after us. But we left the weeping one behind and left for the forest. O Keshava! One cannot die of grief, as long as she is alive. Our mother was
honoured by the Anartas, but she was deeply grief-stricken because of her sons. O Krishna! O lord! Salute her on
my behalf and also Kouravya Dhritarashtra and the kings who are our seniors. O Madhusudana! Embrace Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, the great king Bahlika, Drona’s son, Somadatta and all the Bharatas separately, and the immensely wise Vidura, who is unfathomable in his intelligence, knowledgeable about dharma and the adviser of the
Kurus.” In the midst of the kings, when Yudhishthira had spoken to Keshava thus, he circumambulated Krishna
and took his leave.
‘Bibhatsu followed his friend, who was a bull among men. He told the unvanquished Dasharha, the slayer of enemy warriors. “O lord! O Govinda! All the kings know about our earlier consultations, concerning half of the kingdom. O mighty-armed one! I will be delighted if they give it to us courteously, without any disrespect. They will
be saved from a great fear. But Dhritarashtra’s son doesn’t know about the right code of conduct. O Janardana! If
he acts in a contrary way, I will certainly annihilate the kshatriyas.” When Pandava spoke in this way, Vrikodara
was delighted. Pandava’s32 form repeatedly shook because of his rage. While trembling, Kounteya emitted loud
roars. Having heard Dhananjaya’s words, his mind was ﬁlled with great delight. On hearing his roars, the archers
trembled and all the mounts released dung and urine. Having thus spoken to Keshava and voiced his intentions,
he33 embraced Janardana and, having taken his leave, departed. All the kings also returned.
‘Janardana progressed on his journey, drawn by the mounts Sainya and Sugriva. Under Daruka’s34 whip, Vasudeva’s horses seemed to kiss the road and devour the sky. Along the road, the mighty-armed Keshava saw that
many radiant rishis were stationed, shining with the resplendence of brahmanas. Janardana swiftly descended from
his chariot and honoured them. He worshipped all the rishis in the proper way and asked, “Are all the worlds in
good health? Is dharma followed? Do the other three varnas follow the instructions of brahmanas?” Having worshipped them with honours, Madhusudana said, “O illustrious ones! Have all of you been successful in your objectives? O illustrious ones! What is your purpose? What do you wish to be done? O illustrious ones! For what pur-

pose have you descended on earth?” Jamadagni’s son approached Madhusudana, his friend in earlier good deeds.35
Embracing Govinda, he said, “O Dasharha! O immensely radiant one! The devarshis who are the performers of
good deeds, the extremely learned brahmanas, the rajarshis and the venerable ascetics once witnessed the ancient
battle between the gods and the asuras. O Janardana! They wish to see all the kshatriyas on earth and the kings
gathered in the assembly hall, with you voicing what is true. O Keshava! O Madhava! We are going to witness that
great spectacle, wishing to hear the words that you will speak, in conformity with dharma and artha. O scorcher of
enemies! You will speak to the Kurus in the midst of those kings. Bhishma, Drona and the others, the immensely
intelligent Vidura and you, tiger among the Yadava lineage, will gather in that assembly hall. O Madhava! O
Govinda! We wish to hear your celestial words, full of truth and welfare, and theirs too. O mighty-armed one! Let
us take your leave now. We will see you again. O brave one! May your journey be without obstacles. We will see
you in that assembly hall.”’
745(82)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Ten mighty-armed maharathas, destroyers of enemy warriors, followed Devaki’s son, with
weapons in their hands. O destroyer of enemies! There were one thousand foot soldiers and riders. O king! There
were hundreds of others, with plenty of provisions.’
Janamejaya asked, ‘How did the great-souled Dasharha Madhusudana travel? What portents were seen when
that immensely energetic one progressed?’
Vaishampayana said, ‘When the great-souled one travelled, listen to the extraordinary portents. Some were divine, driven by destiny. Others were adverse portents. In the clear sky, there was thunder, with lightning. Behind
him, Parjanya showered down ﬁercely, though there were no clouds. The seven great rivers, supreme among rivers,
ﬂow in an eastern direction.36 All of them reversed direction. All the directions were reversed and nothing could be
discerned. O king! Fires were ignited and the earth trembled. Hundreds of wells and water pots overﬂowed and
water ﬂowed out. The entire earth was covered in darkness. O king! Because of the dust, the directions and the
sub-directions could not be seen. There was a loud roar in the sky, though nothing could be seen. O king! There
were extraordinary things in every region. A storm from the south-western direction devastated Hastinapura. With
a harsh and terrible roar, it uprooted a large number of trees. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Along whatever
route Varshneya progressed, there was a pleasant breeze and everything was favourable. There was a shower of
ﬂowers, with a large number of lotuses. The roads became smooth and pleasant, without prickly grass and thorns.
O king! Wherever the mighty-armed one went, he was honoured by brahmanas. The granter of riches was worshipped with madhuparka and ﬂowers. Women gathered along the road and showered fragrant and wild ﬂowers on
the great-souled one. He passed the beautiful Shalibhavana, which had an abundance of crops. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! It was a happy spot, where supreme dharma was followed. He saw many animals and beautiful
villages, pleasant to the heart. There were diverse cities and many kingdoms. The people there were protected by
the Bharatas and were always happy, happy in their hearts. They were without anxiety and were ignorant about any
evil designs on the part of enemies. The residents of the city of Upaplavya came out in large numbers to see Vishvaksena. They stood along the road. All of them honoured the famous lord, who had arrived in that country as a
guest, blazing like a ﬁre, with the homage that he deserved.
‘Keshava, the slayer of enemy heroes, arrived in Vrikasthala. The clear sun’s scattered rays were red. He swiftly
descended from the chariot and performed the appropriate ablutions. He gave instructions that the chariot should
be unyoked and seated himself for the evening rites. Having unharnessed the horses and tended to them, in accordance with the sacred texts,37 Daruka removed their armour and released them. After he had done all that, Madhusudana said, “To accomplish Yudhishthira’s objective, we will spend the night here.” Getting to know about his
intention, the men instantly set up camp there and obtained excellent food and drink. O king! The foremost brahmanas from the village, noble in birth and conduct, modest and devoted to the tasks of brahmanas, approached the
great-souled Hrishikesha, the destroyer of enemies. They worshipped him with benedictions and auspicious words.
Having worshipped the great-souled Dasharha, honoured by all the worlds, they offered him their houses, with all
their riches. The lord told them that they had done enough and returned their homage in the appropriate way. Hav-

ing entered their houses, he returned again,38 in their company. Keshava offered succulent food to the brahmanas
and himself ate in their company. All of them spent the night in comfort.’
746(83)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having got to know from messengers about Madhusudana’s departure, Dhritarashtra was
ﬁlled with delight. He honoured the mighty-armed Bhishma and told him, Drona, Sanjaya, the immensely intelligent Vidura and Duryodhana and his advisers, “O descendant of the Kuru lineage!39 I have heard of a great and
extraordinary wonder. Women, children and aged people are talking about it in every house. Some are doing it out
of faith. Others are doing it in groups. Different accounts are circulating in squares and in assembly halls—the valorous Dasharha has arrived for the sake of the Pandavas. Madhusudana should always be revered and honoured by
us. The course of the entire world depends on him. He is the lord of all beings. Madhava possesses fortitude, valour, wisdom and energy. That foremost among men should be revered because he is the eternal dharma. He must
be worshipped for the sake of happiness. If he is not honoured, there is unhappiness. If Dasharha, the scorcher of
enemies, is satisﬁed with our veneration, in the midst of all the kings, we will be successful in all our objectives. O
scorcher of enemies! Make immediate arrangements for his worship. Erect pavilions along the route and let them
be stocked with all desirable objects. O Gandhari’s son!40 O mighty-armed one! Act so that satisfaction towards
you is created in him. O Bhishma! What do you think?” Bhishma and all the others approved these words of King
Dhritarashtra. They said that these words were excellent. Having obtained their approval, King Duryodhana began
to look for beautiful sites for those pavilions. In one beautiful site after another, he had pavilions built and ﬁlled
them with every kind of gem, colourful seats that possessed many different qualities, women, fragrances, ornaments, ﬁne garments, excellent food and drink of different types and perfumed garlands. The king donated all
these. So that they could live in the village of Vrikasthala, King Kourava specially built a residence and ﬁlled it
with many beautiful jewels. All these superhuman arrangements were made worthy of the gods. King Duryodhana
then informed Dhritarashtra about what had been done. However, Dasharha Keshava ignored all those pavilions,
with their many different kinds of jewels, and went to the abode of the Kurus.’
747(84)

Kshatta!41

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O
Janardana has set out from Upaplavya. He is now residing in Vrikasthala and
will arrive here in the morning. Janardana is the lord of the Ahukas and the foremost among all the Satvatas. He is
immensely intelligent, immensely valorous and immensely spirited. Madhava is the lord and the protector of the
prosperous kingdom of the Vrishnis. The illustrious one is the great-grandfather of the three worlds. Happy in their
minds, the Vrishnis and the Andhakas honour his wisdom, just as the Adityas, the Vasus and the Rudras listen to
Brihaspati’s intelligence. I will show my homage to the great-souled Dasharha. O one learned in dharma! Listen to
what you will see. I will give him sixteen golden chariots. Each will be yoked to four excellent horses from the
Bahlika region and they will be extremely dark in complexion. I will also give Keshava eight war elephants with
tusks that are like poles and they will always ooze musth. Each will have eight attendants. I will give him one hundred servant maids who are beautiful and possess golden complexions. They have never given birth. I will give
him an equal number of male servants. I will give him eighteen thousand woollen garments that are extremely
pleasant to the touch. They have been brought by those who dwell in the mountainous regions. I will give him one
thousand deerskins that have been brought from the country of China42 and whatever else deserves to be given to
Keshava. I will give him this extremely energetic and clear jewel that sparkles by day and night. I will give it to
him, because Keshava deserves it. I will also give him a cart drawn by a mule, which can travel fourteen yojanas in
a single day. Every day, I will give him eight times the food that his mounts and men can consume. With the exception of Duryodhana, all my sons and grandsons will adorn themselves, and mounting excellent chariots, will go
out to meet Dasharha. Thousands of the best courtesans, beautiful, immensely fortunate and adorned with ornaments, will go out to meet Keshava on foot. Beautiful maidens, who have not been seen by men, will leave the city
and go and meet Janardana and they will go without their veils. Let all the subjects of the city, women, men and
children, see the great-souled Madhusudana, who is like the sun. Let all the directions be covered with large ﬂags
and pennants. Let the roads be sprinkled with water and cleaned of dust. Duhshasana’s house is superior to Duryo-

dhana’s house. Let it be quickly decorated for him. It is adorned with many beautiful pavilions and is pure and
lovely. It is full of riches in every season. All my riches, and those of Duryodhana, are in that house. There is no
doubt that Varshneya should be given everything that he deserves.”’
748(85)

‘Vidura said, “O king! You are extremely revered by the three worlds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You
are loved by the world and respected by us. Having reached an age that leans towards the west,43 whatever you say
should not be against the sacred texts or reasoning. You are well established because you are old. O great king!
The subjects know that dharma is established in you, like lines in rocks, rays in the sun and waves in the ocean. O
lord of the earth! You are always honoured by the world because of your qualities. Together with your relatives,
you must always seek to protect these qualities. Resort to honesty. Out of childishness, do not destroy your kingdom, your sons, your grandsons, your well-wishers and those you love. O king! What you wish to give Krishna, as
a guest, is a lot. But Dasharha deserves all this and more, even the entire earth. But I truthfully say that you are not
giving this to Krishna because of dharma or to show him affection, but because of your own self. It is because of
deception and falsehood that you are giving him all these gifts. O king! Despite your external deeds, I know your
inner secrets. O king! The ﬁve Pandavas only desire ﬁve villages. If you do not wish to give them that, how can
there be peace? You wish to win over the mighty-armed Varshneya through riches and use this means to create a
rift between him and the Pandavas. But I tell you truthfully that he cannot be separated from Dhananjaya through
riches, effort or maligning.44 I know Krishna’s greatness. I know that his devotion is ﬁrm. I know that he will not
give up Dhananjaya, who is as dear as his life itself. Janardana will look at nothing other than a pot full of water,
enough to wash his feet, and nothing other than inquiries about his health. Therefore, show the great-souled and
venerable one the hospitality that he desires. O king! Act accordingly, because Janardana is deserving of honour.
Keshava has arrived, hoping for the welfare of the Kurus. O king! Give him that through which the objective may
be attained. Dasharha desires peace between you and Duryodhana, and the Pandavas. O Indra among kings! Therefore, do what he says. O king! You are the father and they are your sons. You are aged and the others are children.
Therefore, act like a father towards them, because they act like sons towards you.”’
749(86)

‘Duryodhana said, “Everything that Vidura has said about Krishna is true. Janardana is ﬁrmly devoted to the
Parthas and it is impossible to separate them. O Indra among kings! Therefore, the many different kinds of riches
you proposed to bestow on Janardana as hospitality should never be given to him. Though Keshava deserves all
that, this is not the time and the place. O king! Adhokshaja45 will think that you are honouring him because of fear.
O lord of the earth! It is my certain conviction that anything that causes disrespect should never be undertaken by a
wise kshatriya. The divine and lotus-eyed Krishna deserves to be worshipped by the three worlds. I know everything about that. O lord! But one should not act so as to give him anything. That is the right course, now that war
has been decided on. War cannot become peace through pretence.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing these words, Bhishma, the grandfather of the Kurus, addressed these words to
the king who was Vichitravirya’s son. “Whether he is treated well or maltreated, Janardana will not be angered.
Though he is insulted, Keshava is incapable of insulting others. O mighty-armed one! Whatever he has mentally
decided as the right course of action cannot be thwarted by anyone through any means. Without any hesitation, we
should do what the mighty-armed one asks us to do. Using Vasudeva as our salvation, we must swiftly make peace
with the Pandavas. Janardana has dharma in his soul. He is certain to say that which is in conformity with dharma
and artha. You should address him in affectionate words, together with your relatives.”
‘Duryodhana said, “O king! This prosperity is mine alone and there is no circumstance under which I will share
it. O grandfather! I cannot bear to share it, and then continue to live. Listen to the great task that I have decided
upon. I will capture Janardana, the refuge of the Pandavas. When he is captured, the Vrishnis, the entire earth and
the Pandavas will submit. He will be here tomorrow morning. This must be accomplished so that Janardana does
not get to know. Tell me how this can be done, so that we do not confront any danger.”’

Vaishampayana said, ‘When Dhritarashtra and his advisers heard these terrible words about causing violence to
Krishna, they were distressed and distracted. Dhritarashtra addressed these words to Duryodhana. “If you are the
protector of your subjects, do not speak in this way. This is not eternal dharma. Hrishikesha is a messenger and our
beloved relative. He intends no evil towards the Kouravas. How can it be right that he should be captured?”
‘Bhishma said, “O Dhritarashtra! This extremely evil son of yours is the ultimate. Though he is urged by his
well-wishers, he chooses disaster over that which will ensure welfare. Because of his wicked followers, this
wicked one has deviated from the path. But you continue to follow him, without paying heed to the words of your
well-wishers. If this extremely evil son of yours and his advisers touch Krishna, whose deeds are unsullied, they
will be destroyed in an instant. I cannot bear to listen any more to the fruitless words of this wicked, cruel and evilminded one who has discarded dharma.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having said this, the aged one, foremost among the Bharatas, was extremely enraged.
Bhishma, whose truth was his valour, arose and left the place.’
750(87)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having arisen next morning, Krishna performed all his morning rites. He took leave of the
brahmanas and left for the city. O king! Having taken leave of the mighty-armed one, who was about to leave, all
the residents of Vrikasthala returned. Adorned, Dhritarashtra’s sons, with the exception of Duryodhana, Bhishma,
Drona and Kripa advanced to meet him when he arrived. O king! There were many inhabitants of the city too, desiring to see Hrishikesha. They came in many different kinds of vehicles and others were on foot. He met them
along the road. Surrounded by Bhishma of the unsullied deeds, Drona and the sons of Dhritarashtra, he entered the
city. The city was adorned in Krishna’s honour. The royal roads were decorated with many different kinds of gems.
O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! There was no one who stayed at home—woman, aged or child. They
all wished to see Vasudeva. O great king! At the time when Hrishikesha entered, no men stood along the royal
road. They prostrated themselves in his honour. The great mansions were full of beautiful women and seemed to
sway on the ground, because of that great weight. Because the royal road was full of men, the speed of Vasudeva’s
swift horses was restrained.
‘Pundarikaksha, the destroyer of enemies, entered Dhritarashtra’s white house. It was adorned with many pavilions. After passing through three rooms in the royal abode, the destroyer of enemies went to the king who was Vichitravirya’s son. When Dasharha approached him, the immensely famous lord of men, who possessed the sight of
wisdom, stood up, together with Drona, Bhishma, Kripa, Somadatta and the great king of Bahlika. All of them
arose from their seats and honoured Janardana. Having approached the famous King Dhritarashtra and Bhishma,
Varshneya swiftly honoured them with eloquent words. Madhusudana ﬁrst honoured them in accordance with
dharma. In accordance with age, Madhava then greeted the other kings. Janardana then met Drona and his famous
son and Bahlika, Kripa and Somadatta. There was a large and golden throne there, exquisite in workmanship. On
Dhritarashtra’s instructions, Achyuta seated himself there. As is the custom, Dhritarashtra’s priests offered Janardana a cow, madhuparka and water. With the rites due to a guest having been observed, Govinda, surrounded by
the Kurus, stayed with all the Kurus for some time joking with them and asking all the relatives about their welfare. The immensely fortunate one was thus honoured and worshipped by Dhritarashtra. Having taken his leave of
the king, the destroyer of enemies then left.
‘Having met the Kurus in the appropriate way in that assembly of the Kurus, Madhava then went to Vidura’s
beautiful house. Vidura received Janardana with every kind of benediction and honoured Dasharha with every object of desire. After having greeted Govinda as a guest, Vidura, who was knowledgeable about every kind of dharma, asked Madusudana about the welfare of the sons of Pandu. Vidura was his beloved well-wisher, wise and always established in dharma, and bereft of any sins. Dasharha, supreme among wise ones, could always see everything and told Kshatta everything about the Pandavas in detail, and their endeavours.’
751(88)

Vaishampayana said, ‘After meeting Vidura, Janardana Govinda, the destroyer of enemies, went to meet his father’s sister46 in the afternoon. When she saw Krishna approach, radiant as a pleasant sun, Pritha embraced him

around the neck. Remembering the Parthas, she began to weep. She had seen Varshneya Govinda after a long time
and he was always a companion to her spirited sons. Pritha began to shed tears. When Krishna, lord among warriors, had seated himself and the rites due to a guest had been performed, with her voice choked with tears and
with her mouth dry, she said, “They have always been devoted to serving their elders from childhood. They have
wished each other well and have been similar in their minds. They were deprived of their kingdom through deceit
and though they deserved to be with people, were banished to desolate regions. They were humble and had conquered anger and delight. They possessed the qualities of brahmanas. They spoke the truth. The Parthas have abandoned their beloved happiness and I have been left behind, in the midst of tears. They left for the forest and took
my heart, with its roots, with them. O Keshava! How did the great-souled Pandavas deserve this? O son!47 They
lived in that great forest, infested by lions, tigers and elephants. They lost their father in their childhood and I have
always reared them. Without seeing their parents, how did they live in that great forest? O Keshava! Ever since
childhood, the Pandavas have woken up to the sounds of conch shells, kettledrums, drums and ﬂutes. At home,
they were woken by the trumpeting of elephants, the neighing of horses and the roar of chariot wheels. There were
the sounds of conch shells and drums and notes of ﬂutes and veenas. There were sounds of brahmanas honouring
the auspicious times of the day. They honoured brahmanas by distributing garments, gems and ornaments. The
great-souled brahmanas blessed them with hymns and benedictions. In the best of palaces, they slept on the skins
of ranku deer and awoke to chants uttered by the venerated, for those who deserve to be honoured. In the great forest, they heard the roars of cruel predators. O Janardana! They did not deserve this and they could not have slept
there. O Madhusudana! They awoke to the sweet sounds of kettledrums, drums, conch shells and ﬂutes, the singing
of women and the praises of bards and minstrels. In that great forest, how could they awake to the roars of predatory beasts?
‘“He is modest and ﬁrm in his truth. He is self-controlled and compassionate towards all beings. He has control
over desire and hatred. He follows the path followed by the virtuous. He bears the extremely difﬁcult burdens of
Ambarisha, Mandhata, Yayati, Nahusha, Bharata, Dilipa, Shibi Oushinara and the ancient rajarshis. He is characterized by goodness of conduct. He is learned in dharma and follows the truth. He possesses all the qualities and
deserves to be the king of the three worlds. He is Ajatashatru, with dharma in his soul. He has the complexion of
pure gold. He is best among all the Kurus in dharma, learning and conduct. He is handsome and has long arms. O
Krishna! How is Yudhishthira?
‘“Vrikodara has the strength of ten thousand elephants and the force of a storm. That Pandava is wrathful. But
he is loved by his brother and always does what brings pleasure to him. O Madhusudana! He is the brave one who
killed Kichaka and his relatives, the Krodhavashas, Hidimba and Baka. He is Shakra’s equal in valour and the
equal of the force of the wind in speed. He is Maheshvara’s equal in rage. He is Bhima, supreme among warriors.
That scorcher of enemies has controlled his anger, his strength and his intolerance. Despite his intolerance, the
Pandava has controlled his soul and follows the instructions of his brother. The great-souled one is a mass of energy and his strength is supreme because of his inﬁnite energy. O Janardana! Bhimasena is terrible in his appearance.
O Varshneya! Tell me. How is Vrikodara now?
‘“The strong Pandava in the middle has arms like clubs. O Krishna! O Keshava! With his two arms, Arjuna rivals the thousand-armed Arjuna48 and always surpasses him. With a single thrust, he unleashes ﬁve hundred arrows. In archery, the Pandava is the equal of King Kartavirya. He is the equal of the sun in his energy. He is the
equal of maharshis in his self-control. He is the equal of the earth in his forgiveness. He is the equal of the great
Indra in his valour. O Madhusudana! With his valour, he brought all the kings under the suzerainty of the Kurus
and they obtained a great, radiant and famous overlordship. All the Kouravas honour his terrible strength of arms.
The Pandava is supreme among all the charioteers. Truth is his valour. The Pandavas seek refuge with him, like the
gods with Vasava. He is your brother and your friend. How is Dhananjaya now?
‘“He is compassionate towards all beings. He is restrained because of his modesty. He is great in the use of
weapons. He is mild and delicate. He follows dharma and I love him. Sahadeva is a brave and great archer and
shines in assemblies. O Krishna! He is devoted to serving his brothers. He is young and skilled in dharma and
artha. O Madhusudana! His brothers always honour the conduct of the great-souled Sahadeva, whose conduct is

always designed to ensure welfare. The brave Sahadeva is supreme among warriors and defers to his elders. He
used to serve me. O Varshneya! Tell me about Madri’s son.
‘“He is delicate, young and brave. He is a handsome Pandava. O Krishna! He is always as loved by his brothers
as their own lives, although he possesses a different body. Nakula is immensely strong and a great archer and his
valour is diverse. O Krishna! My son has been reared in comforts. Is he well? O mighty-armed one! Will I again
see Nakula? Since birth, he has been reared in comforts. He is delicate and a maharatha. He does not deserve this
unhappiness. I cannot ﬁnd peace if I am separated from Nakula for even the twinkling of an eye. O brave one! But
look at me. I am still alive.
‘“O Janardana! Droupadi is the beloved of all my sons. She has been born in a noble lineage and possesses good
conduct. She is endowed with all the qualities. She speaks the truth and chose the world of her husbands over the
world of her sons.49 Having left her beloved sons, she followed the Pandavas. She was born in a noble lineage and
has been honoured with all the objects of desire. She is fortunate in every way. O Achyuta! How is the illustrious
Droupadi? She has ﬁve husbands and they are brave warriors, equal to the ﬁre. They are great archers. But
Droupadi has only faced unhappiness. O destroyer of enemies! I have not seen Droupadi, who is truthful in speech,
for fourteen years. Worrying about her sons, she must be tired out. Droupadi has such conduct, yet she has not obtained eternal happiness. It is then certain that a man does not obtain happiness because of his meritorious deeds.
Bibhatsu, Yudhishthira, Bhimasena and the twins are not dearer to me than Krishna.50 When I saw her brought to
the assembly hall, it brought me greater pain than anything I had confronted before. Without wishing for it,
Droupadi was brought before her fathers-in-law. While all the Kurus watched, she was brought to the assembly
hall in a single garment. She was brought there by an ignoble one, who was overcome by anger and avarice.51
Dhritarashtra, the great king Bahlika, Kripa, Somadatta and the distressed Kurus were present there. Among all
those who were there in the assembly, I respect Kshatta52 alone. A man becomes an arya because of what he does,
not because of riches or learning. O Krishna! The great-souled Kshatta’s great intelligence is profound. Because of
his conduct, he is established like an ornament of the world.”
‘She was both distressed and happy at having seen Govinda arrive.53 She began to recount the many kinds of
unhappiness that she had faced. “O destroyer of enemies! Gambling with the dice and the killing of deer were sins
practised by evil kings in earlier times. Could those have brought them happiness? I am tormented because
Krishna54 was molested in the assembly hall by Dhritarashtra’s son, in the midst of the Kurus. This could not have
been good. O scorcher of enemies! They were exiled to the forest and banished. O Janardana! There are many
kinds of unhappiness that I have faced. O Keshava! They lived in concealment and were separated from their children. O scorcher of enemies! Nothing makes me and my sons suffer more than that we will now be deceived by
Duryodhana in the fourteenth year. If happiness does not follow unhappiness, the fruits of meritorious deeds will
be destroyed. I have not distinguished between the sons of Dhritarashtra and the Pandavas. O Krishna! That is the
truth and because of this, I will see you and the Pandavas emerge from this battle, surrounded by prosperity, and
with the enemies slain. They55 have such spirit that they are incapable of being vanquished. But it is my father who
should be blamed, and not I, or Suyodhana. While I was still playing as a child, with a ball in my hands, my father
gave me away to Kuntibhoja, like a wicked man gives away riches.56 I was given to Kuntibhoja, a friend, as a
mark of great-souled friendship. O scorcher of enemies! I have been deceived by my father and my fathers-in-law.
O Krishna! I have been extremely unhappy. What has been the point of my being alive? When I was giving birth to
Savyasachi, a voice told me in the night, ‘Your son will conquer the earth and his fame will touch heaven. Having
killed the Kurus in a battle among men, Dhananjaya Kounteya will obtain the kingdom and will perform three sacriﬁces with his brothers.’ I have never doubted this. I bow down to what dharma has ordained and to the great
Krishna. Dharma always sustains subjects. O Varshneya! If there is any dharma, all this will become true. O
Krishna! You will accomplish everything that has been said. O Madhava! I am a widow. My prosperity has been
destroyed and I have enemies. But nothing distresses me as much as separation from my sons. I do not see
Dhananjaya, the wielder of the bow Gandiva, and supreme among those who are skilled in the use of all weapons.
How can there be peace in my heart? O Govinda! I have not seen Yudhishthira, Dhananjaya, the twins and Vriokodara for fourteen years. Men perform funeral ceremonies57 for those whose lives have been destroyed. O Janardana! They seem to be dead to me, and I to them. O Madhava! Tell King Yudhishthira, who has dharma in his soul,

‘O son! Your dharma is diminishing. Your deeds are in vain.’ O Vasudeva! Shame on those who live like me, under the protection of others. It is better not to exist, than to obtain life through such inferior means. Also tell
Dhananjaya and Vrikodara, who is always ready, ‘The reason why a kshatriya gives birth to sons, and the appropriate time, has arrived. The time has come. And if the time passes, no matter how respected you are by the worlds,
you will do that which is extremely cruel. If you act in this cruel way, I will abandon you for an eternity. When the
time has arrived, one should even give up one’s own life.’ Tell Madri’s two sons, who are always devoted to the
dharma of kshatriyas. ‘Even at the cost of your lives, choose the comforts that can only be obtained through valour.’ O Purushottama! For a man who lives according to the dharma of kshatriyas, there is always delight at obtaining objects that are gained through valour. O mighty-armed one! Go there and speak to brave Pandava Arjuna,
supreme among those who wield all the weapons. ‘Follow the path adopted by Droupadi.’58 You know that when
Bhima and Arjuna are extremely enraged, they can despatch even the gods on the ﬁnal destination.59 It was an insult to them that Krishna60 was brought to the assembly hall and Duhshasana and Karna addressed her in harsh
words. While the foremost among the Kurus looked on, Duryodhana assailed the intelligent Bhimasena, and will
now witness the consequences. Having once embarked on an enmity, Vrikodara cannot be paciﬁed. Even an old
enmity with Bhima cannot be paciﬁed until that destroyer of enemies has brought an end to all his foes. The robbing of the kingdom, the defeat at the game of dice and the exile of my sons has not caused me as much of unhappiness, as that of the large and dark lady brought to the assembly hall in a single garment. She was made to listen
to harsh words. What can be greater misery than that? She was in her seasons then.61 The one with the beautiful
thighs has always been devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. Though she had protectors, Krishna62 found no one to
protect her then. O Madhusudana! But my sons and I have you as a protector, and Rama,63 supreme among strong
ones, and maharatha Pradyumna. O Purushottama! I can therefore bear all these miseries now, because the invincible Bhima and Vijaya,64 who cannot be dislodged, are alive.” She was overcome with grief because of her sons.
‘Shouri, friend to the Parthas, comforted his father’s sister, Pritha. “O sister of my father! Where is there a
woman like you in this world? You are the daughter of King Shura and went to the lineage of the Ajamidhas.65
You have been born in a great lineage and were transplanted from one lake to another. You are a goddess who is
fortunate in every way. You have been greatly honoured by your husband. You have given birth to warriors. You
were the wife of a warrior. You are adorned with all the qualities. O immensely wise one! Someone like you can
tolerate both happiness and unhappiness. Sleep, laziness, anger, delight, hunger, thirst, cold and heat have been
conquered by the Parthas. They are always engaged in that which brings bliss to warriors. The Parthas have given
up the happiness of ordinary people. They are always engaged in the happiness that brings delight to heroes. Those
immensely strong ones are great in their endeavour. They are not satisﬁed with mere triﬂes. Those who are patient
serve that which is ultimate. Those who are mediocre love the happiness of ordinary people. Those who are patient
bear supreme hardships for the sake of superhuman comforts, and obtain ultimate delight, not enjoyment that is
mediocre. They consider the ultimate to be happiness and anything that is intermediate to be unhappiness. The
Pandavas and Krishna66 offer you their respects. Having conveyed that they are well, they ask whether you are
well. You will soon see the Pandavas in good health, having accomplished all their objectives, the lords of all the
worlds and surrounded by prosperity, with their enemies slain.” Having been thus reassured, Kunti overcame the
darkness of ignorance, though she still suffered from grief on account of her sons. She replied to Janardana, “O
Madhusudana! O mighty-armed one! O Krishna! O scorcher of enemies! Do whatever you see and think to be
good for their sake, without transgressing dharma and without resorting to deceit. O Krishna! I know about the inﬂuence of your truth and your noble birth, and the intelligence and valour that you display in establishing your
friends. In our lineage, you are dharma, you are truth and you are the greatness of austerities. You are the saviour.
You are the great brahman. Everything is established in you. Everything will be as you say. Truth is established in
you.” Govinda took his leave of her and circumambulated her. The mighty-armed one left for Duryodhana’s
residence.’
752(89)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having taken his leave of Pritha and circumambulating her, Shouri Govinda, the destroyer
of enemies, went to Duryodhana’s residence. It possessed supreme prosperity and was like Purandara’s67 abode.

Without being stopped by the gatekeepers, he passed through three rooms. The immensely famous one then ascended into a palace that was radiant with prosperity. It was like a cloud in the sky and arose like the peak of a
mountain. Surrounded by the Kurus and thousands of kings, he saw the mighty-armed son of Dhritarashtra seated
there. He also saw Duhshasana, Karna and Shakuni Soubala, seated near Duryodhana. Dasharha approached. The
immensely famous son of Dhritarashtra arose, together with his advisers, and honoured Madhusudana. Varshneya
Keshava met Dhritarashtra’s son and his advisers and the kings and greeted them, in accordance with their age.
Achyuta seated himself on a golden couch that had been constructed well. It was strewn with many kinds of covers. After offering him a cow and madhuparka, Kourava offered Janardana his house and his kingdom. All the Kurus, together with the kings, honoured him and having seated himself, Govinda was as radiant as the pleasant sun.
Then King Duryodhana offered Varshneya, supreme among victorious ones, some food. But Keshava declined.
‘In that assembly of Kurus, Duryodhana then spoke to Krishna. His tones were mild, but there was wickedness
in his heart. Glancing towards Karna, Kourava said, “O Janardana! We have offered you food, drink, garments and
beds. These have been brought for you. Why do you not accept? You have offered help to both sides. You are engaged in the welfare of both. O Madhava! You are Dhritarashtra’s beloved relative. O Govinda! You know everything about dharma and artha. O wielder of the chakra and the club! I wish to hear about your reasons.” Having
been thus addressed, the immensely intelligent Govinda, grasped his own mighty arms and replied in a voice that
sounded like a ﬂood or a cloud. The words were completely articulated. They were distinct and were pronounced
correctly, without any slurring. The lotus-eyed one told the king these supreme words about his reasons. “Messengers enjoy and accept the honours when they have been successful in their objectives. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! You, together with your advisers, can honour me after I have been successful in my objective.” Having
been thus addressed, Dhritarashtra’s son replied to Janardana, “You should not act in this improper way towards
us. O Madhusudana! O Govinda! Whether you are successful or unsuccessful, we have tried to honour you and
have failed. O Madhusudana! We do not know the reason why you have done this. O Purushottama! We offered
you the homage in an act of affection. O Govinda! We have no enmity with you, nor any quarrel. Reﬂecting on
this, you should not have spoken as you have.” Having been thus addressed, Dasharha Janardana glanced at Dhritarashtra’s son, together with his advisers, and laughed and said, “I never transgress dharma for the sake of desire,
anger, hatred, self-interest in gaining objects, debate or avarice. Food should be accepted because of love, or because of necessity. O king! But I do not have affection for you. Nor am I in need. O king! Without any reason, you
have hated the Pandavas from birth. All of them are your brothers and possess all the qualities. They have acted
kindly towards you. This irrational hatred of the Pandavas is not warranted. The Pandavas are established in dharma. Who can speak against them for any reason? He who hates them hates me. He who follows them, follows me.
Know that I am immersed like a single soul in the Pandavas, who act in accordance with dharma. He who follows
desire and anger and, because of his delusion, hates those who possess qualities is known to be the worst among
men. He is confounded because of his avarice and anger. He is foolish in the way he regards his relatives who have
the fortunate qualities. He has not controlled his soul and has not been able to conquer his anger. His prosperity
will be swiftly destroyed. But one who possesses all the qualities and acts out of affection in the heart acts out of
affection and conquers everyone. Fame is established in him for a long time. I think that all this food has been
tainted and cannot be accepted. It is my view that I should only eat the food offered by Kshatta.” Having spoken
these words to the intolerant Duryodhana, the mighty-armed one left the white mansion of Dhritarashtra’s son. The
mighty-armed and immensely intelligent Vasudeva departed. He went to the abode of the great-souled Vidura.
‘While the mighty-armed one stayed in Vidura’s house, Drona, Kripa, Bhishma, Bahlika and all the Kurus went
to visit him. The Kurus told Madhusudana, “O Varshneya! We are offering you our gems and our houses.” However, the immensely energetic Madhusudana told the Kouravas, “All of you must leave. I have been honoured in
every kind of way.” When the Kurus had left, Kshatta made every effort, with every object of desire, to honour the
unvanquished Dasharha. Kshatta brought large amounts of food and drink that was pure and excellent for greatsouled Keshava. Madhusudana ﬁrst satisﬁed the brahmanas with this. Krishna gave supreme gifts to those who
knew the Vedas. Like Vasava with the Maruts, he then enjoyed Vidura’s pure and excellent food.’
753(90)

Vaishampayana said, ‘At night, after he had eaten and rested, Vidura told him, “O Keshava! It was not a wise decision for you to come. O Janardana! That ignorant one acts counter to artha and dharma. He insults those who deserve respect, though he himself craves for respect. He ignores the instructions of the aged. The foolish and evilsouled one goes against dharma and the sacred texts. O Janardana! Dhritarashtra’s wicked son is incapable of being controlled by his superiors. His soul is full of desire. He thinks himself to be wise. He harms his friends and is
suspicious of everyone. He does not do what he should. He is ungrateful. He has given up dharma and is addicted
to falsehood. He is full of these and many other vices. Because of this, he will not accept your advice and will not
accept what is good for him. O Madhusudana! He sees these soldiers who have been brought together on this earth
and without examining his own soul, in his foolishness, thinks that his objectives have been accomplished. Dhritarashtra’s evil-minded son will not accept peace. He has decided that Karna alone is capable of defeating all the
others. He has the greatest faith in Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna, Drona’s son and Jayadratha. Therefore, his mind
is not set on peace. O Janardana! The sons of Dhritarashtra, together with Karna, have made up their minds that the
Parthas will not be capable of countering Bhishma, Drona and Kripa. O Keshava! Because of brotherly feelings,
you are endeavouring to bring about peace. But all the sons of Dhritarashtra have resolved that they will not return
to the Pandavas what is rightly theirs. Any words addressed towards them will be pointless. O Madhusudana!
When good and bad advice is equal, a wise man does not speak, like a singer who is restrained in the midst of the
deaf. O Madhava! Those foolish ones have no reverence for others. You should not speak to them, like brahmanas
don’t to chandalas.68 Because of his strength, this foolish one will not pay heed to your words. Therefore, it will
be fruitless for you to speak any words to him. O Krishna! It does not appeal to me that you should descend in the
midst, when all these evil-minded ones are gathered together. They are evil in intelligence. They are wicked. They
are many and they are evil in intelligence. O Krishna! It does not appeal to me that you should speak words in their
midst. Because of his delusion and insolence, he does not listen to his elders and accept what is superior. Because
of his age, insolence, delusion and intolerance, he will not accept what is good for him. He possesses a strong
army. O Madhava! If you speak to him, I have a great anxiety that he will not act in accordance with your words.
O Janardana! All the sons of Dhritarashtra have arrived at the conclusion that even Indra, together with the immortals, is incapable of vanquishing them in battle. Among those who are thus inclined and overcome by desire and
anger, your words will be ineffective, no matter how effective they may be. The evil and foolish one is stationed in
the midst of his army, with elephants, soldiers, chariots and horses. Duryodhana thinks that he has no reason to be
afraid of anyone else’s anger and that he has conquered the entire earth. Dhritarashtra’s son aspires for a great
kingdom on earth, without any rivals. No peace can be obtained from such a person, one who thinks that he has
obtained all the prosperity that can be achieved. The earth has been cooked by destiny. All the warriors on earth
have assembled together, for Duryodhana’s sake and to ﬁght with the Pandavas. The kings and the lords of the
earth have gathered together. All of them have old enmities with you.69 O Krishna! It is you who have robbed the
kings of their possessions. It is because of their anxiety from you that these brave ones have sought refuge with
Dhritarashtra’s son and have gathered around Karna. They are with Duryodhana and are ready to give up their own
selves. All the warriors are happy at the prospect of ﬁghting with the Pandavas. O brave Dasharha! It is not my
view that you should enter into their midst. There are many evil-minded ones gathered there. O destroyer of enemies! Why should you go in the midst of these foes? O mighty-armed one! Even the gods are incapable of withstanding you in any way. O slayer of enemies! I know your power, manliness and intelligence. O Madhava! I have
the same affection for you as I have for the Pandavas. I speak because of my affection, great reverence and friendship.”’
754(91)

‘Bhagavan said, “You have spoken as an immensely wise and discerning one should. You have spoken as a wellwisher like you should speak to a well-wisher like me. This is truly in accordance with dharma and artha and beﬁts
you. The words spoken by you are truly like those spoken by a father and a mother. What you have told me is true,
appropriate and worthy of being followed. O Vidura! But listen attentively to the reason why I have come. O
Kshatta! I have come to the Kouravas with complete knowledge about the evil soul of Dhritarashtra’s son and the
enmity of the kshatriyas. However, one who will relieve the earth, with all its horses, chariots and elephants, of her

burden and free her from the noose of death, will achieve supreme dharma. If a man strives for an act of dharma to
the best of his capability, even if he is not successful, I have no doubt that he obtains merits. Those who are knowledgeable about dharma know that if one thinks of an evil deed in one’s mind, but does not consent to do it, one
does not suffer from the fruits. O Kshatta! Therefore, I will sincerely try to bring about peace between the Kurus
and the Srinjayas. Otherwise, they will be destroyed in this war. This extremely terrible calamity has now arisen
before the Kurus. This is because of Karna and Duryodhana, but all the others are also responsible. The wise say
that one who does not rush, to the best of his capacity, to help a friend who faces distress is cruel. A friend should
be prevented from performing an improper act, even by grasping him by the hair. If one strives for this, to the best
of one’s strength, one cannot be blamed. My words are appropriate, pure, beneﬁcial and in conformity with dharma
and artha. O Vidura! Together with his advisers, Dhritarashtra’s son should accept them. I will sincerely try for the
welfare of the sons of Dhritarashtra, the Pandavas and all the kshatriyas on earth. Though I strive for welfare, if
Duryodhana suspects me, my heart will at least be satisﬁed that I have been freed from a debt.70 If a friend does
not intervene, to the best of his endeavours, and maintains a distance, when there is dissension among relatives, the
wise know that he is not a friend. Those who do not know about dharma and are foolish and hostile should not say
that Krishna, though capable, did not restrain the angry Kurus and Pandavas. I have come here to help both sides.
After having made the effort, I will no longer be blamed by men. After having listened to my beneﬁcial words, in
conformity with dharma and artha, if that child ignores them, he will come under the power of destiny. If I can
bring about peace with the Kurus, without harming the cause of the Pandavas, I will accomplish a great objective
and earn merit, saving the Kurus from the noose of death. If Dhritarashtra’s sons pay attention to my virtuous and
wise words, full of dharma and artha and designed to ensure welfare, I will earn the respect of the Kurus for having
come here. All the kings of the earth together are not sufﬁcient to withstand me when I am enraged, like deer before a lion.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having spoken these words, the bull of the Vrishni lineage and the source of joy to the
Yadu lineage lay down to sleep on a bed that was pleasant to the touch.’
755(92)

Vaishampayana said, ‘While these two intelligent ones were conversing in this way, the night, auspicious with the
nakshatras, passed. The great-souled Vidura was listening to many words about dharma, artha and kama, diverse in
their purport, sentences and syllables, spoken by the inﬁnitely energetic Krishna and he did not desire that the
night should pass. Neither did Krishna. Then, many bards and minstrels with good voices awoke Keshava, to the
sound of conch shells and drums. Dasharha Janardana, bull among all those of the Satvata lineage, arose and performed all the necessary morning ablutions. Having bathed in water, meditating and offering oblations into the ﬁre,
Madhava adorned himself in ornaments and worshipped the rising sun.
‘Duryodhana and Shakuni Soubala came to the unvanquished Krishna Dasharha, while he was performing the
morning rites. They told Krishna, “O Govinda! Dhritarashtra has arrived in the assembly hall with all the Kurus,
with Bhishma at the forefront, and all the other kings and lords of the earth. They are waiting for you, like the immortals await Shakra in heaven.” Govinda welcomed them with extremely conciliatory words. Then, when the
clear sun had risen, Janardana, the scorcher of enemies, gave the brahmanas gold, garments, cows and horses.
When the unvanquished Dasharha had given many gems and was waiting, his charioteer arrived and greeted him.
On the instructions of the immensely intelligent one, the divine chariot was brought. It roared like a monsoon
cloud and was decorated with every kind of jewel. Janardana circumambulated the ﬁre and the brahmanas. He
donned the Koustubha jewel and was radiant in his supreme prosperity. Surrounded by the Kurus and protected by
the Vrishnis, Shouri Krishna, the joy of all the Yadavas, ascended the chariot. After Dasharha had ascended, Vidura, knowledgeable in dharma, foremost among all beings and supreme among all those who uphold dharma, also
ascended. Duryodhana and Shakuni Soubala followed Krishna, the scorcher of enemies, on a second chariot.
Satyaki, Kritavarma and maharatha Vrishnis followed Krishna on chariots, horses and elephants. As they travelled,
the beautiful and colourful chariots roared. They were decorated in gold and were yoked to excellent horses. In a
short while, Krishna, resplendent in his wisdom and prosperity, came upon a large road that was frequented by rajarshis. The dust had been swept and it had been sprinkled.71 As Dasharha proceeded, there was continuous music

from drums, conch shells and other musical instruments. Brave and young warriors from all the worlds, scorchers
of enemies and with the valour of lions, surrounded Shouri’s chariot as he travelled. Many thousand of others preceded Krishna in colourful and wonderful attire, with swords, spears and other weapons. There were more than
one hundred elephants and thousands of supreme horses that followed the brave and unvanquished Dasharha as he
progressed. The entire city of the Kurus was full of children, women and the aged, who wished to see Janardana,
the scorcher of enemies, arrive on his chariot. There were many women who crowded on the balconies, so that the
foundations seemed to sway under the burden. He proceeded slowly, honoured by the Kurus, listening to the many
words, glancing in all directions and returning the homage to those who should be honoured.
‘Keshava and his followers then reached the assembly hall. The sounds of conch shells and ﬂutes ﬁlled all the
directions, resounding in the sky. The entire assembly of inﬁnitely energetic kings trembled in delight, desiring
Krishna’s arrival. As Krishna neared, the lords of men trembled when they heard the roar of the chariot, with a
noise like that of a monsoon cloud. Shouri, bull among all the Satvatas, reached the gate of the assembly hall and
dismounted from the chariot, which was like Mount Kailasa. Similar to clouds and mountains, it was radiant in its
energy. He entered the assembly hall, which was like the abode of the great Indra. The immensely famous one held
Vidura and Satyaki with his two hands. O king! He overshadowed the Kurus with his radiance, like the sun over
the nakshatras. Karna and Duryodhana were in front of Vasudeva. Kritavarma and the Vrishnis were behind
Krishna. With Dhritarashtra at the forefront, Bhishma, Drona and all the others arose from their seats and honoured
Janardana. When Dasharha arrived, the immensely famous lord of men who possessed wisdom as his sight72 arose,
together with Bhishma, Drona and the others. When the great king Dhritarashtra, lord of men, arose, all the thousands of kings stood up in every direction. On Dhritarashtra’s instructions, a golden seat that was excellent in
every way had been prepared for Krishna. Madhava greeted the king, Bhishma and Drona with a smile. The one
with dharma in his soul greeted the other kings in accordance with age. The kings, the lords of the earth and all the
Kurus worshipped Keshava Janardana when he entered the assembly hall. Dasharha, the scorcher of enemies and
the conqueror of enemy cities, stood in the midst of the kings and saw that the rishis had assembled in the sky. On
seeing the rishis, with Narada at the forefront, Dasharha softly told Bhishma, Shantanu’s son, “O king! The rishis
have arrived to witness this assembly on earth. They should be invited, offered seats and shown a great deal of honours. No one is capable of being seated as long as they don’t have seats. Let the sages, who have controlled their
souls, be immediately worshipped.” On seeing the rishis arrive at the gate of the assembly hall, Shantanu’s son ordered the servants to quickly bring seats for them. They brought many large and beautiful seats, smooth and decorated with jewels and gold. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When they had accepted the argha,73 they seated
themselves. Krishna seated himself, and so did the kings in their respective seats. Duhshasana showed Satyaki his
excellent seat. Vivimshati brought a golden seat for Kritavarma. The great-souled and intolerant Karna and Duryodhana shared the same seat, not far away from Krishna. O lord of the earth! Shakuni, the king of Gandhara, was
protected by all those from Gandhara and sat on a seat, together with his son. Vidura sat on a seat that was crested
with jewels and was covered with white deerskin. His seat touched the seat where the immensely wise Shouri was
seated.
‘For a long time, all the kings glanced towards Dasharha. They looked at Janardana, as if they were drinking
amrita, and were not satisﬁed. Janardana was attired in a yellow garment and had the complexion of an atasi
ﬂower.74 He sat in the midst of that assembly hall, like a jewel that has been set in gold. With their minds on
Govinda, all of them were seated and silent. Not a man who was there said anything.’
756(93)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When all the kings had seated themselves and were silent, Krishna, whose teeth were excellent, began to speak in a voice that rumbled like a drum or like a cloud at the end of the summer. Madhava addressed Dhritarashtra so that everyone in the assembly hall could hear him.
‘“O descendant of the Bharata lineage! May there be peace between the Kurus and the Pandavas, without any
endeavours at war on the part of the warriors. That is the reason why I have come. O king! I have nothing else to
say, no other words that can be beneﬁcial. O destroyer of enemies! You know everything that deserves to be
known. O lord of the earth! This lineage of yours is supreme among all the kings. It is known for its learning and

conduct and possesses all the qualities. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Compassion, sympathy, kindness,
non-violence, uprightness, forgiveness and truthfulness—all these distinguish the Kurus. O king! Belonging to a
lineage that is great in these ways, an improper act on your part is especially to be deplored. O supreme among the
Kurus! O father!75 You are foremost among those who restrain the Kurus when they act in accordance with falsehood, whether with outsiders or insiders. O Kouravya! With Duryodhana leading the way, these sons of yours have
turned their backs on dharma and artha and have strayed into violence. They are wicked. They have transgressed
honour. They have lost their senses because of their avarice, even towards their chief relatives. O bull among men!
You know this. An extremely terrible calamity has arisen before the Kurus. O Kouravya! If it is ignored, it will destroy the earth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If you wish to do so, you are capable of pacifying this. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! It is my view that it will not be difﬁcult to obtain peace. O king! Peace depends on
you. O lord of the earth! It depends on me. O Kouravya! Establish76 your sons and I will establish the others.77 O
Indra among kings! Your sons and their followers must obey your instructions, because if they act in accordance
with your instructions, that will ensure their great welfare. O king! What is beneﬁcial for you will also be beneﬁcial for the Pandavas. They wish to be instructed by you, while I endeavour for peace. O lord of the earth! Reﬂect
on the consequences and then act accordingly. O lord of men! You are capable of uniting the Bharatas. O king!
Protected by the Pandavas, you will be established in dharma and artha. O lord of men! However much you try,
you will not obtain people like them. When the great-souled Pandavas protect you, not even Indra with the gods
can withstand you. How can kings? O bull among the Bharata lineage! Who will wish to ﬁght against a side that
has Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna, Vivimshati, Ashvatthama, Vikarna, Somadatta, Bahlika, Saindhava, Kalinga,
Kamboja, Sudakshina, Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, Savyasachi, the twins and the immensely energetic maharatha
Satyaki? O destroyer of enemies! With the Kurus and the Pandavas, you will become invincible before your enemies and will become the unrivalled lord of the world. O lord of the earth! O scorcher of enemies! Lords of the
earth who are your equal and kings who are your superior will seek alliances with you. Protected in every direction
by your sons, grandsons, brothers, fathers and well-wishers, you will live happily. O lord of the earth! Give primacy to their interests and treat them well, as you have in the past, and you will enjoy the entire earth. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Together with the Pandavas and your own,78 you will triumph over enemies and this will be
in your own interests. O scorcher of enemies! O lord of men! If you are united with your sons and advisers, you
will enjoy land that will be conquered by them.
‘“O great king! But if there is war, a great destruction can be seen. O king! There will be destruction on both
sides. What dharma do you see in that? The Pandavas may be killed in battle, or your immensely strong sons. O
king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Tell me the happiness that you will feel then. They are brave ones, skilled
in the usage of weapons, and all of them, the Pandavas and your own, wish to ﬁght. Save them from a great danger.
If there is a battle, we will not see all the Kurus, or the Pandavas. Brave ones will be destroyed on both sides.
Charioteers will kill charioteers. O supreme among kings! All the kings of earth have gathered together. They are
under the inﬂuence of anger and will destroy your subjects. O king! Save the world and do not destroy your subjects. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! If you return to your natural state, some remnants may be left. They are
pure. They are generous. They are modest. They are aryas. They are born of pure lineages. They are related to one
another. O king! Save them from this great danger. Let the lords of the earth meet each other in auspicious circumstances. Let them eat and drink together and let them return to their respective homes, with excellent garments and
beautiful garlands, and duly honoured. O scorcher of enemies! Let the intolerance and enmity be restrained. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! When so much of your age has elapsed, let the affection that you once felt for the Pandavas return again, now and for always. They lost their father when they were children and were reared by you. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! Protect them in a proper way, as you would your own sons. You should especially
protect them when they face hardships. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Otherwise, your dharma and your artha
will be destroyed. O king! The Pandavas have conveyed their homage and seek your favours, saying, ‘On your instructions, we and our followers have faced unhappiness. We have dwelt for twelve years in the forest. We lived
for a thirteenth year in concealment, unknown to others. We spent that time, certain that our father would not deviate from the agreement. O father! We have adhered to the agreement. The brahmanas know this. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! Therefore, adhere to the agreement with us, as we have. O king! We have suffered many hard-

ships. We should now obtain our share of the kingdom. Since you know about dharma and artha, it is for you to
save us. Seeing that you are our senior, we have borne many hardships. Therefore, act towards us as a mother or a
father. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The conduct of a disciple towards his preceptor is supreme. If we deviate from the path, it is for the father to establish us there. O king! Establish us on the right path and follow that
yourself.’ O bull among the Bharata lineage! Your sons have said this to the assembly. ‘To those who know about
dharma and are in the assembly hall, anything inappropriate is improper, such as when dharma is destroyed by adharma and truth by a falsehood. If this happens in the sight of those who are in the assembly hall, they are themselves killed. Dharma has been pierced by adharma and has come to this assembly hall. If the stake is not taken
out, those who are in the assembly hall are themselves pierced. Dharma destroys them, like a river uproots the
trees along its banks.’ O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those who can see dharma, and are silently waiting for it
to manifest itself have spoken what is true, righteous and just. O lord of men! What can you tell them, except returning their share?
‘“Let the lords of the earth who are in this assembly hall speak. O bull among the kshatriyas! If I have spoken in
accordance with dharma and artha, if I have spoken the truth, free those kshatriyas from the noose of death. O best
of the Bharata lineage! Make peace. Do not come under the control of anger. As is proper, return to the Pandavas
their share of the ancestral kingdom. O scorcher of enemies! Be successful with your sons and enjoy the prosperity. O lord of men! You know that Ajatashatru is always established in the dharma of the righteous and you know
his conduct towards you and your sons. There was an attempt to burn him. There was an attempt to exile him. But
he has returned again to you as a refuge. You and your sons banished him to Indraprastha. Dwelling there, he
brought all the lords of the earth under his suzerainty. O king! But he has always placed you above him and has
never crossed you. When he conducted himself in this way, Soubala conquered him through ultimate deceit, because he coveted the kingdom, the riches and the grain. When he was reduced to such a state, Krishna79 was
brought to the assembly hall. But Yudhishthira, whose soul is unfathomable, did not swerve from the dharma of
kshatriyas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I wish their welfare and yours, dharma, artha and happiness. O
king! Do not destroy your subjects. O lord of the earth! Control your sons, who have overstepped the limits of
greed and think that which is not artha to be artha, and that which is artha to be not artha. The Parthas, the destroyers of enemies, are stationed, ready to serve you and ready to ﬁght. O king! O scorcher of enemies! Station yourself in what you perceive to be healthy.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘In their hearts, all the lords of the earth welcomed these words. But no one present ventured to speak ﬁrst.’
757(94)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When the great-souled Keshava spoke these words, all those who were in the assembly hall
sat immobile in their seats, their body hair standing up. No man present ventured to voice a reply. All the kings
thought in their hearts. All the kings there remained silent.
‘Jamadagni’s son80 then spoke these words in that assembly of the Kurus, “O king! Listen to the example that I
am going to cite. Do not entertain any doubt about it not being true. When you have heard it, if you so think ﬁt, decide on what is best for you. In earlier times, there was a king named Dambhodbhava. He conquered the entire
earth. We have heard that he enjoyed the entire earth. When night had passed, this valorous maharatha would always awake in the morning and ask brahmanas and kshatriyas, ‘Is there anyone, a shudra, a vaishya, a kshatriya or
a brahmana who wields weapons, who is my equal or superior in battle?’ Saying this, the king roamed around the
earth. He was so intoxicated with great insolence that he thought of no one else. There were noble and learned
brahmanas who feared nothing. They cautioned the king against his repeated expressions of pride. But though he
was forbidden, that wicked one kept questioning those brahmanas. He was vain and intoxicated with his prosperity.
Those great-souled brahmanas were ascetics. They observed the vows of the Vedas. Blazing with anger, they told
the insolent king, ‘There are two lions among men who have fought in battles in many lives. O king! There is no
way that you will be their equal.’ Having been thus addressed, the king again asked those brahmanas, ‘Where are
those brave ones? Where have they been born? What are their deeds? Who are they?’ The brahmanas replied, ‘We
have heard that they are the two ascetics Nara and Narayana. They have come to this world of men. O king! Fight

with them. It is said that the great-souled Nara and Narayana are tormenting themselves with great austerities in
some undetermined region of Gandhamadana.’”
‘Rama81 said, “The king gathered a large army with six divisions. He intolerantly marched to where those unvanquished ones dwelt. He went to the uneven and terrible Mount Gandhamadana. He advanced, looking for those
two unvanquished ascetics. He saw those supreme among men, lean from hunger and thirst, their veins holding
them together. They were afﬂicted by the cold, the wind and the heat. He approached them, touched their feet and
asked about their welfare. They honoured the king with roots, fruits, a seat and water and asked him, ‘What can be
done for you?’ Dambhodbhava replied, ‘The earth has been conquered with my arms and all the enemies have
been slain. I have now come to this mountain, wishing to ﬁght with you. Grant that to me as a mark of hospitality. I
have desired this for a long time.’ Nara and Narayana said, ‘O supreme among kings! Anger and avarice have been
banished from this hermitage. There are no ﬁghts in this hermitage. Where are the weapons and where is the malice? Go and desire a ﬁght elsewhere. There are many kshatriyas on earth.’ Though spoken to in this way, he kept
on insisting. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They refused and repeatedly tried to placate him.
‘“But Dambhodbhava was eager to ﬁght and challenged the ascetics. O Kourava! Nara then picked up some
blades of grass in his ﬁst and told him, ‘O kshatriya! You desire to ﬁght. Come and ﬁght. Bring all your weapons
and prepare your army. From now onwards, I will destroy your love for war forever.’ Dambhodbhava replied, ‘O
ascetic! If you think that is enough of a weapon to be used against us, then I will ﬁght with you. I have come here
desiring a ﬁght.’ Having said this, desiring to kill the ascetic with his army, Dambhodbhava enveloped him from
all directions with a shower of arrows. Those terrible arrows were capable of piercing the bodies of others. But the
sage repulsed them all with his blades of grass. Then the unvanquished one released a blade of grass as a terrible
weapon. It was incapable of being countered and an extraordinary event took place. Through the power of maya,
the sage used that blade of grass to slice off the eyes, ears and noses of the soldiers. The king saw that the sky was
white with these blades of grass. He fell down at Nara’s feet and prayed for salvation. Nara is a safe sanctuary for
those who desire it. He told the king who had sought refuge, ‘Have the qualities of a brahmana. Have dharma in
your soul. And do not act in this way again. Overcome by insolence, do not ever insult anyone again, whether he is
inferior or superior. O king! That will ensure your supreme welfare. Obtain wisdom. Overcome avarice. Be without vanity. Have control over your soul. Be self-controlled and forgiving. Be gentle and peaceful. O king! Protect
your subjects. You have our leave to go. Be fortunate. Do not act in this way again. On our request, ask the brahmanas about their welfare.’ Then the king bowed down before the feet of those great-souled ones. He returned to
his own city and accumulated a lot of dharma.
‘“The deed accomplished by Nara in ancient times was great. But Narayana was superior to him because of his
many qualities. O king! Therefore, discard your vanity and go to Dhananjaya82 before a weapon has been afﬁxed
to Gandiva, the best of bows. He possesses Kakudika, Shuka, Naka, Akshisamtarjana, Santana, Nartana, Ghora
and Ajyamodaka as the eighth.83 All men who are pierced by these confront their death, or move around insane, or
lose their senses and become unconscious, or go to sleep, or jump around, or vomit, or urinate, or incessantly cry
and laugh. Partha’s qualities are innumerable and Janardana is superior to him. You have known him as Kunti’s
son, Dhananjaya. O great king! But know that Nara and Narayana are Arjuna and Keshava, brave warriors and
bulls among men. If you know this, do not harbour any suspicions about me. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Be an arya in your resolution and make peace with the Pandavas. O best of the Bharata lineage! If you think it best
that there should not be any discord with you, strive for peace and do not set your mind on war. O best of the Kuru
lineage! Your lineage is extremely revered on earth. O fortunate one! Let it continue to be that way. Think about
what is best for you.”’
758(95)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having heard the words of Jamadagni’s son, the illustrious rishi Kanva addressed these
words to Duryodhana, in the midst of the assembly of the Kurus. “Brahma, the grandfather of the world, is eternal
and without decay. The illustrious rishis Nara and Narayana are like that. Among all the Adityas, Vishnu alone is
eternal, without birth, without end and the eternal lord and god. The others—the moon, the sun, the earth, the water, the wind, the ﬁre, the sky, the planet and the stars—are subject to death. When there is the ﬁnal dissolution of

the universe, all of them give up the three worlds and are created again and again. There are others who die in an
instant—men, animals, birds and those which are born in inferior species,84 inhabiting the world of the living.
Having enjoyed their great prosperity, kings are destroyed by age. They confront death and enjoy their good deeds
and bad deeds. Therefore, you should have peace with Dharma’s son. Let the Pandavas and the Kurus rule the
earth. O Suyodhana! You should not think that you are strong. O bull among men! It is the strong who decide that
others are strong. O Kourava! Among those who are strong, it is not strength alone that makes them strong. All the
Pandavas are strong because of the valour of the gods. In this context, an ancient story is told about Matali, when
he searched for a suitor to whom he could give his daughter away. The lord of the three worlds85 has a charioteer
named Matali. A single daughter was born in his lineage. She was famous in the worlds because of her beauty. She
was as beautiful as a goddess and was famous by the name of Gunakeshi. She surpassed all other women in her
beauty and form. O king! Knowing that the time had arrived, together with his wife, Matali decided to give her
away and worried, thought about the matter. ‘In families of men who are weighty, virtuous, prosperous, famous,
gentle and spirited, the growing up of a daughter is deplorable. The mother’s family, the father’s family and the
one into which the daughter is given—these three families are afﬂicted. I have used the eye of my mind to search
in the two worlds of gods and men. But there is no one who satisﬁes me as a suitor—among gods, daityas, gandharvas, men and the many rishis. No one is suitable as a groom.’86 In the night, Matali discussed this with his wife
Sudharma and decided to travel to the world of the serpents.87 ‘As a groom, I do not see anyone in the worlds of
gods and men who is equal to Gunakeshi in beauty. But there is certain to be one among the serpents.’88 Having
discussed in this way with Sudharma, he circumambulated her and having inhaled the fragrance of his daughter’s
head, entered the earth.”’
759(96)

‘Kanva said, “When Matali was travelling along the road, he met maharshi Narada. Because he so desired, he was
going to see Varuna. Narada asked, ‘Where are you going? O charioteer! Is it on your own task, or on the instructions of Shatakratu?’ Being questioned by Narada, who was travelling along the same road towards Varuna, Matali
told him everything about his own objective. The sage told him, ‘Let us travel together. I have myself descended
from heaven to see the lord the waters.89 I will tell you everything when we see the nether regions of the earth. O
Matali! After having searched there, we will approve of a suitable groom.’ Matali and Narada immersed themselves in the nether regions of the earth. The great-souled ones saw the guardian of the world who was the lord of
the waters. There, Narada received the homage due to a devarshi and Matali also received honours due to the great
Indra. In a happy frame of mind, they told Varuna about their task and having taken his leave, went to the world of
the serpents. Narada knew everything about all the beings who dwelt in the nether regions of the earth and described everything in detail to his companion.
‘“Narada said, ‘O son!90 You have now seen Varuna, surrounded by his sons and grandsons. Now behold the regions of the lord of the waters. They are fortunate and prosperous in every way. This immensely wise one is the
son of Varuna, the lord of the cows. He is specially distinguished because of his good conduct and purity. This is
his beloved son Pushkara, whose eyes are like lotuses. He is beautiful and handsome and has been chosen by
Soma’s daughter as her husband. She is famous by the name of Jyotsnakali and she is second only to Shri91 in her
beauty. It has been said that this son of a cow has been made the eldest son of Aditya himself.92 Behold Varuni’s
abode.93 It is constructed out of gold everywhere. O friend of the lord of the gods! By obtaining this, the gods obtained their divinity. O Matali! You can see all those radiant weapons. They belong to the daityas, who were ousted
from the kingdom.94 Since they are indestructible, they still remain. O Matali! They were conquered by the gods
and require great power to be used. O Matali! There are many species of rakshasas and many species of bhutas95
here. They possessed divine weapons that had been constructed by the gods earlier.96 There is a great ﬁre here, a
ﬁre that was created in Varuna’s lake.97 Theres is also Vishnu’s chakra, surrounded by a ﬁre without smoke. This is
the bow Gandiva,98 created for the destruction of the world. Because it is always protected by the gods, the bow is
known by the name of Gandiva.99 When the time for action has arrived, it is always certain that it has the strength
of one hundred thousand breaths of life. It chastises and brings under its control kings who are allied with the rakshasas. This is the staff ﬁrst created by Brahma, imbibed with knowledge of the brahman. This is a great weapon

for Indras among men and has been pronounced to be that by the great Shakra. The sons of the lord of the waters
bear this great weapon. This is the umbrella of the king of the waters100 and is kept in the room reserved for umbrellas. Like a cloud, it showers cold waters everywhere. The water that showers from this umbrella is as pure as
the moon. But it is enveloped in darkness and nothing can be seen. O Matali! There are many extraordinary sights
here. But because of the task you have to accomplish, let us quickly leave this spot.’”’
760(97)

‘“Narada said, ‘This city is located in the navel101 of the world of the serpents. This is known as Patala and is frequented by daityas and the danavas.102 Living beings and immobile objects are washed down here by the waters
and enter, uttering loud noises because they are oppressed by fear. Feeding on the water, the ﬁre known as asura
always blazes forth here. But it knows its own restrictions and keeps to its limits. Having killed their enemies, the
gods drunk the amrita here and kept the remnants. It is from here that the waxing and waning of the moon can be
witnessed.103 At every conjunction of time, it is from here that the divine Hayashira arises.104 It is golden in complexion and ﬁlls the universe with water. All the objects that have the form of water fall down here. Therefore, this
supreme region is famous by the name of Patala.105 For the welfare of the universe, it is from here that Airavata
accepts the water and sprinkles it on the clouds. The great Indra then showers this down as rain.106 Many kinds of
aquatic creatures, in diverse shapes and forms, dwell here. They roam in the water, drinking the water, which is
like the rays of the moon. O charioteer! During the day, some inhabitants of the nether regions of Patala are
pierced by the rays of the sun and die. They are revived again at night. The moon arises every day, enveloped in its
rays. It touches the amrita and revives the beings with this touch. The daityas dwell here, addicted to adharma.
Vasava has robbed them of their prosperity and they are tied down here, oppressed by destiny. Maheshvara, the
lord of all beings and famous by the name of Bhutapati,107 performed severe austerities here for the welfare of all
beings. The brahmanas who observe the rites of the cow dwell here. They are maharshis devoted to studying and
teaching. They have given up their lives and have conquered heaven. A person who lives anywhere, feeds on anything and wears anything, is said to observe the rite of the cow. Airavata, the king of elephants, Vamana, Kumuda
and Anjana, supreme among elephants, were born in the lineage of Supratika.108 Look here and see if there is a
groom who appeals to you because of his qualities. O Matali! We will then go to him and make efforts to choose
him as a groom. There is an egg that is placed in these waters. It blazes with its radiance. It has been here since the
time when beings were created.109 It is not shattered. Nor does it move. I have never heard the story about its birth
or creation. No one knows about its father or its mother. O Matali! At the time of destruction, it is said that a gigantic ﬁre arises from it and consumes all the three worlds, with their mobile and immobile objects.’”
‘Kanva said, “On hearing what Narada had said, Matali replied, ‘There is no one here who appeals to me. Let us
swiftly go somewhere else.’”’
761(98)

‘“Narada said, ‘This supreme and excellent city is known as Hiranyapura of the daityas and the danavas, who roam
around with a hundred different kinds of maya. Maya fashioned it in his mind and Vishvakarma created it with a
great deal of effort.110 It was placed in the nether regions of Patala. Having been granted a boon in ancient times,
the brave and greatly energetic danavas lived here, practising a thousand different kinds of maya. Shakra, or
Varuna, or Yama, or the lord of riches,111 or any of the others, could not control them. The asuras known as the
Kalakhanjas were created from Vishnu’s feet. The Nairritas and Yatudhanas were created from Brahma’s altar.112
They had teeth and terrible forms and were valorous, with the speed of the wind. They were endowed with the
prowess of maya. They lived here and protected themselves. The danavas named Nivatakavachas were invincible
in battle. You know that even Shakra was incapable of restraining them. O Matali! You yourself, together with
your son Gomukha, have repeatedly been shattered by them and also the king of the gods, Shachi’s consort, together with his son. O Matali! Behold those mansions, constructed out of gold and silver. They have been designed and
constructed with diverse kinds of wonderful artisanship. They have green lapis lazuli, red coral, white coral that is
like the sun and radiant diamonds. They shine like the earth, mountains or rocks, and seem to be like the stars.
They are as radiant as the sun and like a blazing ﬁre. They have colourful nets of jewels and are tall, standing close

to one another. It is impossible to describe their forms, constituents and qualities. They are large and possess all the
qualities. Look at the sporting grounds of the daityas and their beds. The vessels and the seats are bejewelled and
extremely expensive. Look at the mountains which are like clouds, with currents of water ﬂowing down them and
trees that can move around at will and provide blossoms and fruit one desires. O Matali! Is there anyone here who
appeals to you as a groom? Or if you so wish, let us go towards some other direction on earth.’”
‘Kanva said, “Matali then spoke to the one who had addressed him in this way. ‘O devarshi! I do not wish to do
anything that causes displeasure to the denizens of heaven. Though the gods and the danavas are brothers, they are
always engaged in enmity. I cannot ﬁnd pleasure in an alliance with the enemy’s party. It is better that we should
go somewhere else. I should not look at the danavas. I know this of myself. I wish to give that lotus away.’”’
762(99)

‘“Narada said, ‘This is the world of the Suparnas. They are birds which kill serpents. They are not exhausted in
their valour, in travelling, or in bearing loads. O charioteer! This is the lineage that has descended from the six
sons of Vinata’s son113—Sumukha, Sunamna, Sunetra, Suvarchasa, Surupa, the king of the birds, and Subala.
There were hundreds and thousands who were born and reared in Vinata’s lineage, born in the lineage of the king
of the birds. They were born in Kashyapa’s lineage and extended it.114 All of them are endowed with prosperity.
All of them are marked by the srivatsa sign.115 All of them aspire for good fortune and bear strength. They are
kshatriyas in their deeds and are ruthless in feeding on serpents. Because they destroy their relatives,116 they never
attain the status of brahmanas. O Matali! Listen. I will recount the names of the foremost ones to you. This lineage
is extremely revered because it is favoured by Vishnu. Vishnu is their god and Vishnu is their refuge. Vishnu is always in their hearts. Vishnu is always their objective. There are Suvarnachuda, Nagashi, Daruna, Chandatundaka,
Anala, Anila, Vishalaksha, Kundali, Kashyapi, Dhvajavishkamba, Vainateya, Vamana, Vatavega, Dishachakshu,
Nimesha, Nimisha, Trivara, Saptavara, Valmiki, Dvipaka, Daityadvipa, Sariddvipa, Sarasa, Padmakesara,
Sumukha, Sukhaketu, Chitrabahu, Anagha, Meghakrita, Kumuda, Daksha, Sarpanta, Somabhojana, Gurubhara,
Kapota, Suryanetra, Chirantaka, Vishnudhanva, Kumara, Paribarha, Harita, Susvara, Madhuparka, Hemavarna,
Malaya, Matarishva, Nishakara and Divakara. I have recounted Garuda’s descendants only as examples. They are
the foremost ones in fame, deeds and spirit. O Matali! If none of these appeals to you, let us proceed. I will take
you to a region where you may ﬁnd what you are looking for.’”’
763(100)

‘“Narada said, ‘This is the seventh of the nether regions of earth, named Rasatala.117 Surabhi, the mother of all
cows, who was created from amrita, dwells there. She is always overﬂowing with milk and is the source of all the
essences of earth. That single supreme essence is distilled from the core of the six essences.118 In ancient times,
this unblemished one arose from the grandfather’s119 mouth, when he was satisﬁed with amrita and regurgitated its
essence. The ﬂow of her milk descended on the surface of the earth and created a lake that is known as the sacred
and extremely supreme ocean of milk. It is surrounded by blossoming foam in every direction. The supreme sages
who drink foam dwell there. O Matali! They are known as the drinkers of foam because they survive on foam.
They are engaged in terrible austerities and the gods are terriﬁed of them. O Matali! From her, a cow was born for
each of the directions. They live there, as those who protect those directions and it is said that they support the directions. Surabhi’s calf named Surupa sustains the eastern direction. Varuna’s western direction is sustained by
Subhadra. O Matali! She is great in her inﬂuence and has the form of the universe. The calf named Sarvakamadugha sustains the northern direction. O Matali! She is devoted to dharma and is named after Ilavila’s son.120
The gods and the asuras got together and churned the waters of the ocean, which was mixed with their milk, using
Mandara as a churning rod. O Matali! They obtained the liquor known as Varuni, Lakshmi, amrita, Uchchaihshrava, the king of the horses, and Koustubha, jewel among all gems. Surabhi provides her milk as sudha for those
who drink sudha, as svadha for those who drink svadha and as amrita for those who drink amrita.121 In ancient
times, a song was sung by the residents of Rasatala. The learned ones of this world heard this in ancient times and
still sing it. “Dwelling in Rasatala brings greater happiness than in the world of the serpents, or in heaven, or in the
vimanas of the gods.”’”’

764(101)

‘“Narada said, ‘This city is named Bhogavati and is ruled over by Vasuki. It is as beautiful as Amaravati, the beautiful city of the king of the gods. The naga Shesha is stationed here. Because of his austerities, foremost in the
worlds, and his power, he always holds up the earth. In size, he is as large as Mount Shveta and he is adorned in
many kinds of ornaments. He is immensely strong. He has a thousand122 on his head and a ﬂaming tongue.
Adorned in many kinds of ornaments, the nagas who are Surasa’s sons dwell here. They have many different kinds
of forms and live here happily. They are marked with the signs of jewels, svastikas, chakras and kamandalus. They
are many thousands in number. All of them are strong and naturally terrible. Some have one thousand heads. Others have ﬁve hundred faces. Some have one hundred heads. Others have three heads. Some have three heads. Others have seven faces. They have strong coils and gigantic forms, with the coils resembling mountains. In a single
lineage, there are many thousand, million and crore of nagas. Listen to the most famous ones. There are Vasuki,
Takshaka, Karkotaka, Dhananjaya, Kaliya, Nahusha, Kambala, Ashvatara, Bahyakunda, Maninaga, Apurana, Khaga, Vamana, Elapatra, Kukura, Kukuna, Aryaka, Nandaka, Kalasha, Potaka, Kailasaka, Pinjaraka, the naga Airavata, Sumanomukha, Dadhimukha, Shankha, Nanda, Upanandaka, Apta, Kotanaka, Shikhi, Nishthurika, Tittiri,
Hastibhadra, Kumuda, Malyapindaka, the two Padmas, Pundarika, Pushpa, Mudgaraparnaka, Karavira, Pitharaka,
Samvritta, Vritta, Pindara, Bilvapatra, Mushikada, Shirishaka, Dilipa, Shankhashirsa, Jyotishka, Aparajita,
Kouravya, Dhritarashtra, Kumara, Kushaka, Viraja, Dharana, Subahu, Mukhara, Jaya, Badhira, Andha, Vikunda,
Virasa and Surasa. These and many others are known as Kashyapa’s descendants.123 O Matali! See if there is anyone here who appeals to you as a groom.’”
‘Kanva said, “Matali was listening attentively and continuously glancing at one particular one. He seemed to be
delighted and asked Narada, ‘There is this one who is standing before the Kouravya Aryaka. He is radiant and
handsome. Whose lineage is he descended from? Who are his father and mother? From what serpent is he descended? Of what great lineage is he the ﬂag-bearer? He has energy, fortitude, beauty and age. My mind ﬁnds delight in him. O devarshi! He will be a worthy husband for Gunakeshi.’ On seeing that Matali was delighted at having seen Sumukha, he124 then told him about his greatness, birth and deeds. ‘His name is Sumukha and he is a king
of the nagas. He has been born in Airavata’s lineage. He is the grandson of Aryaka on the father’s side and of Vamana on the mother’s. O Matali! His father is the naga named Chikura, who has recently been reduced to the ﬁve
elements by Vinata’s son.’125 Delighted, Matali then addressed Narada in these words. ‘O father!126 This supreme
among serpents pleases me as a son-in-law. I am delighted with him and let us make swift endeavours. O sage! I
wish to bestow my beloved daughter on this serpent.’”’
765 (102)

‘“Narada said, ‘This is Shakra’s beloved well-wisher and charioteer and his name is Matali. He is pure and of good
conduct and possesses all the qualities. He is energetic, valiant and strong. Apart from being a charioteer, he is
Shakra’s friend and adviser. In battle after battle, there has been little difference in power between him and Vasava.
He drives the supreme chariot Jaitra, to which one thousand bay horses are yoked. Through his strength of mind,
he controls them in battles between the gods and the asuras. Vasava uses his strength to defeat others only after he
has vanquished them with his horses. The destroyer of Bala strikes with his weapons only after he127 has struck
ﬁrst. He has a daughter with beautiful thighs. She is unsurpassed on earth in beauty. She is truthful and of good
conduct and has all the qualities. She is known by the name of Gunakeshi. O one with the radiance of an
immortal!128 He has been searching in the three worlds. Your grandson Sumukha appeals to him as a husband for
his daughter. O Aryaka! O supreme among serpents! If this appeals to you, without any delay, make arrangements
for accepting this maiden. Like Lakshmi in the lineage of Vishnu, like Svaha in the lineage of the ﬁre, may the
slender-waisted Gunakeshi be like that in your lineage.129 Therefore, accept Gunakeshi for the sake of your grandson. She is his equal in beauty, like Shachi is the equal of Vasava. Though he doesn’t have a father, we choose him
as a groom because of his qualities and out of great reverence for you and Airavata. Sumukha possesses the qualities of conduct, purity, self-control and so on. Matali has come to you in person, ready to bestow his daughter. It is
proper that you should also honour him.’”

‘Kanva said, “Aryaka was both happy and miserable. He was happy because of his grandson, but sad because
his son was dead. He told Narada, ‘O devarshi! Do not think that I do not approve of your words. Who will not desire an alliance with Shakra’s friend? O great sage! But I am hesitant on account of a weakness. O father!130 My
immensely radiant son, who gave him his body, has been devoured by Vinata’s son and we are miserable on that
account. O lord! When Vinata’s son went away, he said, “I will devour Sumukha after a month.” This will certainly
happen, because I know his determination. Therefore, my delight has been destroyed because of the words of Suparna.’ Matali then told him, ‘My mind has been made up. I have decided that Sumukha, born from your son, will
be my son-in-law. This serpent must come with me and Narada and go and see Vasava, the lord of the three worlds
and the lord of the gods. I will endeavour to ﬁnd out how much of his lifespan remains. O supreme one! I will attempt to counter Suparna. Let Sumukha come with me to the lord of the gods, for the accomplishment of this task.
O serpent! May you be fortunate.’ Then all of those immensely energetic ones went to see the immensely radiant
king of the gods, Shakra, where he was seated, together with Sumukha. The illustrious four-armed Vishnu also
happened to be there. Narada related everything about Matali. Vishnu then told Purana, the lord of the world, ‘O
Vasava! Give him amrita and make him an equal of the immortals. Through your wish, let Matali, Narada and
Sumukha obtain their cherished desires.’ Thinking about the valour of Vinata’s son, Purandara told Vishnu, ‘You
should grant it.’ Vishnu replied, ‘You are the lord of all the worlds and of everything that is mobile and immobile.
O lord! Who will dare to take back what you have given?’ Thus did Shakra grant the serpent a supreme lifespan.
But the destroyer of Bala and Vritra did not give him amrita. On obtaining the boon, Sumukha’s face became extremely radiant. He obtained a wife. And according to his desires, returned home. Having succeeded in their objective, Narada and Aryaka were delighted, and after honouring the greatly radiant king of the gods, departed.”’

766(103)

‘Kanva said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The immensely strong Garuda heard the account about how
Shakra had granted the serpent a long life. Suparna was extremely enraged and went to Vasava, stopping the three
worlds with the great wind created by his wings.
‘“Garuda said, ‘O illustrious one! When I was hungry, you gave me a boon of your own accord.131 Why are you
ignoring that and going back on it? The creator, the lord of all beings, has ordained my food, ever since all beings
have been created. What is the reason for your going against that? I have chosen this great naga for my sustenance
and have chosen the time. O god! I have to sustain my large offspring through him. O king of the gods! Now that
this decision has been frustrated, I cannot cause violence to another, unlike you, sporting according to your wishes
and your whims. Therefore, I will have to give up my life now, together with my relatives and the servants in my
house. O Vasava! I hope you are happy. O slayer of Bala and Vritra! But this is certainly what I deserve. When I
was a lord of the three worlds, I chose to become the servant of another one.132 As long as you are the lord of the
gods, Vishnu is not responsible for this. O Vasava! The kingship of the three worlds and the kingdom is vested in
you for eternity. I also have Daksha’s daughter as my mother and Kashyapa as my father.133 With ease, I can also
bear the burden of the worlds. I am also unassailable by all beings and I also possess great strength. In the war with
the daityas, extremely great deeds have also been performed by me. Diti’s sons have also been killed by me 134—
Shrutashri, Shrutasena, Vivasvan, Rochanamukha, Prasabha and Kalakaksha. I make efforts to station myself on
your younger brother’s135 standard and serve and bear him. Is that the reason you disrespect me? Who else is capable of bearing that load? Who else is stronger than I am? Though I am distinguished in this way, yet I bear him and
his relatives. Since you have restrained me from my food, I have been shown disrespect by you and have also lost
his.136 O Vasava! Among all those who have been born from Aditi and possess strength and valour, you are certainly the one who is strongest among them all. But without any exhaustion, I can bear you on a single one of my
feathers. O father!137 Therefore, reﬂect on who is the stronger one.’”
‘Kanva said, “When the one who wields the wheel of the chariot138 heard these extremely threatening words of
the bird, he spoke to Tarkshya,139 desiring to trouble the one who cannot be troubled. ‘O Garuda! You think yourself to be strong, but you are extremely weak. O one who has been born from an egg! In our presence, you should
not praise yourself in this way. Even when they are together, the three worlds are incapable of bearing my body. I
myself bear myself and bear you too. To establish the truth of your words, bear my right arm alone. If you can bear
it, your self-praise will be established to be true.’ Then the illustrious one placed his140 arm on his141 shoulder and
he fell down oppressed by that load, unconscious and bereft of his senses. The entire weight of the earth, together
with its mountains, was as much as a single arm of his body. Achyuta, supreme among strong ones, did not press
down with all his strength. He did not want to rob him of his life. The bird was bereft of its wings. His body was
spread out. He was unconscious. He was bereft of his senses. Oppressed by that great burden, he began to shed his
feathers. The bird who was Vinata’s son then bowed his head before Vishnu. He was unconscious and bereft of his
senses. In misery, he spoke these words. ‘O illustrious one! You have extended a well-formed arm that is like the
essence of the worlds and have pressed me down on the face of the earth. O god! You should forgive me. I am confused and am a bird with limited intelligence. Dwelling on your standard, I was consumed by the ﬁre of my
strength. O god! O lord! I did not know of your supreme strength. That is the reason I thought myself to possess a
valour that was unmatched by anyone else.’ The illustrious one was then pleased with Garuda and affectionately
told him that he should not act in this way again. O Gandhari’s son! O son! Like that, you are alive only as long as
you do not attack the sons of Pandu in battle. Bhima, Vayu’s extremely strong son, is foremost among the wielders
of weapons. Dhananjaya is Indra’s son. Who will they not kill in battle? Vishnu, Vayu, Shakra, Dharma and the
two Ashvins are gods.142 You are incapable of even looking at them. O son of a king! Therefore, end the hostilities
and seek peace. With Vasudeva as a sanctuary, you should protect your lineage. The immensely ascetic Narada has
witnessed all this and Vishnu’s greatness with his own eyes. He is the wielder of the chakra and the club.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Duryodhana had listened to all this with sighs and frowns on his face. He glanced towards
Radheya then and laughed out aloud. Ignoring the words of the rishi Kanva, the evil-minded one slapped his thigh,

which was like the trunk on an elephant, and said, “I will act as the creator has created me, according to what is in
the future and my destiny. O maharshi! What will this pointless conversation achieve?”’
767(104)

Janamejaya said, ‘He143 has been prone to evil from his birth, coveting the riches of others and confounded by
avarice. He acts in ways that are not like those of an arya and is determined to bring about his own death. He is the
cause of grief to his kin and relatives and increases their misery. He causes difﬁculties for his well-wishers and increases the delight of his enemies. Why did his relatives and well-wishers not restrain him from this deviant path?
Out of friendship and affection, why did the illustrious one144 and the grandfather not stop him?’
Vaishampayana said, ‘The illustrious one spoke appropriate words and so did Bhishma. Narada also said many
things. Listen to them.
‘Narada said, “Rare is a well-wisher who listens. Rare is a well-wisher who offers beneﬁcial advice. Where
there is a well-wisher, there is no friend.145 O descendant of the Kuru lineage! I think that your well-wishers
should be heard. One should not stick to obstinacy. Stubbornness is extremely terrible. In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about how obstinacy led to Galava’s defeat. In ancient times, Dharma sought to test
Vishvamitra’s austerities. He went to him himself, adopting the form of the illustrious rishi Vasishtha. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! Having adopted the form of one of the saptarshis, he went to Koushika’s146
hermitage, as if he was hungry and wished to satisfy his hunger. With reverence, Vishvamitra cooked some
charu.147 Because of the extreme care he took on this, he could not attend to him in other ways. But without waiting for this food, he148 ate what had been offered by other ascetics. Having brought the warm food, Vishvamitra
came to him. The illustrious one said, ‘I have already eaten. Stay here.’ And departed. O king! The immensely radiant Vishvamitra stood there. Because of his devotion, he grasped the food with his two hands and placing it on
his head, stood nearby. He stood immobile like a pillar, subsisting only on air. At that time, the sage Galava made
efforts to take care of him. Out of respect, reverence and affection, he did what brought him149 pleasure. After one
hundred years had passed, Dharma appeared before Koushika in Vasishtha’s disguise and wished to eat. He saw
the intelligent maharshi Vishvamitra stationed there in devotion, subsisting on air and bearing the food on his head.
Dharma accepted it and it was still warm and fresh. Having eaten, he said, ‘O brahmana rishi! I am pleased.’ Then
the sage left. Because of Dharma’s words, Vishvamitra was delighted and giving up the state of a kshatriya, assumed the state of a brahmana. Vishvamitra was pleased at the service and devotion of his disciple, the ascetic
Galava, and said, ‘O son! O Galava! You have my permission to go wherever you desire.’ Having been thus addressed, Galava, supreme among sages was pleased. He told the immensely radiant Vishvamitra in gentle words,
‘What dakshina150 will I give you for having performed the task of my preceptor? Man’s rites only succeed when
dakshina has been given. When dakshina has been paid, virtuous ones are freed from their debts. Dakshina is the
fruit of a sacriﬁce, obtained in heaven, and is therefore said to constitute peace. O illustrious one! Tell me. What
will I give my preceptor?’ The illustrious Vishvamitra knew that he had already been honoured by his service and
repeatedly asked him151 to go away. But despite Vishvamitra repeatedly asking him to leave, Galava kept repeatedly asking, ‘What will I give?’ The ascetic Vishamitra was slightly enraged at Galava’s great obstinacy and told
him, ‘Give me eight hundred horses that are as white as the rays of the moon and possess a single black ear each.
O Galava! Go now and do not delay.’”’
768(105)

‘Narada said, “When Galava was thus addressed by the intelligent Vishvamitra, he could not sleep, sit or eat. His
body became skeletal and green, because he was overcome by worry and misery. He began to think excessively
and was consumed by his exasperation. ‘Where can I get prosperous friends? Where can I obtain riches and treasure? Where can I get eight hundred horses that are as white as the rays of the moon? How can I devote myself to
eating? How can I devote myself to happiness? Though I am alive, I am not devoted to it. What is the point of this
devastated life? I will go to the other side of the ocean, or to the other side of the earth, and give up my life. What
is the point of remaining alive? I am without riches. I am unsuccessful. I have given up different kinds of fruits. I
am bearing the burden of a debt. How can such a person hope for happiness? If one has enjoyed the riches of one’s

well-wishers, offered as a mark of affection, and is unable to repay the favour, death is superior to remaining alive.
Having promised to do something, if one does not accomplish that task, one is tormented with false words and all
the fruits of sacriﬁces are destroyed. There is no beauty in a liar. A liar does not obtain offspring. A liar obtains no
lordships. How can he ﬁnd an auspicious end? How can there be fame for an ungrateful person, or a proper station,
or happiness? An ungrateful person is disrespected. There is no salvation for an ungrateful one. There is no life for
one without riches. Will such a wicked person sustain himself through crookedness? Unable to return a favour,
such a wicked person is certainly destroyed. I am such a wicked person. I am ungrateful. I am wretched. I am a
liar. Having succeeded in studying with my preceptor, I am unable to accomplish what he has asked me to do. After having undertaken supreme endeavours, I will free myself of this life. Never before have I asked for anything
from the gods. All the thirty gods revere me because of my sacriﬁces. I will go to Vishnu, the lord of the three
worlds and the god who is foremost among the gods. Krishna is the refuge and he is the supreme refuge for those
who seek it. He pervades all the gods and the asuras and all the comforts are established in him. I bow down, wishing to see that undecaying and great yogi.’
‘“When he said this, his friend Garuda, Vinata’s son, appeared before him. He was delighted and to undertake a
kind act, said, ‘I think that you are my well-wisher. It is my view that a well-wisher must help, to the best of capacity, his well-wisher obtain the object that he desires. O brahmana! I possess the means. O brahmana! I have spoken
earlier to Vasava’s younger brother152 on your behalf and he has acceded to my wishes. Let us happily go to the
region that is beyond this earth. O Galava! Let us swiftly go.’”’
769 (106)

‘“Suparna said, ‘O Galava! I have received instructions from the god who is the source of all knowledge. Tell me.
Towards which direction do you wish to go ﬁrst—east, south, the western direction or the north? O foremost
among brahmanas! O Galava! Where will I go? The sun rises from the east and illuminates all the worlds. When it
is dawn, the austerities of the Sadhyas take place there. Intelligence was ﬁrst born in the east and from there, permeated the entire universe. Dharma’s two eyes are established there.153 Offerings are rendered through the mouth
there and the oblations spread to all the directions. O foremost among brahmanas! This is the gate through which
the day begins its journey. It is in the east that Daksha’s women154 gave birth to subjects. It is the direction where
Kashyapa’s offspring prospered. This is the root of the prosperity of the gods and Shakra was instated in the kingdom of the gods there. O brahmana rishi! Even the gods performed austerities there. O brahmana! It is because of
these reasons that this direction is known as purva. In earlier times, this was the ﬁrst region to be covered by the
gods.155 All the ancient ones gaze upon the eastern direction. One who craves happiness, should perform all the
divine tasks in the eastern direction. The illustrious one who gives birth to the worlds,156 ﬁrst chanted the Vedas
there. To those who know about the brahman, the sun god ﬁrst recited the savitri here.157 O supreme among brahmanas! The sun god bestowed the hymns of the Yajur Veda here. It was here that those gods, who had obtained the
required boon, earlier drank soma at sacriﬁces. The ﬂame that bears oblations was satisﬁed here through objects
that have the same origin as itself.158 It is here that Varuna descended to Patala and obtained his prosperity. O bull
among brahmanas! It is here that the ancient Vasishtha’s birth, rise to eminence and death took place. The ﬁrst
sound of “Om” was created here, one thousand times. The sages who drink soma drank it near the altar here. It is
here that Shakra kills many boars and forest-dwelling beasts, as shares in the sacriﬁce for minor gods. The sun rises here and in his rage, kills all ungrateful men and asuras. This is the gate to the three worlds and to heaven and
happiness. This is the eastern quarter. If you so wish, let us go there. My task is to please the one159 whose instructions I obey. O Galava! Tell me, and I will go. Or listen to me about another direction.’”’
770(107)

‘“Suparna said, ‘In ancient times, Vivasvat performed a shrouta160 sacriﬁce here. Because he offered dakshina to
his preceptor, this direction is known as dakshina.161 It is there that pitripaksha of the three worlds is
established.162 O brahmana! It is said that the gods who sustain themselves on warm oblations also dwell here.163
The Vishvadevas also live here, together with the ancestors. They are worshipped through sacriﬁces in this world
and are given equal shares. O brahmana! This is known as Dharma’s second gate. Time is computed here through

trutis and lavas.164 The devarshis always dwell here, as do those who dwell in the world of the ancestors. All the
rajarshis, having transcended pain, live here. Dharma, truth and karma are heard of here. O foremost among brahmanas! Immersed in one’s karma, one goes there. O foremost among brahmanas! This is the direction that everyone must traverse.165 But confounded by ignorance, they do not obtain happiness. O bull among brahmanas! There
are thousands of Nairritas there. They have been created to obstruct those who have not perfected their souls. O
brahmana! There, in the groves of Mandara, dwell brahmana rishis and gandharvas sing songs that steal the heart
and the mind. Raivata heard the chants of the Sama Veda being sung here.166 He gave up his wife, his advisers and
his kingdom and left for the forest. O brahmana! Savarni and Yavakrita’s son167 established limits here and the sun
does not transgress them. The great-souled Poulastya Ravana, the king of the rakshasas, performed terrible austerities here and obtained immortality from the gods as a boon.168 Because of his conduct, Vritra became Shakra’s enemy here. All living beings are reduced to the ﬁve elements here. O Galava! Men who are the performers of evil
deeds are cooked here. The river Vaitarani is here and is surrounded by people who cannot cross it.169 After having
faced extreme happiness, men confront extreme unhappiness here. On returning here,170 the sun releases tasty water. Having reached the solstice, with the nakshatra Dhanishtha,171 it again begins to release the cold. O Galava! In
earlier times, I was oppressed by hunger here and began to think about satisfying it. I obtained a large elephant and
a large tortoise that were ﬁghting with each other.172 The great rishi Shakradhanu was born here from the sun. He
is the one who is known as the divine Kapila, the one who consumed Sagara’s sons.173 Here the brahmanas named
the Shivas became learned in the Vedas and obtained success. After having studied all the Vedas, they attained
Yama’s abode. This is the city named Bhogavati, ruled over by Vasuki, the serpent Takshaka and Airavata. At the
time of death, one encounters a great darkness here. It cannot be penetrated by the sun or the black-trailed ﬁre itself. O Galava! You will yourself travel along this path of grief. Tell me if you wish to go.174 Otherwise, hear
about the west.’”’
771(108)

‘“Suparna said, ‘This is the beloved region of King Varuna, the lord of the cows. This kingdom of the waters has
always been the source of his powers. At the end of the day, the sun himself sheds his rays here. O supreme among
brahmanas! That is the reason this direction is known as the last.175 The illustrious and divine Kashyapa instated
Varuna here, to rule over the kingdom of the waters and aquatic creatures. Having drunk the six rasas of Varuna
here, the moon becomes young at the beginning of shuklapaksha and dispels darkness. Vayu vanquished the
daityas here and subsequently fettered them. O brahmana! They sleep and sigh here, oppressed by the great nagas.
The mountain named Asta176 accepts the beloved sun here and from this, the western twilight spreads. At the end
of the day, night and sleep spread from here, seeming to steal away half the lives of living beings. It was here that
Shakra aborted the goddess Diti when she was asleep and the masses of Maruts were born from that.177 Here, the
root of the Himalayas extends as far as the eternal Mandara. Even if one travels for one thousand years, one does
not reach the end. Having reached the shores of the golden ocean, near the golden mountain, Surabhi yields milk
here. Here, in the midst of the ocean, can be seen the torso of Svarbhanu.178 Resembling the sun, he tries to kill the
sun and the moon. The loud chanting by Suvarnashira can be heard here. His body hair is golden and he is invisible and immeasurable. On the instructions of the sun, Harimedha’s daughter Dhvajavati was stationed in the sky
here and was asked to remain there.179 O Galava! During the day and during the night, the wind, the ﬁre, the water
and the sky are freed from any unhappiness that their touch causes. From this point on, the sun travels in a diagonal direction180 and all the nakshatras enter the sun’s circle. Together with the sun, they circle for twenty-eight
nights. Having emerged again from the sun, they have conjunctions with the moon. This is the eternal source of the
rivers and the ocean is created from them. The waters of the three worlds are here and this is Varuna’s abode. This
is the residence of Ananta, the king of the serpents. This is the supreme residence of Vishnu, who is without a beginning and without an end. This is also the abode of the wind, a friend of the ﬁre. This is the abode of maharshi
Kashyapa, the son of Maricha. Thus, in my description of the directions, I have recounted the western path. O
Galava! O supreme among brahmanas! Tell me the direction in which you wish to go.’”’
772(109)

‘“Suparna said, ‘Since one is absolved from sins and obtains supreme welfare, learned ones therefore refer to it as
the northern direction.181 O Galava! The road to the north is golden and is said to be between the western and eastern directions. O bull among brahmanas! The north is the supreme of directions. People who are not tranquil, have
not controlled their souls and are not devoted to dharma cannot dwell there. Krishna Narayana and Jishnu, supreme
among men, live there in the hermitage of Badari, as does the eternal Brahma. Here, on the slopes of the Himalayas, Maheshvara always resides. The moon was instated as the king of the brahmanas here. O one who is
learned about the brahman! When Ganga descended from the sky, Mahadeva held her here and gave her to the
world of men. The goddess182 performed austerities here to obtain Maheshvara. Desire, anger, mountains and Uma
were created here. O Galava! The lord of riches183 was instated here on Kailasa as the lord of the rakshasas, the
yakshas and the gandharvas. This is the beautiful Chaitraratha and the hermitage of the Vaikhanasas.184 O bull
among brahmanas! Mandakini and Mandara are here. There is the forest of Sougandhika, guarded by the Nairittas.
There are meadows and groves of plantains and the Santanaka mountains. The Siddhas are here, always controlled.
O Galava! They can roam around as they wish in excellent vimanas and can enjoy them as they wish. The seven
rishis are here and the goddess Arundhati.185 This is said to be the place of Svati, because it rises here.186 When a
sacriﬁce was performed, the grandfather determined that this would be Dhruva’s187 place. The stars, and the moon
and the sun, always circle around him. O supreme among brahmanas! The great-souled and truthful sages named
Dhama protect the gate of Gayantika here. Their origins, shapes, or the strength of their austerities, are not known.
O Galava! They have created one thousand orbits that can be enjoyed as one desires. Whenever a man penetrates
beyond this, he vanishes. O bull among brahmanas! No one has ever gone beyond this, except the god Narayana
and the undecaying Nara Jishnu. This is the region of Ilavila’s son,188 known as Kailasa. The ten apsaras known as
Vidyutprabhas were born here. When Vishnu strode the three worlds, he placed a foot in the spot known as Vishnupada.189 O brahmana! This is the northern direction. O supreme among brahmanas! O brahmana rishi! King
Marutta performed a sacriﬁce here, at Ushirabija, and there is a golden pond there. Jimuta is a great-souled brahmana rishi and the sacred and clear pond of the Himalayas, full of lotuses, waits upon him in person there. Having
donated all those great riches to brahmanas, the maharshi left for the forest known as Jimutavana. O bull among
the brahmanas! O Galava! The guardians of the directions always gather here in the morning and in the evening,
loudly wishing to know who desires what. O foremost among brahmanas! This is the northern region, foremost in
its qualities.190 It is known as the north because it is foremost in all deeds. O son!191 I have now described the directions to you in detail. I have described all four in due order. Which one do you wish to go to? O foremost
among brahmanas! O brahmana! I am ready to show you all the directions and the entire earth. O brahmana!
Climb up on me.’”’
773(110)

Garutman!192

‘“Galava said, ‘O
O enemy of the kings of serpents! O Suparna! O Vinata’s son! O Tarkshya! Take
me to the east, where Dharma’s two eyes are stationed. Take me to the eastern direction, the one you have described ﬁrst. You have said that the gods are present there. You have truly said that dharma and truth reside there. I
wish to meet all those gods. O Aruna’s younger brother! I wish to see those gods.’”
‘Narada said, “Then Vinata’s son told the brahmana, ‘Mount on me,’ and the sage Galava climbed onto Garuda.
‘“Galava said, ‘O destroyer of serpents! As you travel, your beauty can be seen, like the sun, the one who brings
light in a thousand rays, in the forenoon. O bird! As you travel, I can see how the trees are uprooted by the wind
created by your wings and leave a trail behind. O traveller in the sky! The storm created by your winds seems to
drag up the earth, with its oceans, mountains, forests and groves. Because of the great force created by the wind of
your wings, the water seems to be raised up into the sky, with its ﬁsh, serpents and crocodiles. I can see ﬁsh, whale
and timingilas,193 similar in their forms, churned up and also serpents, similar in forms to men. I have been rendered deaf because of the roar of the great ocean. I can hear nothing. I can see nothing. I do not even know why I
am here. Please travel slowly. Remember that you may kill a brahmana. O father!194 O bird! The sun cannot be
seen, or the directions, or the sky. I can only see darkness. I cannot discern your body. O one born from an egg! I
can only see your two eyes, glistening like jewels. I cannot see your body, nor my own. At every step, I see ﬁre rising out of the water. Swiftly extinguish it and again restore tranquillity to my eyes. O Vinata’s son! You have been

travelling for a long time. Stop now. O destroyer of serpents! There is no reason for me to go. O one who travels at
great speed! Refrain, because I cannot bear your speed. I have promised my preceptor eight hundred horses that
are as white as the rays of the moon, with a single black ear each. O one born from an egg! But I see no means of
keeping that pledge. Therefore, the only path that I can see is to give up my own life. I possess no riches. I do not
have wealthy well-wishers. Even with great riches, this objective is incapable of being attained.’”
‘Narada said, “Galava spoke many miserable words in this way. But Vinata’s son laughed and continued to travel. He replied, ‘O brahmana rishi! If you wish to kill yourself, you cannot be very wise. Death cannot be artiﬁcially
chosen. Death is determined by the supreme god. Why did you not tell me this earlier? There is great ease with
which you will accomplish your objective. On the breast of the ocean, there is this mountain named Rishabha. O
Galava! Rest here and having eaten, we will return.’”’
774(111)

‘Narada said, “The brahmana and the bird descended on the summit of Rishabha. They saw the brahmana lady
Shandili practising austerities there. After Suparna had greeted her and Galava had worshipped her, she welcomed
them and they seated themselves on grass that had been spread out. They quickly ate the cooked food she offered,
consecrated with mantras. Having lost their senses because of this, they slept on the ground. After some time, Suparna woke up and wished to leave. The traveller in the sky saw that his wings had fallen off. The bird became like
a lump of ﬂesh, with only a mouth and feet. On seeing him, Galava was distressed and asked, ‘How have you
come to this state? What is the cause? How long will we have to remain here? Have we thought of something that
is evil and transgressed dharma? Surely this cannot have been the result of a small transgression on your part.’ Suparna told the brahmana, ‘O brahmana! I did entertain the thought of taking this Siddha to where Prajapati, the god
Mahadeva, the eternal Vishnu, Dharma and sacriﬁces reside, so that she might live there also. O illustrious goddess!195 For my own good, I bow down before you. I harboured this thought in my mind and have certainly come
to grief because of this. But it was only out of great respect for you that I wished to do something like this.
Whether it was a good deed, or whether it was a bad deed, you should forgive me because of your greatness.’ Thus
spoken to, she was placated.
‘“She told the king of the birds and the bull among the brahmanas, ‘O Suparna! Do not be afraid. You will possess beautiful wings again. O son! I have been slighted by you and I do not tolerate slights. Evil ones who slight
me will be dislodged from the superior worlds. I am devoid of any inauspicious marks. I am unblemished in every
way. I have achieved supreme success. Through good conduct, one obtains dharma. Through good conduct, one
obtains riches. Through good conduct, one obtains prosperity. Through good conduct, one destroys inauspicious
portents. O lord of the birds! May you have a long life. Go wherever you wish. Never censure a woman, even if
she deserves to be censured. You will possess strength and valour, as you did earlier.’ His wings grew up again and
they were stronger than before. Having taken Shandili’s leave, he left in the direction from where he had come.
But they did not come across horses of that description.
‘“Vishvamitra was stationed along that road and saw Galava. The most eloquent of speakers told him in the
presence of Vinata’s son, ‘O brahmana! You have promised me of your own volition. The time has come to meet
that pledge. Do what you think is proper. Since I have waited this long, I will wait for a little more. O brahmana!
Determine a path to accomplish success.’ Galava was extremely distressed and Suparna told him, ‘I have myself
heard what Vishvamitra has told you. O best of brahmanas! O Galava! Let us go and consult together. Until you
have given your preceptor what you have promised in entirety, you cannot even sit down.’”’
775(112)

‘Narada said, “Galava was distressed. Suparna, supreme among those who have wings, told him, ‘Gold is created
in the ground and is puriﬁed by ﬁre. It is because of this that it is known as hiranya.196 Since it supports and sustains the prosperity of the three worlds, it is always known as dhana.197 Shukra is the lord of riches. When the two
constellations of Proshthapada198 are in the ascendance, Shukra grants men the riches that they have earned. Those
riches are guarded by Aja Ekapada,199 Ahi Budhnya200 and the lord of riches. O bull among brahmanas! They cannot be obtained if they are meant to be unobtainable. Without riches, you are incapable of obtaining the horses.

Ask a king for riches, one who has been born in a lineage of rajarshis. Such a king will be able to satisfy us, without oppressing his subjects. There is a king who has been born in the lunar dynasty. He is my friend. Let us approach him. He possesses a great deal of riches on earth. He is a rajarshi named Yayati, the son of Nahusha, and
truth is his valour. When he is asked by you and requested by me, he will himself give it. He possessed wealth that
was as great as that of the lord of riches. But by giving up some of those riches, the learned one cleansed himself.’
While they were conversing and thinking in this fashion, they reached King Yayati in Pratishthana.
‘“After accepting the honours, the argha and the excellent food, Vinata’s son was subsequently asked about the
reason for their arrival. ‘O son of Nahusha! This is my friend Galava. He is an ocean of austerities. O king! He has
been Vishvamitra’s pupil for ten thousand years. When he was given permission to leave, this illustrious brahmana
wished to return the favour and asked his preceptor about what should be given as a dakshina. When he kept asking, his teacher was enraged and asked him to give, though he knew that his riches were limited. “Give me eight
hundred pure-born horses that are as white as the rays of the moon and possess one black ear each. O Galava! If
you so desire, give this to your preceptor as a gift.” This is what Vishvamitra, the store of austerities, told him in
anger. It is for this reason that this bull among brahmanas is tormented by a great grief. He is incapable of returning the favour and has sought refuge with you. O tiger among men! When he has accepted alms from you, he will
be free from his miseries. He will be freed from the debt to his preceptor and will practise great austerities. He will
give you a share of those austerities. You are full of a rajarshi’s austerities, but you will be ﬁlled even more. O lord
of men! O lord of the earth! Those who give away a horse obtain as many worlds as there are body hairs on a
horse. He is the right vessel to receive and you are the right person to give. This will be like milk sprinkled into a
conch shell.’”’
776(113)

‘Narada said, “On hearing Suparna’s supreme words, the king thought repeatedly and at last made up his mind.
The lord who had performed one thousand sacriﬁces was generous and was the lord of gifts. Yayati, the king of all
the Vatsas and the Kashis, spoke these words. On seeing his beloved friend Tarkshya and Galava, bull among the
brahmanas, an example of austerities, and considering that this act of giving alms was praiseworthy and would
bring renown to himself, he thought, ‘These two have come to me, ignoring all the other kings of the solar dynasty.’ He said, ‘My birth has become successful today. O Tarkshya! O unblemished one! My country has been
saved by you today. O friend! But I wish to tell you that I am no longer as wealthy as you knew me to be earlier. I
don’t possess that kind of riches. O friend! My wealth is lesser now. O traveller in the sky! But at the same time, I
cannot render your arrival here unsuccessful. Nor do I dare to frustrate the desires of this brahmana rishi. I will
give him something that will make his endeavour successful. If one arrives and is frustrated in one’s wishes, one
burns down the lineage. O son of Vinata! It is said that there is nothing more evil in the world of the living than
saying, “I have nothing.” This destroys and frustrates the hopes of a man who has arrived for something. A man
who is thus unsuccessful causes damage to the sons and grandsons.201 This daughter of mine will establish four
lineages. She is as beautiful as a daughter of the gods and follows every kind of dharma. O Galava! Because of her
beauty, this maiden has always been solicited by gods, men and asuras. Therefore, accept my daughter. Kings will
certainly give their kingdoms for her as a bride price, not to speak of eight hundred horses with black ears. Accept
Madhavi, this daughter of mine. O lord! The only boon that I ask for is that I should have grandsons through my
daughter.’ Having accepted the maiden, Galava left with the bird. Saying, ‘Let us look again,’ he left with the
maiden. The bird said, ‘The path for obtaining the horses has now been obtained.’ Having said this, he took Galava’s leave and returned to his own abode.
‘“When the king of the birds had left, Galava, travelled with the maiden, thinking about kings who had the capacity to pay the bride price. He thought of Haryashva Ikshvaku of Ayodhya, supreme among kings, immensely
valorous and with the four constituent parts202 in his army. He loved brahmanas and was the beloved of the citizens. He possessed treasuries, granaries and soldiers. He desired peace for his subjects and performed supreme
austerities. The brahmana Galava went to Haryashva and said, ‘O Indra among kings! This maiden of mine will
give birth and extend lineages. O Haryashva! Accept her as your wife and give me a bride price. I will tell you
what the bride price is. Hearing this, arrive at a decision.’”’

777(114)

‘Narada said, “King Haryashva thought about many things. He released warm sighs at the lack of offspring. Then
the supreme among kings said, ‘She is high in the six high points.203 She is slim in the seven places that should be
slim.204 She is deep in the three places205 that should be deep. She is red in the ﬁve places that should be red.206
She is ﬁt to be seen in many worlds of gods and asuras and by many gandharvas. She has many auspicious marks.
She is capable of giving birth to many. I am capable of giving birth to a son who will be an emperor.207 O foremost
among brahmanas! Tell me the bride price, remembering the state of my riches.’ Galava replied, ‘Give me eight
hundred horses that have one black ear each. They must be as white as the moon. They must be built well and they
must have been born in this country. Then this beautiful and long-eyed one will be the mother of your children,
just as kindling is the womb of ﬁres.’ On hearing these words, King Haryashva, who was overcome with desire,
was miserable. The rajarshi told Galava, supreme among rishis, ‘I only have two hundred horses of the sort that
you desire, though there are hundreds of other sacriﬁcial horses that are roaming around. O Galava! I will give
birth to a single son through her. Grant me this desire as a boon.’ When the maiden heard these words, she told
Galava, ‘One who knows about the brahman once granted me a boon. After each time that I give birth, I will become a virgin again. Therefore, give me to the king and accept those supreme horses. By going to four kings in
succession, you will obtain all the eight hundred horses. I will also have four sons. O supreme among brahmanas!
Act in this way for the sake of your preceptor. I think that this is wise. O brahmana! What do you think?’ Having
been thus addressed by the maiden, the sage Galava told King Haryashva, ‘O Haryashva! O best of men! Accept
this maiden. Give birth to a single son through her, for one quarter of the bride price.’ He208 applauded Galava and
accepted the maiden. At the right time and the right place, he obtained the son that he had wished for. He was
named Vasumana. He was greater in riches than the Vasus. That lord of men resembled one of the Vasus and he became a great granter of riches.
‘“After some time, the intelligent Galava presented himself again. He met Haryashva, who was delighted in his
mind, and told him, ‘O king! A son has been born to you and he is like the young sun in his radiance. O lord of
men! It is now time for me to go to another king in search of alms.’ Haryashva was truthful in his words and truthful in his manliness. Since those horses were extremely rare, he returned Madhavi. Madhavi gave up the radiant
prosperity of the king. Of her own will, she became a virgin again and followed Galava. The brahmana said, ‘Let
the horses remain with you for the moment.’ With the maiden, he went to Divodasa, the lord of his subjects.”’
778(115)

‘“Galava said, ‘There is an immensely valorous lord of men named Divodasa. That lord is the lord of Kashi. He is
a descendant of Bhimasena.209 O fortunate one! Let us go there quickly. Do not sorrow. That lord of men is devoted to dharma. He is self-controlled and is devoted to the truth.’”
‘Narada said, “When the sage went to the king, he was greeted with honours. Galava then requested him to have
offspring.”
‘“Divodasa replied, ‘O brahmana! I have heard about all this already. There is no need to say more. O supreme
among brahmanas! As soon as I heard about this, I wished that this should happen. You have passed over many
other kings and have come to me and this shows me great honour. There is no doubt that this will come to pass. O
Galava! But so far as horses are concerned, I have the same number. Therefore, I will also give birth to one king
through her.’”
‘Narada said, “The foremost among brahmanas agreed to this. He gave the maiden to the lord of the earth and
the king accepted her in accordance with the prescribed rites. The rajarshi pleasured with her like Ravi210 with
Prabhavati, Vahni211 with Svaha, Vasava with Shachi, Chandra with Rohini, Yama with Dhumorna, Varuna with
Gouri, Dhaneshvara212 with Riddhi, Narayana with Lakshmi, the ocean with Jahnavi,213 Rudra with Rudrani, the
grandfather214 with the altar, Vasishtha’s son with Adrishyanti, Vasishtha with Akshamala, Chyavana with
Sukanya, Pulastya with Sandhya, Agastya with Vaidharbhi, Satyavan with Savitri, Bhrigu with Puloma, Kashyapa
with Aditi, Richika’s son215 with Renuka, Koushika with Haimavati, Brihaspati with Tara, Shukra with Shataparva, Bhumipati with Bhumi, Pururava with Urvashi, Richika with Satyavati and Manu with Sarasvati. After King
Divodasa pleasured with her, Madhavi gave birth to a single son named Pratardana. At the right time, the illustri-

ous Galava came to Divodasa and told him, ‘O lord of the earth! Return the maiden to me. But keep the horses
here, while I go elsewhere for a bride price.’ At the right time, Divodasa, lord of the earth who was established in
truth and had dharma in his soul, returned the maiden to Galava.”’
779(116)

‘Narada said, “The famous Madhavi gave up her riches. Truthful to her words, she became a virgin and followed
the brahmana Galava. Galava’s thoughts were ﬁxed on accomplishing his own objective. He went to the city of
Bhoja to see King Oushinara. He went and told the king, for whom valour was truth, ‘This maiden will bear you
two sons who will be kings. Through this, you will attain your objectives, here and in the hereafter. O king! You
will have two sons who will be like the sun and the moon. O one learned in all manner of dharma! But as a bride
price, you will have to give me horses that have the complexion of the moon and they must each possess one black
ear. You must give me four hundred of these. I am seeking these horses for my preceptor’s sake and not for my
own. O great king! If you are capable, do it without thinking about it. O rajarshi! You are without offspring. O
king! Give birth to two sons. Through these sons as boats, you will save your ancestors and yourself. O rajarshi!
One who bears the fruit of sons is not cast out from heaven. He does not go to the terrible hell, where those without
sons go.’ Having heard this and much else spoken by Galava, King Ushinara216 gave him this reply, ‘O Galava! I
have heard the words that you have spoken. O brahmana! My heart is inclined towards what you have said, but
destiny is powerful. O supreme among brahmanas! I only possess two hundred such horses, though there are many
thousands of others that are roaming around. O Galava! I will only have one son through her. O brahmana! I will
also follow the path that the others217 have. O supreme among brahmanas! I will also pay you the same price. My
riches are for the enjoyment of the inhabitants of the cities and the country, not for myself.218 O one with dharma
in the soul! If a king uses the riches of others to satisfy his own desires, he obtains neither dharma nor fame.
Therefore, I will accept the maiden. Give her to me. This maiden is like one born from the gods and a single son
will be born to me.’ Galava, foremost among brahmanas, then worshipped King Ushinara, who had spoken many
beneﬁcial words. After giving her to Ushinara, Galava left for the forest. Like a meritorious one enjoys his prosperity, he219 pleasured with her in mountainous caverns, waterfalls in rivers, diverse gardens, forests, groves, beautiful houses, the roofs of palaces, pavilions, vimanas and secluded rooms. In course of time, a son was born and he
was as radiant as the young sun. That supreme among kings was famous by the name of Shibi. The brahmana
Galava presented himself and accepted the maiden back. O king! He then left to visit Vinata’s son.”’
780(117)

‘Narada said, “Vinata’s son laughed and told Galava, ‘O brahmana! It is through good fortune that I see that you
have been successful.’ On hearing these words spoken by Vinata’s son, Galava told him that one-fourth of his task
still remained to be accomplished. Suparna, supreme among birds, told Galava, ‘You should not make any more
efforts on this task. You will not be successful. O Galava! In earlier times, in Kanyakubja, Richika tried to obtain
Gadhi’s daughter, Satyavati, as his wife, and was told, “O illustrious one! Give me one thousand horses that have
the complexion of the moon and possess one black ear each.”220 Richika agreed and went to Varuna’s abode. He
obtained the horses at Ashvatirtha221 and gave them to the king.222 The king gave them away to brahmanas at a
pundarika sacriﬁce. Many kings bought these from them, two hundred each. O supreme among brahmanas! While
they were being led across the Vitasta, the remaining four hundred were killed.223 O Galava! That being the case,
no more can be obtained. O one with dharma in your soul! O bull among the brahmanas! Instead of the two hundred, give Vishvamitra this maiden, together with the six hundred you possess. O bull among brahmanas! You will
then transcend your confusion and be successful.’ Galava agreed to this. Taking the maiden with him, and together
with Suparna, he went to Vishvamitra.
‘“Galava said, ‘Accept six hundred horses of the kind that you desired. Accept this maiden instead of the two
hundred. She has born three sons, devoted to dharma, to rajarshis. O supreme among men! You will give birth to a
fourth. Then you will obtain all eight hundred horses in their entirety. After having freed myself of my debt, I will
happily perform austerities.’”

‘Narada said, “Vishvamitra saw Galava and the bird and the maiden with the beautiful thighs and said, ‘O Galava! Why did you not give her to me earlier? Then all the four sons would have been mine and would have extended the lineage. I will accept this maiden to have one son through her. Let all the horses remain in my hermitage.’
The immensely radiant Vishvamitra then pleasured with her. Madhavi gave birth to a son named Ashtaka. As soon
as the son was born, the immensely radiant Vishvamitra instructed him about dharma and artha and gave him the
horses. Ashtaka went to the city that was as radiant as a city of the moon. Having returned the maiden to his disciple,224 Koushika225 left for the forest. Galava, together with Suparna, was delighted in his mind that the dakshina
had been paid and told the maiden, ‘You have given birth to one son who will be the lord of generosity, another
who will be a warrior, yet another who will be devoted to truth and dharma, and another who will perform sacriﬁces. O one with the beautiful thighs! Therefore, depart. You have saved your father through sons. O one with the
beautiful waist! You have saved four kings226 and me.’ Galava also gave permission to Suparna, the destroyer of
serpents, to leave. Returning the maiden to her father, he left for the forest.”’
781(118)

king227

‘Narada said, “The
wished to hold a svayamvara for her. He went to a hermitage that was at the conﬂuence
of the Ganga and the Yamuna. Madhavi ascended a chariot that was adorned with garlands and ﬂowers. Puru and
Yadu228 followed their sister to the hermitage. Serpents, yakshas, men, winged creatures, animals, birds and
dwellers of mountains, trees and groves gathered there. There was also an assemblage of lords of men from many
countries. The forest was full of rishis who were like Brahma. The beautiful one was asked to choose a groom. But
when the suitors were announced in due order, she chose the forest as her groom. The maiden descended from the
chariot and bowed down before her relatives. Yayati’s daughter went to the sacred forest and performed austerities.
She observed diverse fasts, rites and restraint. She made herself light229 and lived like a doe. She subsisted on excellent grass that was pungent and sweet, with soft and green blades that were like lapis lazuli. She drank excellent
water that was holy, pure, cool and clean, ﬂowing from streams. She roamed in forests where the lion, the king of
deer, was absent. They were deserted and dense, but were free of conﬂagrations. Together with the deer, the forestdwelling one was like a doe. She practised brahmacharya and earned a great deal of dharma.
‘“Yayati followed the conduct of kings who had preceded him. He lived for many thousand years and then succumbed to the dharma of time. Puru and Yadu, supreme among men, extended two lineages. Because of this,
Nahusha’s son230 obtained status in this world and the next. Having arrived in heaven, King Yayati attained greatness. Like a maharshi, the illustrious king obtained the best of fruits in heaven. After many thousand years had
passed in many excellent ways among the great rajarshis and maharshis who were there, Yayati, confounded by
ignorance, insulted all men, gods and the masses of rishis.231 The god Shakra, the destroyer of Bala, detected his
folly and all the rajarshis censured him. They glanced at Nahusha’s son and reﬂected, ‘Who is he, the son of which
king? How did he arrive in heaven? What deeds brought him success? What austerities has he performed? How is
he known in heaven? By whom is he known?’ The kings who resided in heaven reﬂected in this way. They glanced
at each other and asked such questions about King Yayati. The hundreds of guardians of vimanas, the protectors of
the gates of heaven and the keepers of the seats were asked, and replied that they did not know him. All their
knowledge was clouded and no one recognized the king. In an instant, the king lost all his energy.”’
782(119)

‘Narada said, “He was divested from his station and lost his seat. His mind trembled and he was tormented by the
ﬂames of grief. His garlands withered. His knowledge vanished. His crown and armlets fell down. He was dizzy
and all his limbs turned numb. His ornaments and garments were dishevelled. He became invisible. Though he
could see, he could not see any of the others. He was void and his mind was empty. He was about to fall down on
the surface of the earth. ‘What inauspicious thoughts have I harboured in my mind, causing offence to dharma?
What has led me to losing my station?’ The king thought in this way. But the kings, Siddhas and apsaras who were
there, could no longer see Yayati. He was without a support and was dislodged. There was a man who was in
charge of throwing out those whose merits had been exhausted. O king! On the instructions of the king of the gods,
he came and told Yayati, ‘You are intoxicated because of your insolence. There is no one you have not disrespect-

ed. Your pride has dislodged you from heaven. O son of a king! You do not deserve it. No one knows you here. Go
and fall down.’ Thus did he speak. ‘Let me fall down among virtuous ones.’ About to fall down, Nahusha’s son
spoke these words thrice. That foremost among travellers thought about the path that he should take.
‘“At that moment, he saw four bulls among kings in Naimisha and fell down in the midst of the kings. Pratardana, Vasumana, Ushinara’s son Shibi and Ashtaka were performing a vajapeya sacriﬁce to satisfy the lord of the
gods. The smoke from that sacriﬁce arose up to the gates of heaven. As he fell down towards the ground, King
Yayati smelt this, which was like a river of smoke, like the Ganga, joining earth and heaven. The king ﬂoated
down towards the ground. He descended among those four prosperous ones, foremost among those who sacriﬁce.
The king fell down among the four who were like the guardians of the world. They were lions among kings and
like the great ﬁre into which oblations are offered. They were his relatives.232 Rajarshi Yayati descended in that
sacred sanctuary. He was radiant in his beauty and all the kings asked him, ‘Who are you? Whom are you related
to? Which country and city are you from? Are you a yaksha, god, gandharva or rakshasa? You do not have the
form of man. What objective do you desire?’
‘“Yayati replied, ‘I am rajarshi Yayati. I have fallen from heaven because my merits have been exhausted. Desiring that I should fall among righteous ones, I have descended amidst you.’
‘“The kings replied, ‘O bull among men! May your wishes come true. Accept all our fruits of the sacriﬁce and
the dharma.’
‘“Yayati said, ‘I am not a brahmana who can accept riches. I am a kshatriya. My mind is not inclined to destroying the merits of others.’”
‘Narada said, “At that time, the kings saw Madhavi, who was leading the life of a doe. When she arrived, they
greeted her and asked, ‘What is the reason behind your coming here? What instructions of yours must we carry
out? O one rich in austerities! We will follow your commands. All of us are your sons.’ On hearing their words,
Madhavi was extremely delighted. She went to her father Yayati and honoured him. On seeing that her sons had
their heads bowed down, the ascetic lady said, ‘O Indra among kings! These are your daughter’s sons. They are
my sons. They are not strangers. They will save you. Those are the ancient ordinances. O king! I am your daughter
Madhavi, who is living the life of a deer. I have also earned dharma. Accept half of that. O king! All men have a
share in the fruits of offspring. O lord of the earth! That is the reason they wish to have daughter’s sons like you.’
Then all the kings bowed down their heads before their mother and honoured and saluted their maternal grandfather. They ﬁlled the earth with their soft, unmatched and gentle words addressed towards him. The kings saved
their maternal grandfather, who had been dislodged from heaven. At that time, Galava arrived there and told the
king, ‘Ascend to heaven with one-eighth of my austerities.’”’
783 (120)

‘Narada said, “As soon as he was recognized by those virtuous ones, Yayati, bull among men, regained his divine
status and was freed from his fever. He had celestial garlands and garments. He was adorned in divine ornaments.
He had celestial fragrances and qualities. He no longer touched the ground with his feet.233 Vasumana was famous
in the world as the lord of giving. In a loud voice, he ﬁrst spoke these words to the king. ‘I have obtained merit in
this world through my commendable treatment of all the varnas. I will give that to you. The fruits of being generous, the fruits of being forgiving and possessing good conduct and the fruits of maintaining ﬁres—I bestow all that
on you.’ Pratardana, bull among kshatriyas, then spoke these words. ‘I have always been devoted to war and have
been addicted to dharma in this way. I have obtained fruits in this world and earned fame, through the dharma of
kshatriyas. I bestow these consequences of being brave on you.’ The intelligent Shibi Oushinara spoke these sweet
words. ‘I have never uttered a falsehood to children, women, or even in jest—or in battles, calamities and emergencies. Go to heaven by virtue of that truth. O king! I can give up my life, my kingdom, my deeds and my happiness, but I cannot forsake truth. Go to heaven by virtue of that truth. I have pleased dharma with truth, the ﬁre with
truth and Shakra with truth. Go to heaven by virtue of that truth.’ Rajarshi Ashtaka, the son of Koushika and Madhavi, who knew about dharma, also spoke to the one who had performed many hundreds of sacriﬁces.234 ‘O lord! I
have performed hundreds of pundarika and gosava sacriﬁces and vajapeya sacriﬁces too. Obtain the fruits of
those. I have no jewels, riches or other possessions that have not been used in these sacriﬁces. Go to heaven by

virtue of that truth.’ As his grandsons spoke to that lord of men one by one, the king gradually left the earth and
ascended towards heaven. In this way, through their own dharma, sacriﬁces, generosity and deeds, those four kings
and grandsons who had been born in royal lineages and extended their lineages, saved their maternal grandfather
Yayati, who had been dislodged from heaven, through their good deeds. They rescued the immensely wise one and
made him ascend to heaven.
‘“The kings said, ‘O king! We are your daughter’s sons and we possess the dharma and qualities of kings. We
have the qualities of all dharma. O king! O lord of the earth! Ascend to heaven.’”’
784(121)

‘Narada said, “Having been thus made to ascend to heaven by those kings who were extremely generous in the
gifts they gave, Yayati took leave of his grandsons and was established in heaven. There was a shower of fragrant
ﬂowers. There was an auspicious breeze with a holy scent. Amidst this, he attained that eternal station because of
the fruits earned by his grandsons. This was enhanced with his own deeds and he was resplendent with supreme
prosperity. He was happily received in heaven by masses of gandharvas and apsaras, with singing and dancing.
There was the sound of drums being beaten. He was applauded by many gods, rajarshis and bards. He was offered
excellent hospitality and was honoured by the gods. He obtained the fruits of heaven. The grandfather235 spoke to
the happy and serene king, as if satisfying him with these words. ‘Through your deeds in the world, you have entirely accumulated the four parts of dharma. This eternal world is yours. You will again have eternal fame in heaven because of your good deeds. O rajarshi! Darkness had clouded the intelligence of all those who dwell in heaven.
They did not recognize you because of this. Because you were not known, you fell down. You have returned here
again after your grandsons affectionately saved you. You have regained the station you had won through your
deeds. This is immoveable, eternal, sacred, supreme, permanent and without decay.’ Yayati replied, ‘O illustrious
one! I have a doubt. Please dispel it. O grandfather of the world! It is not proper that I should ask anyone else. I
protected and extended my subjects for thousands of years. I performed many sacriﬁces and gave a ﬂood of gifts
and obtained great fruits. How could they be exhausted in such a short span of time? Why did I fall down? O illustrious one! You know that I had obtained eternal worlds.’ The grandfather replied, ‘You have protected and extended your subjects for thousands of years. You have perfomed many sacriﬁces and given a ﬂood of gifts. You obtained fruits. But all of those were destroyed through a single taint and you were thrown down. O Indra among
kings! The residents of heaven censured you because of your insolence. O rajarshi! If there is vanity, strength, violence, wickedness and deceit, this world cannot become eternal. O king! You should not disrespect those who are
superior, inferior, or in the middle. No one can be an equal to those who are consumed by vanity. There is no doubt
that men who recount the story of your fall and subsequent ascendance will be freed from all calamities.’ O lord of
the earth! In ancient times, Yayati was diminished by this taint of insolence and Galava because of his excessive
obstinacy. Those who desire their own welfare should listen to the advice of well-wishers who wish them well.
One should not be stubborn. Obstinacy gives rise to destruction. O Gandhari’s son! Therefore, give up insolence
and anger. O brave one! Make peace with the Pandavas. O king! Abandon your wrath. O king! Whatever is given,
whatever is done, whatever austerities are observed, whatever sacriﬁces are performed—these are never destroyed.
They do not diminish. No one other than the doer enjoys these. This great and supreme account is revered by those
who are extremely learned and are without hatred. In this world, those who examine it and study it in great detail,
learn about the three objectives236 and conquer the earth.”’
785(122)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O illustrious one! O Narada! It is exactly as you have stated it to be. I also wish for the same
thing. But I am not the master.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having said this, he addressed Krishna. “O Keshava! You have told me what is good for heaven and for this world, what is in accordance with dharma and what is
just. O son!237 But I cannot act on my own account. Nor can I do what pleases me. O Krishna! O mighty-armed
one! Anga238 and Duryodhana are wicked and act against my instructions. O Purushottama! Endeavour to per-

suade. O Janardana! You will accomplish an extremely great task as a well-wisher.” Varshneya then spoke to the
intolerant Duryodhana.
‘Knowing everything about the nature of dharma and artha, he spoke these sweet words. “O Duryodhana! O
supreme among the Kurus! Listen to these words of mine. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is especially
for your welfare and that of your well-wishers. You have been born in an immensely wise lineage! It is proper that
you should act in the right way. You have learning and good conduct. You are endowed with all the good qualities.
Those who are born in inferior lineages are evil in their soul, violent and without shame. O son!239 They are the
likes of those who act in the ways you are thinking of. In this world, the inclinations of virtuous ones are in conformity with dharma and artha. O bull among the Bharatas! Those who are wicked are seen to act in a contrary
way. This adharma and obstinacy shown by you is terrible and will bring about the great destruction of lives. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Because of what you have done, there have been many instances of ill fame.
Abandon that which is against artha. O scorcher of enemies! You should do what is best for your welfare and for
that of your brothers, servants and friends. Free yourself from a deed that will be against dharma and against fame.
O tiger among men! O bull of the Bharata lineage! Make peace with the Pandavas. They are wise and brave. They
have great enterprise and are self-controlled and extremely learned. O lord of the earth! O scorcher of enemies!
That will be beneﬁcial and pleasant for the intelligent Dhritarashtra, the grandfather,240 Drona, the immensely intelligent Vidura, Kripa, Somadatta, the intelligent Bahlika, Ashvatthama, Vikarna, Sanjaya, your relatives and your
many friends. O son!241 The entire earth ﬁnds refuge in peace. You have modesty. You have been born in a noble
lineage. You are learned. You are not violent. O son!242 O bull among the Bharata lineage! Abide by the instructions of your father and mother. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is said that everything that a father instruct
is supreme. O son!243 Peace with the Pandavas appeals to your father. O foremost among the Kurus! O son!244
This should appeal to you and your advisers also. He who hears the instructions of his well-wishers, but does not
act in accordance with it, is eventually burnt, like one who has eaten kimpaka.245 Because of delusion, if one does
not pay heed to beneﬁcial words and procrastinates, one fails to accomplish one’s objective and has to lament subsequently. He who listens to beneﬁcial words and acts accordingly, giving up his own views, obtains happiness in
this world. He who acts contrary to words that ensure artha and kama and listens to perverse advice, comes under
the control of his enemies. If one transgresses the views of the virtuous and follows the views of the wicked, one’s
well-wishers will soon lament one’s destruction. He who abandons his foremost advisers and serves inferior ones,
will face a terrible calamity, with no prospect of overcoming it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He who
serves those of false conduct and does not listen to righteous well-wishers, preferring others to those who are his
own, is cursed by the earth. You are against those brave ones. O bull among the Bharatas! You seek help from others who are wicked, incapable and foolish. Other than you, is there a man on this earth who will abandon maharatha relatives who are equal to Shakra and seek refuge with others? Ever since birth, you have always maltreated the Kounteyas. But no anger has been generated in the Pandavas, who have dharma in their souls. O son!246 O
mighty-armed one! Ever since birth, the Pandavas have been falsely treated, but they have treated you well. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! You should act in the same way towards them. Do not be overcome with anger against
your foremost relatives. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The undertakings of wise ones follow the three objectives.247 If all three objectives cannot be pursued at the same time, men follow dharma and artha. If those two cannot be reconciled, a wise one follows dharma. A medium person opts for artha. A child chooses kama. If one is driven by the senses and gives up dharma because of greed, and strives for kama and artha through inappropriate
means, one is ruined. One who pursues kama and artha must still resort to dharma. Kama and artha can never be
separated from dharma. O lord of the earth! It is said that dharma alone is the route towards all three objectives. If
one strives for them in this way, one prospers, like a ﬁre in a dry tree. O son!248 O bull among the Bharata lineage!
You desire a great and radiant lordship that is accepted by all the kings. But you are not resorting to the right
means. One should not maltreat those who treat one’s own self in the right way. That is like cutting down a tree
with an axe. One should not strike down the views of someone one is not trying to vanquish. If a wise person’s
views are not struck down, they ensure welfare. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! One should never ignore
anyone in the three worlds, if that person is willing to give up his life, even if that person is an ordinary one—not
to speak of the Pandava bulls. If a man comes under the inﬂuence of intolerance, there is nothing that he knows. O

descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the excessive growth will be cut down. You will witness the proof. O
son!249 An alliance with the Pandavas is superior to one with the wicked. If you live affectionately with them, you
will obtain every object of desire. O supreme among kings! You will enjoy the land conquered by the Pandavas.
But leaving the Pandavas behind you, you seek salvation with others—Duhshasana, Durvisaha, Karna and
Soubala. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Depending on them, you desire prosperity. They are no match for
you in knowledge of dharma and artha. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They are no match for the Pandavas
in valour. Nor are you, and all the kings combined, enough to look upon the face of an enraged Bhimasena in battle. O son!250 This entire army of kings assembled by you, with Bhishma, Drona, Karna, Kripa, Somadatta’s son
Bhurishrava, Ashvatthama, Jayadratha—all of them are incapable of withstanding Dhananjaya. An angry Arjuna is
incapable of being vanquished by the gods, the asuras, men and the gandharvas. Do not get ﬁxated on battle. In
this entire army of kings, is there a single man who can face Arjuna in the ﬁeld of battle and return safely to his
home? O bull among the Bharata lineage! What is the point of this destruction of men? Show me one man whose
victory will amount to a victory for you. In Khandavaprastha, he defeated the gods, the gandharvas, the yakshas,
the asuras and the serpents. Which man can ﬁght with him? In the same way, a great wonder is heard about Virata’s city. A single one was enough to counter many. That was sufﬁcient proof. Nevertheless, you wish to defeat in
battle the invincible, unassailable and undecaying Jishnu, the brave Arjuna. With me as a second, who can challenge Partha when faced with him in battle? Not even Purandara himself! He can pluck out the earth with his arms.
In his rage, he can burn up beings. He can topple the gods from heaven. Who will defeat Arjuna in battle? Look at
your sons, your brothers, your kin and your relatives. O supreme among Bharatas! Let them not be destroyed because of what you do. Let the Kouravas survive. Let this lineage not be destroyed. O lord of men! May you not be
called a destroyer of the lineage. May your deeds not be destroyed. These maharathas will establish you as the heir
apparent and your father Dhritarashtra, lord of men, as the great king. O son!251 Do not ignore the prosperity that
is about to rise. If you give up half to the Parthas, you will obtain great prosperity. Listen to the words of your
well-wishers and make peace with the Pandavas. Living in affection and friendship with them, you will always be
fortunate.”’
786(123)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O bull among the Bharata lineage! After listening to Keshava’s words, Shantanu’s son
Bhishma addressed the intolerant Duryodhana. “The words spoken by Krishna are those of a well-wisher who desires peace. O son!252 Listen to them and do not act out of anger. O son!253 By not listening to the words of the
great-souled Keshava, you will not obtain well-being, happiness, or good fortune. O son!254 The mighty-armed
Keshava has told you how to act in accordance with dharma and artha. O king! Follow that path and do not bring
destruction for your subjects. The prosperity of the Bharatas blazes among all the kings. While Dhritarashtra is
alive, do not destroy it because of your evil-mindedness. By acting against Keshava’s truthful and beneﬁcial
words, you yourself, your advisers, your sons, your animals, your relatives, your father and the intelligent Vidura
will confront death because of your own perversity. O best of the Bharatas! Do not travel along a deviant path followed by the evil-minded. Do not be the destroyer of your lineage! Do not be a wicked man. Do not cause grief to
your aged father and mother.” Then Drona spoke these words to Duryodhana, who was under the inﬂuence of intolerance and was sighing repeatedly. “O son!255 Keshava spoke words to you that are in conformity with dharma
and artha. So did Shantanu’s son, Bhishma. O lord of men! Pay heed to them. These two are wise, intelligent, selfcontrolled, extremely learned and wish to ensure your welfare. O scorcher of enemies! Accept the words that they
have spoken for your beneﬁt. O immensely wise one! Act in accordance with what Krishna and Bhishma have spoken. Do not listen to the words of those who are inferior in intelligence. Those who are encouraging you have never acted in your interest. When there is a war, they will thrust the enmity of others around your neck. Do not destroy the Kurus and all your sons and brothers. Know that when Vasudeva and Arjuna are together, that power is
invincible. This opinion of your well-wishers, Krishna and Bhishma, is correct. O son!256 O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! If you do not accept it, you will rue it later. Arjuna is greater than what Jamadagni’s son257 has
said. Krishna, Devaki’s son, is one whom even the gods ﬁnd difﬁcult to withstand. O bull among the Bharata lineage! But what is the point of telling you about your happiness and welfare? You have been told all this. Do as you

please. O supreme among the Bharatas! I am not interested in telling you anything more.” After these words had
been spoken, Kshatta Vidura looked at Duryodhana, Dhritarashtra’s intolerant son, and said, “O Duryodhana! O
bull among the Bharata lineage! I do not sorrow for you. I grieve for these two old ones, Gandhari and your father.
As long as an evil-hearted one like you is their protector, they will wander around, unprotected. They have lost
their friends. They have lost their advisers. They are like birds that have lost their wings. Grieving, they will roam
the entire earth as beggars, having given birth to such a wicked and evil man, the destroyer of his lineage.” King
Dhritarashtra then addressed Duryodhana, who was seated with his brothers, surrounded by all the kings. “O Duryodhana! Listen to what the great-souled Shouri has said. Accept his auspicious and eternal words. They will get us
what we aspire for and protect what we already possess.258 Through the help of Krishna, whose deeds are unsullied, together with all the kings, we will obtain everything that we desire. O son! With Keshava’s support, go to
Yudhishthira. Act so that complete safety and good health of the Bharatas can be ensured. O son! With Vasudeva
as the tirtha, go to the meeting. O Duryodhana! I think that the time has arrived now. Do not neglect the chance. If
you abandon the peace that is being asked from you, you will rebuff Keshava and your defeat will be ensured. He
has spoken thus for your own welfare.”’
787(124)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing Dhritarashtra’s words, Bhishma and Drona again spoke in his support to Duryodhana, who was not acting according to the instructions. “As long as the two Krishnas259 are not armoured, as long
as the Gandiva is resting, as long as Dhoumya260 does not offer the foremost forces of the enemy into the ﬁre of
war, as long as the modest and great archer Yudhishthira does not angrily glance at your soldiers, till then, we may
ﬁnd peace. As long as we do not see the mighty archer Partha Bhimasena take his position among the divisions of
his own army, till then, we may ﬁnd peace. As long as he does not roam around and increase the delight of the soldiers, as long as he does not shatter the heads of those who are ﬁghting on elephants in the war, as long as the destroyer of enemies does not use his club, as if against fruits on trees that have been ripened with time, till then, we
may ﬁnd peace. As long as Nakula, Sahadeva, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, Shikhandi and Shishupala’s son,
all skilled in the use of weapons, do not armour themselves and swiftly penetrate, like crocodiles in the great
ocean, till then, we may ﬁnd peace. As long as arrows tufted with the feathers of vultures do not descend on the
delicate bodies of kings, till then, we may ﬁnd peace. As long as those swift and great archers do not use great iron
arrows that can travel far to strike the breasts of warriors who have been anointed with sandalwood and aloe and
are adorned with gold plates and necklaces, till then, we may ﬁnd peace. Let Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, elephant
among kings, hold you by the hands, while you bow your head down. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Let that
extremely generous one261 place his right hand, marked with the signs of a pennant, goad, elephant and ﬂag, on
your shoulder as a mark of peace. When you are seated, let him place his hands, adorned with gems and with jewels on the ﬁngers, on your back. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Let the mighty-armed Vrikodara, whose shoulders are like a shala tree, embrace you and speak to you in conciliatory tones, for the sake of peace. O king! Honoured by the three, Arjuna and the twins, you will affectionately inhale the fragrance of their heads. On seeing you
united with the brave Pandava brothers, let these lords of men release tears of joy. In a spirit of fraternity, let this
be proclaimed in all the capital cities of the kings of the earth. Enjoy this and be bereft of fever.”’
788(125)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On hearing these unpalatable words in that assembly of the Kurus, Duryodhana spoke these
words to the famous and mighty-armed Vasudeva. “O Keshava! Before speaking, you should have reﬂected on the
matter. Why have you spoken as if you are specially censuring me? O Madhusudana! You have said that you are
devoted to the Parthas. But have you examined the strengths and the weaknesses of the two causes? You, Kshatta,
the king,262 the preceptor and the grandfather censure only me, and not any other king. But I do not perceive that I
have done anything wrong. But all of you, including the kings, blame only me. O destroyer of enemies! O Keshava! On thinking about this, I do not see the slightest bit of wrong that I have committed. O Madhusudana! The
Pandavas happily agreed to the gambling match. They lost their kingdom to Shakuni. How was this my crime? O
Madhusudana! I ordered that whatever riches the Pandavas lost then, should instantly be returned to them. O fore-

most among victorious ones! It was not my crime that the invincible Parthas were defeated in another gambling
match and exiled to the forest. On the basis of what disrespect do they seek the enmity now? O Krishna! The Pandavas are incapable, but are happily against us. What have we done to them? Because of what wrong do the Pandavas, together with the Srinjayas, wish to kill the sons of Dhritarashtra? Because of terrible deeds and words, we
will not tremble and bow down out of fear, not even to Shatakratu. O Krishna! O slayer of enemies! I do not see
anyone, who follows the dharma of kshatriyas, who can aspire to vanquish us in battle. O Madhusudana! Bhishma,
Kripa, Drona and their armies are incapable of being defeated in battle by the gods, not to speak of the Pandavas.
O Madhava! If observing our own dharma, we face death in the ﬁeld of battle from a weapon, because our time has
come, that will ensure heaven. O Janardana! The supreme dharma for kshatriyas is that we should lie down on a
bed of arrows in the ﬁeld of battle. O Madhava! If, on the ﬁeld of battle, we lie down on beds meant for warriors,
without bowing down before the enemy, we will not repent it. Is there anyone born in a noble lineage, following
the dharma of kshatriyas, who will bow down out of fear, wishing to protect himself? ‘Manliness lies in raising
oneself and not losing enterprise. Even if all the joints are broken, one should not bow down before anyone.’ These
are the words of Matanga,263 cherished by those who desire their own welfare. A man like me only bows down before dharma and brahmanas. Without paying attention to anyone else, that should be one’s conduct, as long as one
lives. This is the dharma of kshatriyas and that has always been my view. O Keshava! As long as I am alive, they
will not obtain the share of the kingdom that my father once gave them. O Janardana! O Madhava! As long as
Dhritarashtra is the king, we will lower our weapons and sustain ourselves from him. This kingdom should not
have been given away. O Janardana! But when I was a child and not independent, it was given away, out of ignorance or fear. O descendant of the Vrishni lineage! But it cannot be obtained again by the Pandavas. O mightyarmed one! O Keshava! As long as I am alive, I will not give to the Pandavas even that much of land that can be
held on the point of a sharp needle.”’
789(126)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Dasharha’s eyes showed his anger. In the assembly of Kurus, he laughed and spoke these
words to Duryodhana. “You wish to obtain the bed of a warrior and your desire will be fulﬁlled. Station yourself
with your advisers and there will be a great destruction. O foolish one! You think that there is nothing reprehensible in your conduct towards the Pandavas. Let all the lords of men listen. You were tormented with the prosperity
of the great-souled Pandavas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You plotted a gambling match with Soubala. O
son!264 Your relatives are superior and are honoured by virtuous ones. They are not crooked in their conduct. How
could they engage in a deceitful act with that deceitful one?265 O immensely wise one! Gambling with the dice destroys the joy of the virtuous. Among those who are not virtuous, it creates dissension and difﬁculties. It was you
who started this terrible and wicked gambling match with your wicked relatives, ignoring the norms of good conduct. Who else but you could have treated the wife of a relative in that way, bringing Droupadi to the assembly hall
and speaking to her in that way? She has been born in noble lineage. She possesses good conduct. She is dearer to
them than their lives. You maltreated that queen of the sons of Pandu. All the Kurus know how Duhshasana addressed the Kounteyas, the scorchers of enemies, in the assembly of the Kurus, when they were being exiled.
Which virtuous man will act towards his relatives, in this contemptible way? They have followed righteous conduct. They have been devoid of greed. They have always acted in accordance with dharma. Karna, Duhshasana
and you repeatedly used harsh words that are used by those who are violent and are not aryas. When they were
children, together with their mother, you made great efforts to burn them up in Varanavata. But you were unsuccessful. At that time, the Pandavas and their mother lived for a long time in concealment in Ekachakra, in a brahmana’s house. Through poison, through the bonds of snakes, you made every effort to destroy the Pandavas. But
you were unsuccessful. This was your inclination towards the Pandavas. You were always devoted to falsehood.
How have you not commited a crime towards the great-souled Pandavas? You have committed many such cruel
deeds towards the Pandavas. You have resorted to false conduct, like one who is not an arya. You are now against
everyone. Your mother and father, Bhishma, Drona and Vidura have all told you that you should make peace. O
king! But you do not desire peace. There is great beneﬁt to both you and Partha266 in peace. O king! But because
of the feebleness of your intelligence, this does not appeal to you. O king! But going against the advice of your

well-wishers, you will not obtain salvation. O lord of the earth! You are acting against dharma and against fame.”
Dasharha was speaking to the intolerant Duryodhana in this way.
‘Duhshasana then spoke these words in that assembly of the Kurus. “O king! It seems that if you do not have an
alliance with the Pandavas on your own volition, the Kouravas will tie us up and hand us over to Kunti’s son. O
bull among men! Bhishma, Drona and your father will give the three of us—you, Vaikartana and I—to the Pandavas.” On hearing his brother’s words, Suyodhana, Dhritarashtra’s son, arose in rage, hissing like a giant serpent.
That evil-minded one paid no attention to anyone—Vidura, Dhritarashtra, the great king Bahlika, Kripa, Bhishma,
Drona or Janardana. Insulting those who deserve to be honoured, the uncontrolled, wicked and shameless one departed. Having seen that bull among men leave, all his brothers, advisers and all the kings followed him.
‘On seeing Duryodhana angrily rise and leave the assembly hall, together with his brothers, Bhishma, Shantanu’s son, said, “He who is overcome by anger and acts against dharma and artha, will soon be laughed at by his
ill-wishers, when he is in difﬁculties. This evil-minded son of King Dhritarashtra does not know what is right. He
suffers from false pride because of the kingdom. He is under the power of anger and avarice. O Janardana! I think
the time has come for all the kshatriyas to be cooked by destiny, because in their delusion, all the kings and their
advisers are following him.” The valiant and lotus-eyed Dasharha heard Bhishma’s words and told Bhishma,
Drona and all the others who were there. “This is the supreme taint of all the elders among the Kurus, that they are
not forcibly restraining this evil-minded king who is misusing his prosperity. O destroyers of enemies! I think the
time has come to act in this way. O unblemished ones! Listen to me. If that is done, everything may still be well.
Reﬂect on my words, which are for your welfare. O descendants of the Bharata lineage! See if they appeal to you
as conducive to your welfare. While the aged king of Bhoja was still alive, his evil-minded and selﬁsh son,267
overcome by anger, seized his father’s riches. Kamsa, Ugrasena’s son, was abandoned by his relatives. For the
welfare of his relatives, I punished him in a great battle. The other relatives and I then honoured and instated Ahuka’s son, Ugrasena, as the king again and thereby extended the kingdom of the Bhojas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!268 For the sake of the lineage, all the Bhojas, Andhakas and Vrishnis abandoned the solitary Kamsa and
lived in happiness. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the gods and the asuras were arrayed in
battle formations, with their weapons raised, and the world was divided into two sides and was about to be destroyed, Parameshthi Prajapati269 said, ‘The asuras, together with the daityas and the danavas, will be defeated.
The Adityas, the Vasus and the Rudras will dwell in heaven. In this battle, the gods, the asuras, men, gandharvas,
serpents and rakshasas will angrily kill one another.’ Thinking this, Parameshthi Prajapati told Dharma, ‘Bind the
daityas and the danavas and give them to Varuna. Having been thus addressed and instructed by Parameshthi,
Dharma bound the daityas and the danavas and handed them over to Varuna. Having bound them with Dharma’s
nooses and with his own nooses, Varuna, lord of the waters, has since then always carefully conﬁned the danavas
to the ocean. In the same way, fetter Duryodhana, Karna, Shakuni Soubala and Duhshasana and hand them over to
the Pandavas. A man should be abandoned for the sake of a lineage. A lineage should be abandoned for the sake of
a village. A village should be abandoned for the sake of a country. The earth should be abandoned for the sake of
the soul. O king! O bull among the kshatriyas! If you bind up Duryodhana and make peace with the Pandavas, the
kshatriyas will not be destroyed for your sake.”’
790(127)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When Dhritarashtra, lord of men, heard Krishna’s words, he quickly spoke to Vidura,
learned in all manner of dharma. “O son!270 Go and bring the immensely wise and far-sighted Gandhari here. Together with her, I will be able to persuade the evil-minded one. If she can pacify that evil-souled and evil-minded
one, we will be able to abide by the words of our well-wisher, Krishna. She might be able to show the path to the
one who has been overtaken by avarice. He has evil intentions and evil aides. With her words, she may prove capable. If she can avert this great and terrible calamity brought on by Duryodhana, we will be saved and obtain peace,
achieving for eternity what we wish to obtain and protecting that we possess.”271 On hearing the king’s words and
following Dhritarashtra’s instructions, Vidura brought the far-sighted Gandhari. Dhritarashtra said, “O Gandhari!
This evil-minded son of yours does not follow my instructions. Because of his greed for prosperity, he is sporting
with his riches and his life. That wicked one is evil in his conduct and evil-souled. Ignoring his well-wishers, that

foolish one has disrespectfully left the assembly hall.” On hearing her husband’s words, the famous princess Gandhari spoke these words, with the greatest welfare of everyone in mind. “Swiftly summon the son who is afﬂicted
with a desire for the kingdom. The kingdom cannot be ruled by a person who seeks to destroy dharma and artha. O
Dhritarashtra! But you yourself are to be greatly blamed for this. You knew that he was wicked. But out of affection for your son, you followed his intentions. He is obsessed with desire and anger. He is greedy and overcome by
confusion. O king! He is incapable of being restrained through force. Dhritarashtra is reaping the fruits of giving
the kingdom to a stupid, evil-souled and greedy one, who has evil aides. How can an immensely wise one overlook
dissension amongst one’s own relatives? When you have separated from your own relatives, your enemies will
overcome you. O great king! If a difﬁculty can be averted through conciliation and gifts, why should one bring
down a staff on one’s own relatives?” At these words of the mother and on Dhritarashtra’s instructions, Kshatta
again brought the intolerant Duryodhana to the assembly hall.
‘Wishing to hear what his mother had to say, he again entered the assembly hall. He sighed like a serpent in his
anger and his eyes were copper-red. On seeing her deviant son enter, Gandhari censured him and spoke these appropriate words. “O Duryodhana! O son! Listen to my words, for the welfare and happiness of you and your relatives. If you resort to peace, you will honour Bhishma, your father and me, and also the other well-wishers, with
Drona at the forefront. O immensely wise one! O bull among the Bharatas! A kingdom cannot be obtained, protected or enjoyed through one’s own desires alone. Without controlling one’s senses, one cannot retain a kingdom
for a long time. One who is intelligent and has controlled one’s soul, can protect a kingdom. Desire and anger draw
a man away from success. A king conquers the earth after subjugating these two enemies. It is great to be a lord
and master of the world. An evil-souled one may obtain the kingdom and that status, but cannot retain it for long.
One who aspires for greatness must subject his senses to dharma and artha. With the senses under control, the intelligence increases, like a ﬁre with kindling. If they are not under control, they can lead to destruction, like an unskilled charioteer and uncontrolled horses on the road. If one wishes to control one’s advisers without controlling
one’s own soul, with both one’s own self and one’s advisers out of control, one is subjugated. He who ﬁrst controls
his own soul, like conquering a country, then becomes successful in conquering his advisers and his enemies. Prosperity descends on a person who controls his senses, conquers his advisers, holds up the staff against delinquents,
acts after deliberation and is steadfast. Desire and anger in the body destroy wisdom and are like two ﬁsh caught in
a ﬁne-meshed net. If desire and anger increase, the gods are scared of discord, and bar the gates to heaven to such a
person if he travels there. A king who knows how to completely control desire, anger, avarice, insolence and pride,
conquers the earth. If a king wishes for dharma and artha and defeat of the enemies, he must always devote himself
to controlling his senses. He who is overcome by desire and anger and acts falsely towards his own, or those of
others, will have no aides. They are brave, immensely wise and are the destroyers of enemies. O son! Having united with those Pandavas, you will happily enjoy the earth. O son! It is indeed as Bhishma, Shantanu’s son, and maharatha Drona have told you. Krishna and the Pandavas are invincible. Seek refuge with the mighty-armed
Krishna, whose deeds are unsullied. Keshava will be delighted at the happiness of both sides. A man, who does not
follow the instructions of wise and learned well-wishers who desire his welfare, causes delight to his enemies. O
son! There can be no welfare from a war, nor dharma and artha. How can there be happiness? Nor can there be
eternal victory. Do not set your mind on war. O immensely wise one! O destroyer of enemies! Bhishma, your father and Bahlika gave Pandu’s sons a part of the kingdom out of fear of dissension. You can see the fruits of that
gift, since you now enjoy the entire earth, with those brave ones having killed the thorns.272 O destroyer of enemies! Give the sons of Pandu what is due to them, if you and your advisers wish to enjoy the remaing half of the
kings.273 Half of the earth is sufﬁcient for you and your advisers to sustain yourselves. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! By adhering to the advice of your well-wishers, you will attain fame. The Pandavas are prosperous.
They have controlled their souls. They are intelligent. They have mastered their senses. O son! By engaging in a
war with them, your great happiness will be destroyed. Control the wrath of your well-wishers. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! After giving the sons of Pandu their own rightful share, rule over the kingdom. The hardship that
they have suffered for thirteen years is enough. O immensely wise one! Pacify the sentiments of desire and anger.
The son of the suta274 is ﬁrm in his anger and so is your brother, Duhshasana. They desire success, but are incapable of standing up to the Parthas. If Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna, Bhimasena, Dhananjaya and Dhrishtadyum-

na are enraged, it is certain that all the subjects will be destroyed. O son! Because you are overcome by intolerance, do not destroy the Kurus. The entire earth is touched by this, either on your side, or that of the Pandavas. If
you foolishly think that Bhishma, Drona and Kripa and the others will ﬁght with all their strength, this is not going
to happen. They know their own selves. In kingship affection and status, they regard you and the Pandavas equally.
And dharma transcends everything. Even if they lay down their lives, scared that the king will no longer give them
a stipend, they will not be able to look King Yudhishthira in the face. It is not seen that men obtain artha out of
avarice. O son! O bull among the Bharatas! Therefore, control your greed and be paciﬁed.”’
791(128)

he275

Vaishampayana said, ‘But
disregarded his mother’s sensible words. He had no control over his soul and he
again left in anger. Having left the assembly hall, Kourava sought the advice of King Soubala Shakuni, skilled in
dice. They decided on a course of action—Duryodhana, Karna, Shakuni Soubala and Duhshasana as the fourth.
“Janardana is swift in his action. Before he captures us, with King Dhritarashtra and Shantanu’s son, we will
forcibly capture Hrishikesha, that tiger among men, like Indra seized Virochana’s son.276 On hearing that Varshneya has been seized, the Pandavas will lose their spirits. They will lose all their enterprise, like serpents whose
fangs have been destroyed. That mighty-armed one is the refuge and armour for all of them. When the bull among
all the Satvatas, the granter of boons, has been captured, all the Pandavas, together with the Somakas, will lose
their initiative. Therefore, despite Dhritarashtra being angered, let us capture Keshava, who is swift in his action.
Let us imprison him and ﬁght with the enemies.” Satyaki was wise and knew how to understand signs. He swiftly
got to know about the wicked intentions of those wicked and evil-souled ones.
‘Having got to know, he emerged with Hardikya.277 He told Kritavarma, “Swiftly yoke the army and arrange
them in battle formations. Armour them and wait at the gate of the assembly hall. Meanwhile, I will talk to
Krishna, whose deeds are unsullied.” The brave one entered the assembly hall, like a lion entering a mountainous
cavern and communicated the intention to the great-souled Keshava. Thereafter, he laughingly told Dhritarashtra
and Vidura about their intention. “They wish to perform a deed that is against dharma and artha and is censured by
virtuous ones. The wicked ones wish to perform a task that cannot be performed. These foolish and evil-souled
ones have gathered to commit crimes earlier. They have been overcome by desire and anger and have fallen prey
to wrath and avarice. The ones with limited intelligence wish to capture Pundarikaksha. Like children and idiots,
they wish to capture a ﬂaming ﬁre in a piece of cloth.” Hearing Satyaki’s words, the far-sighted Vidura told the
mighty-armed Dhritarashtra in that assembly of the Kurus. “O king! O scorcher of enemies! Destiny is encompassing all your sons. They are attempting to commit a reprehensible deed that is incapable of being performed. They
plan to overcome, capture and oppress Pundarikaksha, the younger brother of Vasava himself. This tiger among
men is invincible and unassailable. They will no longer exist, like insects before a ﬁre. If Janardana so wishes, he
can despatch all of them to Yama’s abode, like an enraged lion with deer. But he will never embark upon a reprehensible act. Achyuta Purushottama will never deviate from dharma.” On hearing Vidura’s words, Keshava
glanced towards Dhritarashtra and, in the hearing of his well-wishers, spoke these words. “O king! If those enraged ones wish to capture me with their energy, let them try. O lord of the earth! I know their strength and I will
be able to control those angry ones. But I am not interested in doing anything that can be censured. By desiring the
riches of the Pandavas, your sons will lose their own. If this is what they want, Yudhishthira will accomplish his
objective. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! At this instant, I can capture them and their followers and
hand them over to the Parthas. There can be nothing wrong with that act. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O
great king! But I do not wish to perform such a reprehensible deed in your presence, generated out of anger and
evil intelligence. O king! But if this is what Duryodhana wants, so be it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I
will allow for all possibilities.” On hearing this, Dhritarashtra told Vidura, “Quickly go and bring that wicked Suyodhana, who is greedy for the kingdom, together with his friends, his advisers, his brothers and his followers. Let
me again see if I can bring him to the right path.” Kshatta again brought the reluctant Duryodhana to the assembly
hall, together with his brothers and surrounded by all the kings.
‘King Dhritarashtra then spoke to Duryodhana and Karna, Duhshasana and the kings who surrounded them. “O
cruel one! O one born in sin! With your assistants, you are embarking on a heinous deed. Your aides are wicked.

Together with them, you wish to perform an evil deed. This is incapable of being done. It brings ill fame. It is censured by those who are righteous. Only foolish ones like you, who bring ill repute to their lineages, can think of
this. Pundarikaksha is indomitable and unassailable. Together with your evil advisers, you wish to oppress and
capture him. All the gods, together with Vasava, are incapable of using force against him. But you desire that like a
wicked one, like a child asking for the moon. You do not know that gods, men, gandharvas, asuras and serpents are
incapable of withstanding Keshava in battle. No hand can grasp the wind. No hand can touch the moon. No head
can bear the earth. No force can grasp Keshava.” After Dhritarashtra had spoken in this way, Kshatta Vidura spoke
these words to Dhritarashtra’s intolerant son Duryodhana, who was looking on. “At the gate of Soubha, Dvivida,
Indra among the apes, enveloped Keshava with a mighty shower of rocks.278 Desiring to capture Madhava through
his valour, he made every kind of endeavour. But he was incapable of grasping him and now you wish to use force.
At Pragjyotisha, Naraka and the other danavas could not grasp Shouri and now you wish to use force. In his childhood, when he was a mere infant, he killed Putana.279 O bull among the Bharata lineage! He held up Govardhana
to protect the cows. He slew Arishta, Dhenuka, the immensely strong Chanura, Ashvaraja and the wicked
Kamsa.280 He slew Jarasandha, Vakra, the valiant Shishupala and Bana and killed many kings in battle. He has
conquered King Varuna and the inﬁnitely energetic ﬁre god. When he stole the parijata ﬂowers, he defeated
Shachi’s consort himself. When he was asleep on the single and large ocean, he killed Madhu and Kaitabha.281 In
another birth, he killed Hayagriva.282 He is the one who does everything. He has not been created. He is the source
of all virility. Without any effort, he does whatever he wishes to do. You do not know Govinda Achyuta, whose
valour is terrible. His anger is like that of a virulent serpent. His mass of energy cannot be vanquished. You are
seeking to assail the mighty-armed Krishna, whose deeds are unsullied, like an insect against a ﬁre. You and your
advisers will be destroyed.”’
792(129)

Vaishampayana said, ‘When Vidura spoke in this way, the valiant Keshava, the destroyer of large numbers of the
enemy, spoke to Duryodhana, Dhritarashtra’s son. “O Suyodhana! In your folly, you think of me as a single person.
O one with extremely evil intelligence! You desire to overpower and capture me. Here are all the Pandavas, and
the Andhakas and the Vrishnis. Here are the Adityas, the Rudras, the Vasus and the maharshis.” Saying this, Keshava, the destroyer of enemy warriors, laughed out aloud. When the great-souled Shouri was laughing, the thirty
gods sprouted from his sides. They were like lightning, but were as small as a thumb. They were as radiant as the
ﬁre. Brahma appeared on his forehead and Rudra on his chest. The guardians of the world were on his arms283 and
Agni was created from his mouth. The Adityas, the Sadhyas, the Vasus, the Ashvins, Indra and the Maruts and the
Vishvadevas manifested themselves and the forms of the yakshas, the gandharvas and the rakshasas also appeared.
Sankarshana284 and Dhananjaya appeared on his two arms, the archer Arjuna on the right and Rama, the wielder of
the plough, on the left. Bhima, Yudhishthira and Madri’s two sons appeared on his back. The Andhakas and the Vrishnis, with Pradyumna at the head, appeared in front of Krishna, with their great weapons raised up. The conch
shell, the chakra, the club, the spear, the Sharnga,285 the plough and Nandaka286 could be seen. And many other
weapons were raised up. They were radiant in all the directions, around Krishna’s many arms. From his eyes, nose
and ears emerged extremely terrible ﬂames of ﬁre with smoke. Rays like those of the sun emerged from the pores
of his body. When they saw the terrible form of the great-souled Keshava, all the kings were frightened in their
hearts and closed their eyes, with the exception of Drona, Bhishma, the immensely intelligent Vidura, the immensely fortunate Sanjaya and the rishis, rich in austerities, because the illustrious Janardana gave them divine
sight.
‘At the great and extraordinary sight of Madhava on the ﬂoor of that assembly hall, the drums of the gods were
sounded and ﬂowers were showered down. The entire earth trembled and the oceans shivered. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! All the lords of the earth were extremely astounded. Then that tiger among men, destroyer of enemies, withdrew his real form, which was divine, extraordinary, colourful, prosperous and radiant. Madhusudana
took the permission of the rishis and grasping Satyaki and Hardikya by the hand, departed. Narada and the other
rishis also disappeared and that was another extraordinary marvel in that confusion.

‘On seeing him leave, the Kouravas, together with the kings, followed that tiger among men, like the gods follow Shatakratu. However, ignoring that entire circle of kings, Shouri, whose soul cannot be measured, went out,
like a ﬁre trailing smoke. His chariot was large and bright, decorated with bells. It was colourful with nets of gold.
It was light and roared like a cloud. It was covered with bright tiger skins and was yoked to Sainya and Sugriva.
Daruka appeared. Maharatha Hardikya Kritavarma, the revered hero of the Vrishnis, also appeared, riding on his
chariot. Shouri, destroyer of enemies, was about to leave on his chariot, which had been prepared. The great king
Dhritarashtra again spoke to him. “O Janardana! You have seen how much power I possess over my sons. O destroyer of enemies! You have witnessed all of it and nothing has happened without your seeing it. O Keshava!
Knowing that I wish for peace among the Kurus and have made efforts and knowing about my condition, you
should not have any doubts about me. O Keshava! I have no evil intentions towards the Pandavas. You know the
words that I have spoken to Suyodhana. O Madhava! All the Kurus and the kings who are the lords of the earth
know that I tried for peace and made every kind of effort.” Then the mighty-armed one told Dhritarashtra, the lord
of men, Drona, the grandfather Bhishma, Kshatta, Bahlika and Kripa, “You have witnessed what happened in the
assembly of the Kurus, when that wicked and evil one arose repeatedly in anger. Dhritarashtra, lord of the earth,
has said that he is helpless. I wish to take leave from all of you. I will go to Yudhishthira now.” Having sought
their permission thus, Shouri, bull among men, left on his chariot. Those brave and great archers, bulls among
Bharatas, followed him—Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Kshatta, Dhritarashtra, Bahlika, Ashvatthama, Vikarna and maharatha Yuyutsu. While the Kurus looked on, he left on his bright and large chariot, decorated with bells, and went
to his father’s sister, Pritha.’287
793(130)

house,288

Vaishampayana said, ‘He entered her
bowed at her feet and told her everything that had happened in the
assembly of the Kurus.
‘Vasudeva said, “Many kinds of acceptable and beneﬁcial words were spoken by me and the rishis, but he289 did
not accept them. Cooked by destiny, all of them are under Duryodhana’s control. I seek your leave. I will swiftly
go to the Pandavas. What shall I tell the Pandavas on your behalf? O immensely wise one! I wish to hear your
words and will act accordingly.”
‘Kunti replied, “O Keshava! Tell the great-souled King Yudhishthira, ‘Your dharma has greatly declined. O son!
Do not act in vain. O king! You have learned the sacred texts, but not properly, and have missed out on their insight. You have focused on the literal words and therefore, your intelligence only focuses on limited dharma. Consider the complete dharma that was created by the one who created himself.290 The kshatriya was created from his
chest, to earn a living through the valour of his arms, always resorting to cruel deeds for the protection of the subjects. Hear about an example that I have heard from the elders. In earlier times, Vaishravana was once delighted
and gave the earth to rajarshi Muchukunda,291 but he did not accept it. “I desire to enjoy a kingdom that I have obtained through the strength of my arms.” On hearing this, Vaishravana was surprised and delighted. Subsequently,
King Muchukunda did rule over the earth, earned through the strength of his arms, completely following the dharma of a kshatriya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If a king protects his subjects and they act in accordance
with dharma, the king enjoys one-fourth of that dharma. When a king acts in accordance with dharma, he warrants
the status of a god. If he practises adharma, he goes to hell. If a lord imposes chastisement on the four varnas in
accordance with the dharma that they should follow, that ensures that they do not transgress dharma. If a king follows chastisement properly and completely, this signiﬁes the commencement of the best era, known as krita yuga.
You should have no doubts about whether the era creates the king, or the king creates the era. It is the king who
creates the era. The king is the creator of krita yuga, treta and dvapara. The king is also the cause of the fourth
yuga.292 If a king is the cause of krita, he enjoys heaven for eternity. If a king is the cause of treta, he enjoys heaven, but not for eternity. By leading to the commencement of dvapara, a king obtains an appropriate share of those
fruits. An evil-acting one dwells in hell for an eternity.293 The earth is touched by a king’s taints and he is also
touched by the earth. Observe the dharma of kings that was followed by your fathers and grandfathers. The conduct that you wish to establish yourself in, is not that of a rajarshi. If a king is touched by lassitude and is based on
non-violence, he does not obtain the fruits that result from protecting the subjects. Pandu, I and your grandfather

did not bless you earlier, so that you might act in accordance with your intelligence. Sacriﬁces, generosity, austerities, valour, wisdom, offspring, greatness, strength and energy are what we always asked for. When they are satisﬁed through pure worship, the gods give men constant svaha, constant svadha,294 long lives, riches and sons. Ancestors and gods always desire generosity, learning, sacriﬁces and the protection of the subjects in their sons.
Whether it is dharma or adharma, you should follow it by virtue of your birth. O son! You are learned and have
been born in a noble lineage. But you are oppressed because you have been following the wrong conduct. When
earth-dwellers are hungry, they search for a brave one who is the lord of generosity. They seek refuge with him for
their satisfaction. What can be a greater dharma than that? When one who follows dharma obtains a kingdom, he
always satisﬁes everyone—some through gifts, some through force, and others through truthful conduct. A brahmana must live on alms, a kshatriya must protect, a vaishya must devote himself to earning riches and a shudra
must serve them. Begging is forbidden for you and you should not resort to agriculture.295 O son! You are a kshatriya, you are the one who saves from injuries, you sustain yourself through the strength of your arms. O mightyarmed one! Your ancestral right has been immersed. Raise it up again. Use conciliation, generosity, dissension,
chastisement296 and policy. What can be a greater misery for me than that I should be in this state, with my relatives destitute? O one who causes delight to your enemies! After having given birth to you, I have to look towards
the alms given by others. Fight according to the dharma of kings and do not keep your ancestors immersed. With
your merits exhausted, together with your younger brothers, do not travel along the evil route.’”’
794(131)

‘Kunti said, “O scorcher of enemies! In this connection, an ancient history is recounted, about a conversation between Vidula297 and her son. She told him about what he should do for his welfare. She was famous and was born
in a noble lineage. She was radiant and was also wrathful. Vidula was far-sighted, fortunate and devoted to the
dharma of kshatriyas. She was renowned in the assemblies of kings because of her learned words and great erudition. The lady named Vidula was truthful. She once censured the son who was born from her womb, when he was
defeated by the king of Sindhu and was lying down, dejected in his intelligence. He was miserable and ignorant
about dharma. He increased the delight of his enemies.
‘“‘Where did you come from?298 You were not born from me or your father. You are such a coward that you
have no anger. You are like a lowly branch. You are a man, but are acting like a eunuch. You can remain hopeless
for the rest of your life. But for your own welfare, bear the burden. Do not think of yourself as inferior. Do not be
satisﬁed with triﬂes. Set your mind on great welfare. Do not be afraid. Show some spirit. Arise. You are a coward.
Don’t lie there in this defeated state. You are the delight of all your enemies. You are causing grief to all your relatives. An inferior299 river is soon ﬁlled, the paws of a mouse are soon ﬁlled, a coward is greatly satisﬁed and content with little. Without uprooting the fangs of a snake, are you going to die like a dog? Or will you exhibit some
valour, even at the expense of your life? Will you be seen circling silently and unafraid in the sky like a hawk,
waiting for a weakness in the enemy? Why are you lying down like a corpse, as if you have been struck by lightning? Arise, you coward! Do not lie down, defeated. Do not vanish in your misery. Make yourself famous through
your own deeds. Do not be medium, inferior, or the worst. Be strong. Blaze up, even if it is only for an instant, like
a kindling of tinduka.300 Do not burn like the ﬂame of husk. Do not lead the fugitive life of a crow. It is better to
blaze for an instant, than to only yield smoke for a long time. Let no son be born in a royal house who is as mild as
a she-mule. As long as a person performs manly deeds and achieves the greatest objective, he acts according to
dharma and triumphs and there is no need for him to censure himself. Whether he is unsuccessful, or whether he is
successful, a learned person does not lament. He moves on to the next task, without setting store by his life. Either
display your valour, or head towards an objective that is certain.301 O son! When you have placed dharma ﬁrst,
why should you remain alive?302 O eunuch! Your sacriﬁces, your donations and all your deeds have been destroyed. The roots of your enjoyment have been severed. Why should you remain alive? If one is sinking and is
about to fall, one should grasp the enemy by the thigh.303 Even if one has been destroyed by the roots, one should
never sorrow. One should remember the achievements of well-bred horses. One should arise, lift the burden and
excel. Know your own manliness and achieve spirit and honour. The lineage has been immersed because of your
own deeds. Raise it up. If men do not talk about a person’s feats as greatly extraordinary, he only increases the

ranks of the ordinary. He is neither a woman, nor a man. A man whose generosity, austerities, valour, learning,
riches and gains are not famously spoken about, is his mother’s excrement.304 One becomes a man through deeds
of learning, austerities, prosperity and valour. A man who surpasses others in deeds, has truly been born. Do not
resort to the livelihood of one with a begging bowl. This is wicked, reprehensible, cruel and vile and leads to misery. It is followed by cowards. Enemies welcome such a feeble man. The worlds despise him. He is inferior in his
food and garments. He gains nothing and is inferior. He lives on nothing and he is himself only nothing. His relatives obtain no happiness from having got such a person as a relative. We have been banished from our kingdom.
We have no means of livelihood. We have fallen in status. We have been deprived of all the objects of desire. We
have been dislodged from our positions. We are nothing. O Sanjaya!305 I have given birth to Kali in the form of a
son. He is not virtuous and acts contrary to the norms of his varna. You are the destroyer of the lineage and you
have nothing in you. You have no anger. You have no enterprise. You have no valour. You are the delight of your
enemies. Let no woman give birth to a son like this. Do not only produce smoke. Blaze up. Attack and conquer the
enemies. Even if it is for an instant, blaze up over the heads of the enemies. One is a man to the extent one is intolerant and unforgiving. One who is forgiving and does not have anger, is neither a woman, nor a man. Satisfaction
destroys prosperity and so do lack of anger, lack of enterprise and fear. Nothing great can be obtained without enterprise. Liberate yourself from these evil traits. Liberate yourself from your own self. Have steel in your heart and
hunt again for what belongs to you. A man is called purusha because he vanquishes a city.306 If one lives like a
woman, one falsiﬁes one’s name. There are brave and spirited ones who roam around with the valour of lions.
Their fate may be determined by destiny, but the subjects rejoice. He who hunts for prosperity, giving up his own
self and his beloved happiness, soon brings delight to his advisers.’
‘“The son replied, ‘If you do not behold me,307 what is the use of this entire earth to you? What will ornaments,
objects of desire and life itself mean to you?’
‘“The mother said, ‘Let your enemies obtain the worlds of those who lament, “What should be done now?” Let
your well-wishers travel to the worlds meant for those who have great souls. Do not follow the conduct of those
who are deserted by their servants and live on alms given by others, those who are miserable and without spirit. O
son! May brahmanas and our well-wishers obtain their sustenance through you, just as all beings obtain lives
through rain and the gods through Shatakratu. O Sanjaya! A man on whom all living beings depend, like a tree
with ripe fruit, is one whose life has meaning. A brave and valiant one, who sustains the happiness of his relatives,
like the thirty gods by Shakra, leads a virtuous life. A man who lives on the strength of his arms obtains fame in
this world and an auspicious objective in the hereafter.’”’
795(132)

‘“Vidula said, ‘If you wish to give up your manliness in your present state, you will soon follow the path travelled
by the inferior. A kshatriya who does not display energy to the best of his capacity and who does not exhibit his
valour, desiring to remain alive, is said to be a thief. My meaningful, appropriate and beneﬁcial words do not reach
you, like medicine to someone who is about to die. It is true that the king of Sindhu has many satisﬁed subjects.
But they are weak and foolish and are waiting for a calamity to strike them. When they see you collect aides one
by one and behold your manliness, they will lose heart and his enemies will join you. Conduct alliances with them
and roam around in mountainous forts, waiting for the time when he will be destroyed. He is not beyond old age.
Nor is he immortal. You are Sanjaya only in name. I do not see it in you.308 O son! Live up to your name. Do not
make your name false. When you were only a child, an immensely wise brahmana who had foresight said, “After
confronting great hardships, he will prosper again.” Remembering those words, I hope that you will be victorious.
O son! Therefore, I am repeatedly telling you about this. If others thrive on the perseverance with which a person
pursues his goals, and if he pursues these goals with reﬂection, that person will certainly be successful. Your ancestors also confronted prosperity and adversity. O Sanjaya! Knowing this—ﬁght. Do not turn back. Shambara309
has said that there is nothing more miserable than not seeing where today’s and tomorrow’s meal will come from.
He said that this is a greater misery than the death of one’s husband and sons. Poverty is nothing but progressive
death. I have been born in a great lineage. I have gone from one pond to another.310 I have been the mistress of
everything fortunate. I have been extremely honoured by my husband. Earlier, masses of well-wishers saw me be-

decked in expensive garlands and ornaments, adorned in excellent garments. I am in penury now. O Sanjaya!
When you see me and your wife extremely weak, what purpose can life have for you? The slaves and servants who
used to work for us, the preceptors and the foremost priests have left us, because they no longer have sustenance.
On seeing this, what purpose can life have for you? If I do not see you today, performing the illustrious and praiseworthy deeds that you used to earlier, how can there be peace in my heart? My heart is shattered when I have to
say no to brahmanas. Neither my husband nor I, have ever said no to a brahmana. Others seek refuge with us. But
we do not seek refuge with others. If I now have to depend on others for a living, I will give up my life.
‘“‘When there are no shores, provide us a shore. When there are no boats, be our boat. When there is no status,
ﬁnd us status. Revive those of us who are dead. If you do not cling to life, you are capable of withstanding all your
enemies. But if you follow this conduct of an eunuch, depressed in mind and troubled in soul, then free yourself of
this wretched life. A brave one becomes famous by killing a single enemy. Indra became the great Indra by slaying
Vritra alone. He obtained the great Indra’s cup for drinking soma and the lordship of the worlds. He proclaimed his
name in battle and challenged the armoured enemies. When he drives away the best of armies and kills the best of
warriors in an excellent battle, a brave one obtains great fame. His enemies tremble and bow down before him.
Men who are cowards are helpless. If a skilled warrior is prepared to give up his life in battle, they satisfy every
desire that he has for riches. Even if there is terrible danger to the kingdom, even if there is doubt about remaining
alive, virtuous ones do not leave any remnants of an enemy who is near. The kingdom is a road to heaven, it is like
amrita itself. It allows for only one311 and it is closed to you. Knowing this, descend like a ﬁrebrand on the enemy.
O king! Defeat your enemies in battle. Follow your own dharma. O fortunate one! Let the enemies not see you in
this extremely dejected state, surrounded by our miserable people and delighted foes. Let me not be miserable at
seeing you in this miserable state. Pleasure with the maidens of Souvira.312 Boast about your prosperity, as you
used to do earlier. Do not be so exhausted and come under the control of the maidens of Sindhu. You are young
and handsome, possess learning and have been born in a good lineage. You are renowned and famous in the world.
One like you should not act in this way, like a bull that cannot bear the burden. I think that this is worse than death.
If I see you speaking pleasant words to the enemy, or following behind him, how can there be peace in my heart?
No one born in this lineage has ever followed others. O son! You should not live in this way, sustaining yourself on
another. I know the eternal heart of kshatriyas, as described by our ancestors and those who came after them, and
also by the ancestors of the enemy and those who came after them. A kshatriya who has been born in this world
and knows about the dharma of kshatriyas, will never bow down before another, either out of fear or to earn a living. Stand upright in manliness. Do not make efforts to bend. It is better to break at the joints than to bend down. O
Sanjaya! You should be strong in your mind and roam around like a rutting elephant, bowing down before brahmanas and dharma. Control the other varnas and chastise all those who perform evil acts. Whether you possess allies or do not possess allies, you should always live in this way.’”’
796(133)

‘“The son said, ‘O mother! You have converted your heart into steel. There is no compassion in you. Incited by the
wisdom of bravery, you have become intolerant. Shame on the conduct of kshatriyas, about which you are censuring me, as if I am a stranger. You are speaking such words to your only son. If you can no longer see me, what purpose will the entire earth have for you? What use will there be of ornaments, or of the pleasures that life brings?’
‘“The mother replied, ‘O son! Everything done by the learned is for the purpose of dharma and artha. O Sanjaya! I have incited you with a view to those ends. The great moment has arrived for you to decide on your course
of action. With the time having arrived, if you do not act accordingly, you will be dishonoured and commit a deed
of extreme cruelty. O Sanjaya! You have already been touched by ill fame. If I do not speak to you in this way, my
affection towards you will be like that of a she-ass, without strength and without purpose. Abandon the path censured by the righteous and frequented by the stupid. This is the great ignorance to which all beings cling. If your
conduct is that of the virtuous, you will be my beloved, that is, if you have the qualities of dharma and artha and
never follow anything else. This recognizes destiny and human endeavour and is the conduct of the virtuous. If one
ﬁnds delight in a son or a grandson who does not have humility and does not exert himself, one loses the fruits of
obtaining offspring. Those who perform deeds that should not be performed are censured. Such inferior men ob-

tain no happiness, in this world and the next. O Sanjaya! A kshatriya has been created to ﬁght and be victorious,
for always performing cruel deeds and protecting the subjects. Whether he triumps, or whether he is slain, he attains Indra’s world. But in Shakra’s sacred and celestial world, the happiness that a kshatriya obtains from subjugating his enemy, is missing. Let the spirited man who has been defeated many times be tormented by rage and
wait to exact vengeance on the enemy. In what other way can he ﬁnd peace, other than giving up his own life or
bringing down the enemy? In this world, a wise man is not delighted with a triﬂe. It is certain that a person who is
delighted with a triﬂe, will not remain happy with that triﬂe. In the absence of what he desires, a man will not be
radiant. It is certain that he will feel empty, like the Ganga after ﬂowing into the ocean.’
‘“The son said, ‘O mother! You should not speak in this way, certainly not to your son. You should look for
compassion, like one who is deaf and mute.’
‘“The mother replied, ‘It is a great pleasure to me that you look on it in this way. You are inciting me in this
way, so that I can incite you some more. I will honour you when you have killed all the Saindhavas and I see you
victorious, free of all your worries.’
‘“The son said, ‘I have no treasury. I have no allies. How can I obtain the success of victory? This is my extremely terrible state and I know about my own self. I have withdrawn from the kingdom, like a performer of evil
deeds withdraws from heaven. This being the situation, I cannot see any means. You are mature in your wisdom
and I am asking you. Tell me exactly and I will act entirely in accordance with your instructions.’
‘“The mother replied, ‘O son! You should not demean yourself because of your earlier failures. Objects that
were not obtained earlier can be obtained. In the same way, those that were obtained can be destroyed. Stupid ones
cannot obtain objects through anger at their absence. O son! The fruits of all deeds are never permanent. Knowing
that they are not permanent, one may be successful or one may fail. But those who do not act, never obtain success. Lack of trying has only one consequence—failure. However, for those who try, there are two consequences—
success or failure. O son of a king! He who knows in advance that all success is impermanent, repels growth and
prosperity and acts against his own interests. One should arise. One should awake. One should yoke oneself to the
task that must be done. Without any hesitation, one must always make up one’s mind that something needs to be
done. One should consider auspicious signs and honour brahmanas and the gods. O son! There is swift prosperity
for such a wise king. Like the sun rising in the east, Lakshmi returns to him. I have instructed you with many instances and words and you have appreciated them. Now display your form. Exhibit your manliness. It is appropriate that you should obtain the objects that you desire. Examine those who are angry, greedy, weak, dishonoured
and disrespected and those who hate him.313 In this way, you can bring them together and create great dissension
in his ranks, like an extremely swift wind that disperses the clouds. Be the ﬁrst to give them gifts. Make efforts.
Speak pleasantly to them. As soon as the enemy knows that you are ready to give up your life, he will shrink away
from you, like from a snake that has penetrated his house. If one knows that the enemy is too powerful to be conquered, one should use conciliation, friendliness and similar methods. Through such methods, one can obtain riches and extend them. Friends gather around those who are prosperous and serve them. O son! Then again, relatives
desert one whose prosperity has been dissipated. They do not gather around such a man, but shun him. If one can
convert an enemy into an ally and obtain his trust, one can then think about regaining the kingdom.’”’
797(134)

‘“The mother said, ‘Confronting any calamity, the king should never be afraid. Even if his heart is shattered, he
should not exhibit this fear. On seeing that a king is frightened, everyone is scared. The kingdom, the soldiers and
the advisers become divided in their views. Some may seek refuge with the enemy, others may desert the king.
Others who have been slighted earlier may try to strike back. Though powerless, only extreme well-wishers remain
with him, desiring salvation, like a cow whose calf has been tethered. They sorrow over his sorrow, as if over relatives who have died. Even those who were honoured before and those who were regarded as well-wishers, covet
the kingdom of a king who has confronted a hardship. Do not be frightened. Otherwise, your well-wishers will
desert you in their fear. I have said all this to you, questioning your power, manliness and intelligence. I have attempted to incite you, like a strong person behaving towards a weaker one. O Sanjaya! If you have understood
everything that I have said, then arise. Be peaceful in your mind and strive for victory. We possess a large treasury

that is not known to you. No one except I knows about this and I will give this to you. O Sanjaya! You still possess
many hundreds of well-wishers. O brave one! They will accompany you, in happiness and unhappiness. They will
not retreat and each is worth one hundred. These are appropriate allies for a man who wishes to obtain what he
wants. They are advisers who are destroyers of the enemy.’
‘“The son replied, ‘Even if one hears such words, colourful, meaningful and with purport and rhythm, from a
person with limited intelligence, how can one not cast away the darkness? With you, one who can see the past and
the future, as my leader, I will shoulder this burden, even if it is in the water and is ebbing away. Because I wished
to hear every word from you, I have generally been silent, but for contradicting you once in a while, like one who
is not satisﬁed with amrita obtained from a relative at the time of a hardship. I will now endeavour to destroy the
enemy and accomplish victory.’”
‘Kunti said, “He was incited like an excellent horse, prodded by the arrows of her words. He carried out all her
instructions, exactly as she had said. These words inspire terror. They are supreme in increasing energy. When a
king is exhausted from the depredations of an enemy, an adviser should recount them. This history is known as
‘Jaya’.314 It should be heard by one who wishes for victory. Having heard it, he will swiftly conquer the earth and
oppress the enemies. This315 leads to the birth of a son. This leads to the birth of a brave son. If a pregnant woman
repeatedly hears it, she is certain to give birth to a warrior who will be learned, valiant, austere, brave, self-controlled and an ascetic, radiant with the prosperity of brahmanas, honoured in the words of the virtuous, resplendent,
strong, immensely fortunate, a maharatha, daring, unassailable, victorious and invincible. He will chastise those
who are evil and protect those who act in accordance with dharma. The kshatriya lady will give birth to such a
brave son, for whom his truth will be his valour.”’
798(135)

‘Kunti said, “O Keshava! Tell Arjuna this. ‘When you were born, I was seated in the maternity chamber, surrounded by women from the hermitage. A voice was then heard from the sky. It was divine in form and pleasant to hear.
“O Kunti! This son of yours will be the equal of the one with a thousand eyes.316 In a battle, he will vanquish all
the assembled Kurus. With Bhimasena as his second, he will overturn the world. Your son will be the conqueror of
the earth and his fame will touch heaven. With Vasudeva as his ally, he will kill the Kurus in the ﬁeld of battle. He
will regain the paternal share that had been lost. Together with his brothers, the illustrious one will perform three
horse sacriﬁces.”’ O Achyuta! If I know Bibhatsu Savyasachi, who is devoted to the truth, it must be as it was spoken. I know that he is strong and unassailable. O Dasharha! It must therefore be as the voice had spoken. O Varshneya! If there is any dharma, it must truly be that way. O Krishna! You will also bring about everything. I do not
doubt the truth of what the voice had spoken. I bow down before the great dharma. It is dharma that sustains living
beings. Speak these words to Dhananjaya.
‘“Speak these words to Vrikodara, who is always ready. ‘The time for which a kshatriya lady gives birth has arrived. Those who are bulls among men do not waver when an enmity surfaces.’ You have always known about
Bhima’s intelligence. That destroyer of enemies cannot be paciﬁed until the enemy has been destroyed.
‘“O Krishna! O Madhava! Speak these words to the fortunate and illustrious Krishna,317 learned in all forms of
dharma and daughter-in-law of the great-souled Pandu. ‘O immensely fortunate one! O one born in a noble lineage! O illustrious one! You have always behaved towards all my sons as is appropriate and as one should behave.’
‘“Speak to the two sons of Madri, both of whom are devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. ‘Choose the enjoyments that can be gained through valour over life itself.’ O Purushottama! If a man lives according to the dharma
of kshatriyas, he is always delighted at prosperity that is gained through valour. It was while you looked on that
Panchali, who was devoted to every kind of dharma, was harshly addressed. It is not proper for you to forgive that.
The unhappiness from the loss of the kingdom, the defeat at the game of dice and the banishment of my sons was
nothing compared to the unhappiness when that large, dark and weeping lady was brought to the assembly hall and
made to listen to harsh words. In my view, that was a greater misery. The one with the beautiful thighs has always
been devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. She was following the dharma of women then.318 Though she has protectors, at that time, Krishna319 obtained no protectors there.

‘“O Krishna! O mighty-armed one! Tell this to Arjuna, tiger among men, supreme among those who wield all
weapons. ‘Follow the path indicated by Droupadi.’ You know that when Bhima and Arjuna are enraged, they are
like two Yamas and can convey even the gods to the ﬁnal destination. Both were insulted when Krishna320 was
brought to the assembly hall and Duhshasana addressed terrible and harsh words towards her, while all the brave
Kurus looked on. Remind him about that again. Ask about the welfare of the Pandavas and Krishna and her sons.
O Janardana! Also tell them that I am extremely well. Travel along a safe path and protect my sons.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Mighty-armed Krishna saluted and circumambulated her. Then he strode out, like a lion in
his gait. He granted leave to Bhishma and the other bulls among the Kurus.321 He made Karna322 ascend his chariot and left with Satyaki. When Dasharha had left, all the Kurus assembled together and talked about the great and
extraordinary wonders that had occurred in connection with Keshava. They said, “The entire earth is confounded
and has been snared in the noose of death. It will be destroyed because of Duryodhana’s stupidity.” Purushottama
left the city and talked for a long time with Karna. Having given Radheya permission to leave, the delight of all the
Yadavas goaded his horses towards a great speed. Urged by Daruka, the horses seemed to drink up the sky and
dashed with the speed of the mind and the wind. Having covered a great distance like swift kites, the horses, bearing the wielder of the Sharnga bow, reached Upaplavya while the sun was still high in the sky.’
799(136)

Vaishampayana said, ‘After listening to Kunti’s words, maharatha Bhishma and Drona spoke these words to Duryodhana, who was beyond control. “O tiger among men! You have heard the words Kunti spoke in Krishna’s presence. They are foremost and full of meaning. They are in conformity with supreme dharma. With Vasudeva’s approval, the Kounteyas will act accordingly. O Kourava! They will not be paciﬁed without the kingdom. You oppressed the Parthas and Droupadi in the assembly hall. But they were then restrained by the noose of dharma and
had to tolerate it. However, Arjuna, skilled in the use of weapons, and Bhima, ﬁrm in his resolution, and Gandiva,
the two quivers,323 the chariot and the standard, Yudhishthira and Vasudeva as the ally, will no longer forgive. O
mighty-armed one! Earlier, you have yourself witnessed how the intelligent Partha vanquished everyone in battle,
in the city of Virata. The nivatakavacha danavas, terrible in their deeds, were burnt in battle with his roudra
weapon, the weapon with ﬂames. Karna and the others and you yourself with your armour and chariot, were freed
at the time of the expedition of the cattle. This is sufﬁcient proof. O foremost among Bharatas! Make peace with
your brothers, the Pandavas. Save this entire earth, which is headed towards the jaws of death. Your elder
brother’s324 conduct is in accordance with dharma. He is affectionate. He is gentle in speech. He is pure. Get rid of
these evil intentions and go to that tiger among men. If the Pandava sees that you have laid down your bow, the illustrious one will smoothen his brows and bring peace to our lineage. Having gone to him with your advisers, embrace that son of a king. O destroyer of enemies! Honour the king, as you used to do earlier. Let Kunti’s son, Yudhishthira, Bhima’s elder brother, embrace you in his arms with affection when you greet him. Bhima is supreme
among warriors. He has shoulders, thighs and arms like a lion and his arms are round and large. Let him embrace
you with those arms. Kunti’s son, Gudakesha Partha Dhananjaya, has a neck like a lion and eyes like lotuses. Let
him salute you. The sons of the two Ashvins are tigers among men and are unmatched in their beauty on earth. Let
them affectionately honour you, as they would for an elder. Let these kings, with Dasharha at the forefront, release
tears of joy. O king! Having discarded your vanity, be united with your brothers. Together with your brothers, rule
the entire earth. Having happily embraced each other, let these kings return. O Indra among kings! Refrain from
war. Listen to the reasons of your well-wishers. In the case of a war, the certain destruction of the kshatriyas can be
seen. The stars are against us. Birds and animals are behaving in a terrible way. Flaming meteors are seen to descend on your army. O lord of the earth! Our mounts are miserable and seem to be weeping. Vultures are circling
our soldiers in every direction. The city and the king’s residence no longer seem to be as they used to be before.
The directions are blazing and jackals are inauspiciously howling in every direction. Listen to the words of your
father and mother and of your well-wishers. O mighty-armed one! Peace or war depends on you. O destroyer of
enemies! If you do not heed the advice of your well-wishers, you will see your soldiers oppressed by Partha’s arrows. You will hear Bhima’s loud roars and see his strength in battle. On hearing these and Gandiva’s roar, you
will remember my325 words. If you do not ﬁnd my words to be acceptable, all of this will come to pass.”’

800(137)

he326

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having been thus addressed,
was distracted. He glanced sideways and lowered his
face. He furrowed the middle of his brows and did not say anything. On seeing him thus distracted, those bulls
among men327 glanced at each other and spoke these words to the one who had not replied.
‘Bhishma said, “Partha328 is devoted. He is devoid of jealousy. He possesses the qualities of a brahmana. He is
devoted to the truth. What can be greater misery than having to ﬁght with him?”
‘Drona said, “O king! Dhananjaya is dearer to me than my own son Ashvatthama. The one with the ape on his
standard329 shows more reverence towards others than anyone else. If I have to ﬁght with Dhananjaya, whom I
love more than my own son, as a result of following the dharma of kshatriyas, shame on the life of kshatriyas. Because of my favours, there is no other archer in the world who is equal or superior to Bibhatsu as an archer. One
who betrays his friends, one who is wicked in his sentiments, one who is an atheist, one who is dishonest and one
who is deceitful, does not obtain worship from the virtuous, like an idiot who has arrived at a sacriﬁce. Though restrained from evil, an evil-souled one desires evil. Though tempted by evil, a person who is pure in soul desires purity. Though they have been treated with falsehood, they still remain affectionately inclined. O supreme among
Bharatas! But your taints will lead to a bad end. You have been addressed by the eldest among the Kurus, by me,
by Vidura and also by Vasudeva. But you do not see what is beneﬁcial. ‘I have the forces.’ Thinking this, you wish
to cross over. That is like crossing the Ganga, with its crocodiles, alligators ands sharks,330 during the rainy season.
You think that you are now dressed in Yudhishthira’s garments. But because of your avarice, you have only obtained the prosperity that he has cast away, like a garland. Even in the forest, together with Droupadi, Partha Pandava331 enjoys a kingdom,332 surrounded by his brothers, who wield weapons. Who can outlive him? When he met
Ilavila’s son,333 whom all the kings serve as servants, Dharmaraja surpassed him in radiance. He obtained gems in
Kubera’s abode. Desiring the kingdom, the Pandavas are ready to invade your prosperous kingdom. We334 have
offered gifts. We have offered oblations. We have studied. We have satisﬁed the brahmanas with riches. We have
lived our lives. Both of us know that we have accomplished our tasks. But you are discarding happiness, the kingdom, friends and riches. You wish to wage war on the Pandavas. But you will confront a great calamity. Droupadi,
the one who is truthful in her conduct, desires their victory. That goddess is terrible in her austerities and vows.
How can you defeat the Pandava? Janardana is his adviser and Dhananjaya, foremost among those who wield all
weapons, is his brother. Brahmanas who have fortitude and have controlled their senses, are his companions. He is
brave and terrible in his austerities. How can you defeat the Pandava? I am telling you again, as a well-wisher who
desires to save the life of a well-wisher who is immersing himself in an ocean of disaster. Refrain from this war
with those brave ones. Have peace with them, so that the Kurus can prosper. With your sons, advisers and forces,
do not advance towards defeat.”’

Section Fifty-Five
Karna-Upanivada Parva
This section has 351 shlokas and eleven chapters.
Chapter 801(138): 28 shlokas
Chapter 802(139): 57 shlokas
Chapter 803(140): 20 shlokas
Chapter 804(141): 49 shlokas
Chapter 805(142): 30 shlokas
Chapter 806(143): 12 shlokas
Chapter 807(144): 26 shlokas
Chapter 808(145): 40 shlokas
Chapter 809(146): 35 shlokas
Chapter 810(147): 35 shlokas
Chapter 811(148): 19 shlokas
Nivada is an invitation and upa has the connotation of secret. This section is in the nature of a secret invitation to Karna. Both Krishna and Kunti
try to wean Karna away, but fail.
801(138)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! Before Madhusudana left, surrounded by the princes and the advisers, he instructed Karna to ascend the chariot. What did the destroyer of enemy warriors tell Radheya on the chariot? What comforting words did Govinda tell the son of a suta? Krishna speaks in a voice that roars like a ﬂood or a cloud. O Sanjaya! Whether it was mildly, or whether it was sharply, what did he tell Karna?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen to what Madhusudana, whose soul cannot be
measured, told Radheya. I will recount the words in their entirety, both sharp and mild. They were pleasant and in
conformity with dharma. They were truthful and beneﬁcial. They were acceptable to the heart.
‘“Vasudeva said, ‘O Radheya! You have served brahmanas who are learned in the Vedas. Free of jealousy and
attentively, you have asked them about the truth. O Karna! You know the eternal teachings of the Vedas. You know
about the sacred texts of dharma and their subtleties. People who know about the sacred texts say that a son who is
born to a maiden before her marriage is as much of a son as one who is born from a father after marriage. O Karna!
You have been born in this fashion.1 According to dharma, you are Pandu’s son. According to the instructions of
the sacred texts of dharma, come with me and you will become a king. The Parthas are on your father’s side and
the Vrishnis are on your mother’s side. O bull among men! Know that both these sides are your own lineage. O
son!2 Come with me now and the Pandavas will recognize you as a Kounteya who has been born before Yudhishthira. The ﬁve Pandavas will grasp your feet as brothers, together with the ﬁve sons of Droupadi and Subhadra’s unvanquished son.3 The kings and princes who have gathered together in the cause of the Pandavas and all
the Andhakas and Vrishnis will grasp your feet. The kings, the wives of kings and the daughters of kings will bring
gold, silver and earthen vessels, herbs, all kinds of seeds, all kinds of gems and creepers for your anointment.4 At
the sixth point in time,5 Droupadi will have intercourse with you. Let the brahmanas who are acquainted with the
four Vedas consecrate you today, assisted by the priest of the Pandavas,6 the ﬁve Pandava brothers who are bulls
among men, Droupadi’s ﬁve sons, the Panchalas and the Chedis. You will be seated on the skin of a tiger. I will
myself instate you as king and the lord of the earth. Kunti’s son, King Yudhishthira, will be the heir apparent. Kun-

ti’s son, Yudhishthira, rigid in his vows and with dharma in his soul, will ascend the chariot behind you and hold a
white umbrella.7 O Kounteya! The immensely strong Bhimasena will hold a giant white umbrella above your head
when you are consecrated. Your chariot will have hundreds of bells that make a noise and will be strewn with the
skins of tigers. It will be yoked to white horses and Arjuna will drive it. Abhimanyu, Nakula, Sahadeva and
Droupadi’s ﬁve sons will always be stationed near, for your instructions. The Panchalas and maharatha Shikhandi
will follow you. I will myself follow you and so will all the Andhakas, Vrishnis and Dasharhas. O lord of the
earth! The Dasharhas will be part of your family. O mighty-armed one! Enjoy the kingdom, together with your
Pandava brothers. Practise meditation. Offer oblations. Observe other auspicious signs. Let the Dravidas, together
with the Kuntalas, follow you, with the Andhras, Talachakras, Chuchupas and Venupas. Let bards and minstrels
sing your praises in many ways. Let the Pandavas proclaim Vasushena’s8 triumph. O Kounteya! Surrounded by the
Parthas, like the moon is by the nakshatras, rule over the kingdom and delight Kunti. Let your friends rejoice and
let your enemies suffer. Today, let there be fraternity between you and your Pandava brothers.’”’
802(139)

‘“Karna said, ‘O Keshava! I have no doubt that you are affectionately speaking to me as a well-wisher. O Varshneya! As a friend, you wish for my welfare. I also know everything about my being Pandu’s son under the norms
of dharma. O Krishna! These are the instructions of the sacred texts of dharma, as you have interpreted them. O
Janardana! As a maiden, she conceived me in her womb through the sun. Once I was born, she abandoned me on
the instructions of the sun. O Krishna! I was born in this way, Pandu’s son under the norms of dharma. However,
Kunti did not think of my welfare and cast me out as one undesired. As soon as he saw me, the suta Adhiratha took
me home. O Madhusudana! Out of affection towards me, he gave me to Radha.9 Out of affection towards me, milk
ﬂowed from Radha’s breasts. O Madhava! She accepted my urine and my excrement. How can someone like me
ignore the ancestral oblations that are due to her? I am learned in dharma. I have always devoted myself to listening to the sacred texts of dharma. Suta Adhiratha thinks of me as a son. Out of affection towards him, I have always thought of him as a father. O Madhava! O Janardana! Out of affection towards his son, he had my birth rites
performed, in accordance with the prescriptions of the sacred texts. He got the brahmanas to name me Vasushena.
O Keshava! When I attained youth, he had me married to wives. O Janardana! I have given birth to sons and
grandsons through them. O Krishna! My heart is tied with bonds of affection to them. O Govinda! The entire earth,
masses of gold, delight and fear cannot incite me to be false towards these. O Krishna! In Dhritarashtra’s lineage, I
have obtained refuge with Duryodhana. I have enjoyed a kingdom for thirteen years, without any thorns. I have offered oblations and performed many sacriﬁces, but in the company of sutas. I have issued invitations and undertaken matrimonial alliances, but in the company of sutas. O Krishna! O Varshneya! On obtaining me on his side,
Duryodhana has raised his weapons and is ready for war with the Pandavas. O Achyuta! Therefore, I have been
conﬁdently chosen as the supreme warrior to counter Savyasachi in a duel with chariots. O Janardana! I cannot be
false to Dhritarashtra’s intelligent son because of death, bondage, fear or greed. O Hrishikesha! If I do not ﬁght
with Savyasachi now in a duel with chariots, that will bring ill fame to both me and Partha.
‘“‘O Madhusudana! There is no doubt that you have spoken with my welfare in mind. There is no doubt that all
the Pandavas will act in accordance with your instructions. O Purushottama! You should not reveal this conversation between us. O descendant of the Yadava lineage! I think that this will be in everyone’s interests. If the king
who has dharma in his soul and is rigid in his vows10 knows that I am Kunti’s ﬁrst son, he will not accept the kingdom. O Madhusudana! O destroyer of enemies! Even if I obtain this large and prosperous kingdom, I will hand it
over to Duryodhana. Yudhishthira has dharma in his soul. He has Hrishikesha as a leader and Dhananjaya as a warrior. May he be the king forever. O Madhava! Maharatha Bhima, Nakula, Sahadeva, Droupadi’s sons, Uttamouja,
Yudhamanyu, Satyadharma, Somaki, Chaidya, Chekitana, the unvanquished Shikhandi, the Kekaya brothers who
have the complexions of ﬁreﬂies, maharatha Kuntibhoja who has the complexion of a rainbow,11 Bhimasena’s maternal uncle, maharatha Senajit and Virata’s son Shankha are on his side. The earth and the kingdom will be his. O
Janardana! You are his treasury. O Krishna! This large assemblage of kshatriyas has been brought together. This
resplendent kingdom, famous among all the kings, has already been won.12 O Varshneya! Dhirtarashtra’s son will
undertake a sacriﬁce with weapons. O Janardana! You will be the one who will witness this sacriﬁce. O Krishna!

When the sacriﬁce is performed, you will be the adhvaryu.13 Bibhatsu, with the ape on his banner, will gird himself as the hotar. Gandiva will be the ladle. The valour of men will be the clariﬁed butter. Unleashed by
Savyasachi, aindra, pashupata, brahma and sthunakarna14 will be mantras. Matching his father in valour and even
surpassing him, Subhadra’s son will be the gravastotra.15 Yet again, the immensely strong Bhima, the tiger among
men whose roars in the ﬁeld of battle destroy an army of elephants, will be the udgatar and prastota.16 The eternal
King Yudhishthira has dharma in his soul. He knows about incantations and oblations and about the brahman. O
Madhusudana! The sound of the conchshells, drums and kettledrums, resounding like roaring lions, will be the
subrahmanya.17 Nakula and Sahadeva, Madri’s two illustrious and extremely valiant sons, will be the shamitars.18
O Govinda! The chariots will have spotted ﬂagpoles and will be stocked with spotless spears. O Janardana! These
will be the sacriﬁcial poles at the sacriﬁce. Shafted arrows, hollow arrows, iron arrows, arrows with heads like the
teeth of calves and javelins will be the pots of soma. The bows will be the strainers.19 The swords will be broken
fragments from the jars. The heads will be the sacriﬁcial cakes. O Krishna! Blood will be the oblations offered at
this sacriﬁce. Maces, lances and unblemished clubs will be the kindling. The pupils of Drona and Sharadvata Kripa
will be the superintending priests.20 The arrows unleashed by the wielder of the Gandiva, by maharathas and by
Drona and Drona’s son, will be the ladles. Satyaki will be the pratiprasthanika.21 Dhritarashtra will be the performer of the sacriﬁce and the great army will be the wife.22 O mighty-armed one! When this atiratra23 sacriﬁce is
observed, the immensely strong Ghatotkacha will be the shamitar. O Krishna! Because he was born from a ﬁre, the
powerful Dhrishtadyumna will be the dakshina at the sacriﬁce when oblations24 are offered.
‘“‘O Krishna! I regret the harsh words I used against the Pandavas to please Dhritarashtra’s son. I am now tormented by that deed. O Krishna! When you see me killed by Savyasachi, that will be the punashchiti25 of their sacriﬁce. When Pandava26 roars loudly and drinks Duhshasana’s blood, that will be the drinking of soma. O Janardana! When the two from Panchala27 bring down Drona and Bhishma, that will be the conclusion of the sacriﬁce.
O Madhava! When the immensely strong Bhimasena kills Duryodhana, that will signify the end of Dhritarashtra’s
sacriﬁce. O Keshava! Dhritarashtra’s daughters-in-law and granddaughters-in-law will gather together, their lords
killed, their sons killed, their protectors killed. O Janardana! Together with Gandhari, they will weep at the sacriﬁcial site, frequented by dogs, vultures and ospreys. That will be like the bath after the sacriﬁce. O Madhusudana! O
bull among kshatriyas! These kshatriyas are aged in learning and aged in years. Because of your doings, let them
not have a fruitless death.28 O Keshava! Let this entire circle of kshatriyas meet their death through weapons in
Kurukshetra, the most sacred spot in the three worlds. O Pundarikaksha! O Varshneya! Therefore, channel your
desires so that all the kshatriyas can ascend to heaven. O Janardana! As long as the mountains are there and as long
as the rivers ﬂow, the eternal fame of this deed shall resound till then. The brahmanas will speak about the great
battle of Bharata.29 O Varshneya! In gatherings, they will proclaim the glory of the kshatriyas. O Keshava! Bring
Kounteya here, to ﬁght with me. O scorcher of enemies! Always keep this conversation between us secret.’”’
803(140)

‘Sanjaya said, “Having heard Karna’s words, Keshava, the destroyer of enemy warriors, smiled. He then laughed
and spoke these words. ‘O Karna! Are you not tempted by the offer of a kingdom? Do you not desire to rule the
earth that I will give to you? The victory of the Pandavas is certain. There is no scope for any doubt on that score.
The triumphal banner of the Pandavas can be seen, with the terrible king of the apes perched at the top. It was constructed by Bhouvana with divine maya. It has been raised, as radiant as Indra’s banner. Many terrible and divine
beings can be seen on it, evoking fear. It is not obstructed by mountains and forests. It has been raised up diagonally and is one yojana tall. O Karna! Dhananjaya’s radiant ﬂag has been raised and is equal to the ﬁre in its form.
When you see the one with the white horses in battle, with Krishna as the charioteer, using the weapons of Indra,
Agni and the Maruts and hear the roar of Gandiva, as forceful as thunder, there will no longer be treta, krita or dvapara. When you see Kunti’s son, Yudhishthira, in battle, protecting his great army with incantations and oblations,
as unassailable as Aditya and tormenting the soldiers of the enemy, there will no longer be treta, krita or dvapara.
When you see the immensely strong Bhimasena in the ﬁeld of battle, dancing in the battle and drinking
Duhshasana’s blood, like a rutting elephant that has slain a challenging tusker, there will no longer be treta, krita or
dvapara. When you see Madri’s maharatha sons in battle, routing the army of Dhritarashtra’s son like two ele-

phants, shattering the chariots of enemy warriors and engaged in hurling weapons, there will no longer be treta,
krita or dvapara. When you see Drona, Shantanu’s son and Kripa in battle, with King Suyodhana and Jayadratha of
Sindhu ﬁercely dashing to attack and restrained by Savyasachi, there will no longer be treta, krita or dvapara. O
Karna! Depart from here and tell Drona, Shantanu’s son and Kripa this. This is a pleasant month, with food and
fuel easily obtained. The herbs and forests are ripe and prosperous now. The trees are full of fruit and with few
ﬂies. There is no mud. The water is tasty. It is not warm, nor is it cold. The time is pleasant. It will be the new
moon30 seven days from now. Let the ﬁght begin on that day, because that is said to be Shakra’s day. Also tell all
the kings who have assembled to do battle. “I will accomplish everything that you wish for.” The kings and the
princes who are following Duryodhana will be killed through weapons and attain the supreme goal.’”’
804(141)

‘Sanjaya said, “On hearing these auspicious and beneﬁcial words from Keshava, Karna honoured Krishna Madhusudana31 and spoke these words. ‘O mighty-armed one! Knowing everything, why did you wish to confuse me?
The destruction of the entire earth is imminent. Shakuni, Duhshasana and Dhritarashtra’s son, King Duryodhana,
and I are responsible. O Krishna! There is no doubt that there will be a great and terrible war between the Pandavas and the Kurus, with the mud of blood. The kings and the princes who follow Duryodhana’s instructions will
be burnt in the battle with the ﬂames of weapons and will go to Yama’s abode. O Madhusudana! Many terrible
dreams are seen. There are fearful portents and extremely terrible omens. They signify the defeat of Dhritarashtra’s
son and Yudhishthira’s victory. O Varshneya! There are many signs and they make the body hair stand up. The
sharp and extremely radiant planet Shanaishchara32 is oppressing the nakshatra Prajapatya,33 implying greater suffering for all beings. O Madhusudana! Angaraka34 is retrograde in Jyeshtha and is aspiring for Anuradha, as if
seeking its friendship.35 O Krishna! O Varshneya! A great calamity confronts the Kurus, in particular because the
planet is oppressing Chitra.36 The signs on the moon are distorted and Rahu is obstructing the sun. Meteors are
showering down from heaven. There are storms and earthquakes. The elephants are trumpeting. O Madhava! The
horses are shedding tears and no longer ﬁnd pleasure in fodder and water. O mighty-armed one! When such omens
are seen, it is said that a great calamity is at hand and that it will be the terrible destruction of beings. O Keshava!
It is seen that though horses, elephants and men are eating little, they are releasing large quantities of excrement. O
Madhusudana! The learned ones have said that these are the signs of the defeat of the entire army of Dhritarashtra’s son. O Krishna! It is said that the mounts of the Pandavas are happy. The animals are circumambulating them
from the right and that is a sign of their victory. O Keshava! But all the animals are circumambulating Dhritarashtra’s son from the left. Invisible voices can be heard and these are signs of his defeat. Peacocks, pushpashakunas,37
swans, cranes, chatakas and masses of jivamjivakas38 follow the Pandavas. Vultures, crows, badas,39 hawks,
yatudhanas, jackals and masses of ﬂies follow the Kouravas. There is no sound of drums in the army of Dhritarashtra’s son. But even when they are not struck, the drums of the Pandavas are making a sound. The wells in the
army of Dhritarashtra’s son are making a sound like that of cows and bulls. That is a sign of his defeat. O Madhava! The gods are showering down ﬂesh and blood. A radiant city of the gandharvas has appeared. It has walls,
moats, turrets and beautiful gates. At dawn and at dusk, a black mace can be seen to envelope the sun. This signiﬁes a great calamity. A jackal is howling terribly and that is a sign of his40 defeat. Terrible birds with black necks
hang around. Then they ﬂy away towards the dusk, a sign of his defeat. O Madhusudana! He ﬁrst hates the brahmanas, then his elders and his faithful servants. That is a sign of his defeat. The eastern direction is red. The southern direction has the complexion of weapons. O Madhusudana! The western direction looks like an unbaked vessel. O Madhava! For Dhritarashtra’s son, all the directions are on ﬁre. These signs that are seen presage a great
calamity. O Achyuta! I had a dream in which I saw a palace with a thousand pillars. I saw Yudhishthira, together
with his brothers, ascending this. All of them were seen to wear white headdresses and white garments. I saw all of
them seated on beautiful seats. O Krishna! O Janardana! I saw you in that dream, draping the earth, strewn with
blood, with entrails. The inﬁnitely energetic Yudhishthira ascended a heap of bones. He happily ate ghee mixed
with payasa41 from a golden vessel. I saw Yudhishthira swallow the earth, which you had given him. It is evident
he will enjoy the earth. Vrikodara, terrible in his deeds, ascended a mountain. That tiger among men held a club in
his hand and seemed to be eyeing the earth. This clearly shows that he will kill us in a great battle. O Hrishikesha!

I know that where dharma exists, victory exists there. O Hrishikesha! Together with you, Dhananjaya held the
Gandiva and mounted a white elephant.42 He shone in supreme radiance. O Krishna! There is no doubt that you
will slaughter all the kings, with Duryodhana in the forefront, in battle. Nakula, Sahadeva and maharatha Satyaki
were adorned in white bracelets and necklaces and wore white garlands and garments. Those tigers among men
ascended excellent vehicles that were drawn by men. Those three great ones had white umbrellas and garments. O
Janardana! O Keshava! I saw three from the army of Dhritarashtra’s son too, wearing white headdresses. You
know who they are—Ashvatthama, Kripa and Satvata Kritavarma. O Madhava! All the other kings were seen with
red headdresses.43 O mighty-armed one! O Janardana! Ascended on a vehicle drawn by camels, Bhishma and
Drona, together with me and Dhritarashtra’s son, headed in the direction ruled by Agastya.44 O Janardana! In a
short while, we reached Yama’s abode. There is no doubt that I and the other kings, and the circle of kshatriyas,
will enter Gandiva’s ﬁre.’
‘“Krishna replied, ‘O Karna! The destruction of the earth is now near, since your heart does not ﬁnd my words
to be acceptable. O son!45 The destruction of all beings is imminent. That which is wrong appears to be right and is
not removed from the heart.’
‘“Karna said, ‘O Krishna! O mighty-armed one! If we remain alive, we may perhaps see you again after this
great battle, which will lead to the destruction of all the brave kshatriyas. O Krishna! Otherwise, we will certainly
meet in heaven. O unblemished one! Now it seems that we will only meet there again.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “Saying this, Karna embraced Madhava tightly. Having obtained Keshava’s permission, he descended from the chariot. Having ascended his own chariot, decorated with gold, Radheya returned with us,46 dejected in his mind. Together with Satyaki, Keshava then left at a greater speed, repeatedly urging his charioteer,
‘Go! Go!’”’
805(142)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Krishna’s entreaties having failed, he left the Kurus and went towards the Pandavas. Kshatta
went to Pritha and in a soft and sorrowful tone, spoke these words. “O one whose sons are alive! You know that I
am always inclined towards kindness. Though I have raised my voice, Suyodhana has not accepted my words.
King Yudhishthira has the Chedis, Panchalas, Kekayas, Bhima, Arjuna, Krishna, Yuyudhana47 and the twins on his
side. Desiring dharma, he has camped in Upaplavya. Though he is strong, desiring friendship with his kin, he acts
like one who is weak. King Dhritarashtra is aged in his years, but does not seek peace. Intoxicated by the insolence
of his son, he is walking along the path of adharma. The dissension has arisen because of the evil intelligence of
Jayadratha, Karna, Duhshasana and Soubala. Using adharma, in this fashion, they robbed the kingdom from one
who follows dharma. But in this way, dharma’s consequences bind one down. Who will not suffer from fever when
the Kurus forcibly oppress dharma in this way? Keshava has left without obtaining peace and the Pandavas will
prepare for war. Thus, the bad policy followed by the Kurus will lead to the destruction of warriors. I think about
this and cannot sleep, during the day and at night.” Kunti heard these words, spoken by one who desired welfare.
She began to sigh in grief and her mind was also distressed.
‘She thought, “Shame on artha! It is because of this that there will be this great carnage of relatives. There can
only be defeat in this war among friends. If the assembled Pandavas, Chedis, Panchalas and Yadavas ﬁght the
Bharatas, what can be greater misery than that? I can see that there is a certain taint associated with war, but it is
also there in the case of defeat in war. For those who are without riches, it is better to die. But there cannot be a
victory in the destruction of relatives. The grandfather, Shantanu’s son, the preceptor who is foremost among warriors and Karna are with Dhritarashtra’s son and that increases my fears. The preceptor Drona will never willingly
wish to ﬁght with his disciples. Why should the grandfather not be kindly disposed towards the Pandavas? This
leaves only one48 who unnecessarily follows the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra. Because of his evil delusions,
he has always hated the Pandavas. He is immensely strong in his resolution and he is also powerful. Karna has always been against the Pandavas and I am now tormented by that. Today, I hope to turn Karna’s mind towards the
Pandavas. I will meet him, tell him the truth and seek to obtain his favours. Satisﬁed, the illustrious Durvasa granted me a boon. When I dwelt in the inner quarters of my father, King Kuntibhoja’s abode, I was honoured by the
ability of summoning the gods. With a trembling heart, I thought about this in many ways, about the strength and

weakness of the mantra and about the brahmana’s boon. Because of the nature of a woman, who also possessed
childish sentiments, I thought about this repeatedly, though I was protected by a trusted nurse and surrounded by
friends. How could I avoid taints and how could I preserve my father’s reputation? How could I do something
good for myself, without committing a sin? Thinking about that brahmana and bowing down before him, I was
overcome by curiosity and behaved like a child. Though I was still a maiden, I summoned the sun god to me.
Though I was a virgin, I conceived him in my womb. He was protected like my son. Why should he not listen to
my words, which will be beneﬁcial for the cause of his brothers?”
‘Thinking in this fashion, Kunti decided on an excellent course of action.49 So as to bring success to her objective, she went towards the Bhagirathi. On the banks of the Ganga, Pritha heard the sounds of incantations, being
recited by her compassionate and truthful son. He was facing the east, with his hands raised up. The ascetic lady
waited behind him, until the meditations were over. She was the daughter of a Kourava and descended from the
Vrishni lineage. She stood there, behind Karna’s upper garments,50 oppressed by the sun, like a garland of lotuses
that has dried. He was rigid in his vows and meditated until his back was heated by the sun. When he turned
around, he saw Kunti and joined his hands in salutation. As was appropriate, the immensely energetic one, who
was supreme among those who upheld dharma, honoured her.’
806(143)

‘Karna said, “I am Karna, the son of Radha and Adhiratha, and I salute you. Tell me. Why have you come here?
What can I do for you?”
‘Kunti replied, “You are the son of Kunti, not of Radha. And Adhiratha is not your father. O Karna! You have
not been born in a lineage of sutas. Know these words of mine to be true. While I was still a maiden, I gave birth to
you. In Kuntibhoja’s abode, you were the ﬁrst one I carried in my womb. O Partha! You are my son. The duty of
the god Tapana Virochana51 is to produce light. O Karna, supreme among those who wield weapons! He gave birth
to you through me. You were born with earrings and armour. You were born as the son of a god, surrounded in radiance. You were born as my invincible son, in my father’s house. Because of your ignorance, you do not know
your true brothers. Since you are my son, you should not serve the sons of Dhritarashtra. O son! It is the determination of dharma that the fruits of dharma accrue to men who satisfy their fathers, or their one-eyed mother.52 Earlier, Arjuna earned prosperity for Yudhishthira and the sons of Dhritarashtra robbed it because of their greed. Separate yourself from them and enjoy it. Today, let the Kurus witness the fraternal union between Karna and Arjuna.
Let those who are evil bow down. Let Karna and Arjuna be like Rama53 and Janardana. If the two of you are united in your minds, what can you not achieve in this world? O Karna! Surrounded by your ﬁve brothers, you will
shine, like Brahma surrounded by the Vedas and the ﬁve Vedangas.54 You have all the qualities. You are the eldest
and the best among all the relatives. The words ‘son of a suta’ will no longer be used for you. You will be a valiant
Partha.”’
807(144)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Then Karna heard a voice that issued from the sun. It was spoken affectionately like a father
and came from the sun god himself. “O Karna! Pritha has spoken the truth. Act in accordance with your mother’s
words. O tiger among men! You will obtain the greatest beneﬁt, if you act entirely in accordance with her words.”
Thus addressed by his mother, and by his father, the sun god himself, Karna’s resolution did not falter, because he
was always established in the truth.
‘Karna said, “O kshatriya lady! It is not that I disbelieve the words spoken by you, or contradict that acting in
accordance with your words is the gate to dharma. But your action towards me was extremely evil. By casting me
out, you have destroyed the fame and renown that I could have possessed. I have been born a kshatriya, but I did
not obtain the rites that were due to a kshatriya. All this was because of you. What wicked enemy could have done
anything worse? You showed me no compassion at the time when it was required. You deprived me of my rites.
But you are now asking me to act. Earlier, you have never sought my welfare as a mother. However, desiring your
own welfare alone, you have now come to me and are addressing me. Who does not suffer when Dhananjaya is
aided by Krishna? If I now go over to the Parthas, who will not think that I am frightened? I have not been known

as their brother before. This has been revealed at the time of the battle. If I go to the Pandavas, who will speak of
me as a kshatriya? The sons of Dhritarashtra have given me a share in every object of desire. They have honoured
me and given me every kind of happiness. How can I act counter to that now? They have always served me and
have always bowed down before me, like the Vasus before Vasava. They now confront a feud with an enemy. They
think that with my life, they can withstand the enemies. How can I act against the desire that is there in their
minds? Using me as a boat, they wish to cross over to the other shore of this shoreless and impassable war. How
can I abandon them? For those who have earned a living from the sons of Dhritarashtra, the time has arrived. I
must devote myself to that task, even if there is a risk to my life. There are those who are satiated and treated well.
But when the time arrives for a task, these wicked ones are ungrateful and act counter to what should be done.
They are faithless towards the king. They are servants who steal the ancestral offerings of their master. These evilacting ones do not obtain this world, or the next. In the cause of Dhritarashtra’s son, I will ﬁght with your sons. I
will use all my strength and my power. I will not lie to you. I will seek to abide by the conduct of a non-violent and
truthful person. But even if they are beneﬁcial, I will not act in accordance with your words now. However, your
appeal to me will not be fruitless. Though I can counter and kill them, I will not kill all of your sons in battle—
Yudhishthira, Bhima and the twins, everyone other than Arjuna. In Yudhishthira’s army, I will ﬁght with Arjuna.
Having killed Arjuna in battle, I will obtain fruits. Or I will be killed by Savyasachi and attain fame. O illustrious
one! The number of your sons will not be less than ﬁve. You will either be without Arjuna and with Karna, or if I
am killed, you will be with Arjuna.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having heard Karna’s words, Kunti trembled with grief. She embraced her son Karna,
who was ﬁrm because of his fortitude, and said, “It must be this way then. O Karna! The Kouravas will go to their
destruction, as you have said. Destiny is extremely powerful. O destroyer of enemies! But you must promise me
about the safety of four of your brothers. You have given me that pledge and you must discharge that promise.
May you be safe and in good health.” Pritha spoke these words to Karna. Delighted, Karna honoured her. Then,
both of them left in different directions.’
808(145)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having returned to Upaplavya from Hastinapura, Keshava, the destroyer of enemies, told
the Pandavas everything that had happened. They spoke to each other for a long time and held repeated consultations. So as to rest, Shouri went to his own residence. After having taken their leave of all the kings, headed by Virata, when the sun had set, the ﬁve Pandava brothers performed their evening prayers. Then their minds turned towards Krishna and they had Dasharha brought for more consultations.
‘Yudhishthira asked, “O Pundarikaksha! When you went to Nagapura,55 what did you tell Dhritarashtra’s son in
the assembly hall? You should tell us that.”
‘Vasudeva replied, “When I went to Nagapura, what I told Dhritarashtra’s son in the assembly hall was true,
healthy and beneﬁcial. But the evil-minded one did not accept it.”
‘Yudhishthira said, “O Hrishikesha! Duryodhana cannot be controlled. When he deviated from the proper path,
what did the grandfather, senior among the Kurus, tell him? What did the mighty-armed preceptor, Bharadvaja,
say? What about our younger father, Kshatta, supreme among those who uphold dharma? Tormented over his
sons,56 what did he tell Dhritarashtra’s son? What did all the kings who were in the assembly hall have to say? O
Janardana! Tell us everything, exactly as it happened. You have already told us all the words spoken by the two
foremost among the Kurus57 to the wicked one who is overcome by desire and avarice and thinks himself to be
wise. O Keshava! But unpleasant things do not remain in my heart. O Govinda! O illustrious one! I wish to hear
their words. O son!58 Act so that time does not pass. O Krishna! You are our refuge. You are our protector. You are
our preceptor.”
‘Vasudeva replied, “O king! O Indra among kings! Listen to the words that King Suyodhana spoke to me in the
midst of that assembly of the Kurus. After I had spoken my words, Dhritarashtra’s son laughed. Then Bhishma was
extremely enraged and spoke these words. ‘O Duryodhana! Listen to my words, for the sake of the welfare of the
lineage. O tiger among kings! Having heard my words, act in the interests of your own lineage. O son!59 My father
was King Shantanu, famous in the worlds. I was the only son of someone who was the best among all those who

had sons. He began to think, “How can I have a second son? The learned ones say that having a single son is like
having no son at all. How can my lineage not be destroyed? How can the fame continue to be extended?” Having
got to know about his desire, I brought him Kali60 as my mother. For the sake of my father and my lineage, I took
an extremely difﬁcult oath that I would not be a king and would hold up my semen.61 This is known to you. I have
cheerfully lived here, abiding by my promise. O king! Through her was born my younger brother Vichitravirya,
with dharma in his soul. He was mighty-armed and prosperous and an extender of the Kuru lineage. When my father ascended to heaven, I instated him in my kingdom as a king. I myself behaved like a servant who was inferior
to him. O Indra among kings! After defeating an array of kings, I brought him appropriate wives. You have heard
about this many times. I then confronted Rama in a duel.62 Because of fear of Rama, the citizens banished him
from the city.63 Because of excessive addiction to his wives, he was soon afﬂicted by pulmonary disease. Without
a king, the lord of the gods no longer rained down on the kingdom. The subjects suffered from hunger and fear and
came and spoke to me.
‘“‘The subjects said, “All the subjects are decaying. For the sake of our welfare, become our king. O fortunate
one! O extender of Shantanu’s lineage! Dispel these calamities. All your subjects are suffering from an extremely
terrible disease. O Gangeya!64 Only a few ones are left. You should save us. O brave one! Dispel this disease. As is
dharma, protect the subjects. When you are yourself alive, do not let this kingdom head towards destruction.”’
‘“Bhishma said, ‘The lamentations of the subjects failed to move my heart. I remembered that adherence to an
oath is virtuous conduct. O great king! The citizens, my fortunate mother Kali, the servants, the priests, the preceptors and the extremely learned brahmanas were greatly distressed and kept urging me, “Be our king. The kingdom
protected by Pratipa65 is being destroyed. O immensely intelligent one! For the sake of our welfare, be our king.”
At these words, I joined my hands in salutation. I was unhappy and extremely miserable. O son! I kept repeatedly
telling them about the oath I had taken to honour my father and for the sake of the lineage, that I would hold up my
semen and would not be a king. O king! Then I joined my hands in salutation and repeatedly told my mother, “O
mother! I have been born from Shantanu and will extend the Kuru lineage. It was for your sake that I took the oath
and I cannot falsify it. Even for your sake, do not impose this burden on me. O one who is devoted to her sons! O
mother! I am your servant, awaiting your command.” O great king! Having thus entreated my mother and the subjects, together with my mother, for the sake of my brother’s wives, I solicited the great sage Vyasa and sought the
rishi’s favours for the sake of offspring. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! He showed us his favours and begot three sons.66 Being blind and deprived of the rites, your father could not be a king. Thus, the great-souled Pandu, famous in the world, became a king. Since he was a king, his sons are the inheritors of their father’s share. O
son!67 Do not quarrel over this. Give them half of the kingdom. As long as I am alive, which man can rule the
kingdom? Do not slight my words. I have always desired peace. O son! O king! I do not differentiate between
them and you. These are also the views of your father, Gandhari and Vidura. The words of the elders should be
heard. Do not ignore my words. Otherwise, you will destroy everybody, yourself and the earth also.’”’
809(146)

‘Vasudeva said, “After Bhishma had spoken, Drona, who was capable of speaking, addressed these words to Duryodhana, in the midst of the kings. ‘O fortunate one! O son!68 Just as Pratipa’s son, Shantanu, was established for
the welfare of the lineage, Devavrata Bhishma is also established for the welfare of the lineage. Pandu, the lord of
men, was also like that. He was truthful and in control of his senses. He became the king of the Kurus. He had
dharma in his soul. He was good in his vows and was extremely controlled. Later, the extender of the Kuru lineage
gave the kingdom to his elder, the intelligent Dhritarashtra, and to the younger, Kshatta. O king! O Kouravya! O
unblemished one! After having established the one without decay69 on the kingdom, he left for the forest with his
wife. Vidura, tiger among men, humbly accepted a position that was inferior to him70 and served him, like one fanning him with a whisk. O son!71 In the appropriate way, all the subjects accepted Dhritarashtra as the lord of men,
just as they had accepted Pandu, lord of men. After having handed over the kingdom to Dhritarashtra and Vidura,
Pandu, the destroyer of enemy cities, roamed around the entire earth. Vidura, devoted to the truth, was in charge of
building up the treasury, gifts, the superintendence of the servants and everyone’s subsistence. Bhishma, the immensely energetic conqueror of enemy cities, was in charge of peace and war and the care of the king. While he

was on the throne, the immensely strong King Dhritarashtra was always followed by the great-souled Vidura. Having been born in this lineage, how can you decide to break up the lineage? O lord of men! Together with your
brothers, enjoy all the objects of desire. I am not saying this out of any weakness, or for any riches. O supreme
among kings! I eat what Bhishma gives me, not what you give. O lord of men! I do not wish to draw my sustenance from you. Drona goes where Bhishma goes. Do what Bhishma has asked you to. O destroyer of enemies!
Give the sons of Pandu half of the kingdom. O son!72 I have always behaved equally as a teacher to both you and
them. The one with the white horses73 is the same to me as Ashvatthama. What is the need to speak a lot? Where
there is dharma, victory is there.’ O great king! The inﬁnitely energetic Drona spoke in this way.
‘“Then Vidura, devoted to the truth and knowledgeable about dharma, glanced towards his father’s74 face and
spoke these words. ‘O Devavrata! Listen to the words that I am going to speak. This lineage of the Kouravas was
destroyed75 and you made it rise up again. Therefore, when I am lamenting, do not ignore my words. Who is the
one named Duryodhana, born in this lineage? He is a deﬁler of the lineage. He is overcome by greed and you are
following his inclination. He does not behave like an arya. He is ungrateful. He has lost his senses because of
avarice. His father can see dharma and artha, but he acts contrary to his instructions. The Kurus will be destroyed
because of Duryodhana’s deeds. O great king! Act so that the destruction does not occur. O immensely radiant
one! Earlier, you created me and Dhritarashtra, like a painter fashions a painting. Do not destroy us now. O
mighty-armed one! Do not look at this destruction of the lineage and ignore it, like Prajapati, who creates beings in
order to destroy them. With the destruction imminent, if your intelligence has failed you, leave for the forest, with
me and Dhritarashtra. Or swiftly bind down the wicked and stupid son of Dhritarashtra, who is extremely evil in
his intelligence. Let the kingdom now be protected by the Pandavas. O tiger among kings! Show your favours. A
great destruction of the Pandavas, the Kurus and the inﬁnitely energetic kings can be seen.’ Having spoken in this
way, Vidura, distressed in his mind, stopped. He was immersed in his thoughts and sighed repeatedly. Then King
Subala’s daughter,76 scared for the lineage, angrily spoke words full of dharma and artha to her evil-minded and
violent son Duryodhana, while all the kings looked on. ‘Let the kings who have entered the king’s assembly hall,
the brahmarshis and the courtiers listen while I speak about your crimes and those of your evil advisers and followers. This kingdom of the Kurus is ruled through a continuous process of succession. That is the dharma of the lineage, as it has come down to us. With your wicked intelligence and violent deeds, you wish to cause injury to the
kingdom of the Kurus. The intelligent Dhritarashtra is established in the kingdom, with his younger brother, the
far-sighted Vidura. O Duryodhana! Because of your delusion and desiring to be king, how can you cross both of
them? As long as Bhishma is there, the king and the greatly fortunate Kshatta are subservient to him. Since he77
knows about dharma, the great-souled son of the river does not desire to be a king of men. The kingdom inalienably belonged to Pandu. His sons should now rule, and no one else. This entire kingdom belongs to the Pandavas,
because it has descended to them from their ancestors and they will leave it to their sons and grandsons. The intelligent Devavrata is devoted to the truth. He is great-souled and is foremost among the Kurus. We must accept
everything that he has said about dharma. We must act according to our own dharma. Let us follow the one whose
vow is great.78 Let the king and Vidura speak. Let us act in accordance with what our well-wishers say. For a very
long time, let us hold dharma up in front. Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma, should rule. He has rightfully obtained
the kingdom of the Kurus. This has been instructed by King Dhritarashtra and Shantanu’s son has said that this is
the most important.’”’
810(147)

‘Vasudeva said, “O lord of men! When Gandhari had spoken thus, Dhritarashtra, lord of men, spoke to Duryodhana in the midst of the kings. ‘O Duryodhana! O son! O fortunate one! Listen to what I am going to tell you and
act accordingly, if you wish to respect your father. Soma Prajapati79 extended the lineage of the Kurus at the beginning. Nahusha’s son, Yayati, was sixth in the line from Soma. He had ﬁve sons, all supreme among rajarshis. The
illustrious and immensely energetic Yadu was the eldest. Puru was younger than him and he extended our lineage.
He was born from Sharmishtha, the daughter of Vrishaparva. O foremost among the Bharatas! Yadu was the son of
Devayani and was the maternal grandson of the inﬁnitely energetic Kavya Shukra.80 The ancestor of the Yadavas81
was powerful and was honoured for his valour. But because he was full of insolence and extremely evil-minded, he

insulted the kshatriyas.82 Because he was deluded by his strength and insolence, he did not follow the instructions
of his father. The unvanquished one insulted his father and brothers. Yadu was the strongest one in the four corners
of the earth. Having subjugated all the kings, he lived in Nagasahrya.83 His father, Nahusha’s son, Yayati, was enraged. O Gandhari’s son! He cursed him and threw him out of the kingdom. Yayati also angrily cursed his other
sons, the brothers who were insolent because of their strength. The best of kings then instated his youngest son,
Puru, in the kingdom and he remained devoted to him.84 Thus, if he is insolent, an eldest son can be deprived of
the kingdom. If he serves his seniors, even a youngest one can obtain the kingdom. My father’s grandfather, Pratipa, knew everything about dharma. He was a lord of the earth who was famous in the three worlds. That lion
among kings ruled the kingdom in accordance with dharma. Three sons were born to him. They were famous and
were like the gods in form. Devapi was the eldest and Bahlika came next. O son! The intelligent Shantanu, my
grandfather, was the third. Devapi was supreme among kings and greatly energetic. He was devoted to dharma,
truthful and served his father. He was revered by the citizens of the town and the country. He was honoured by the
virtuous. He was loved by everyone, the young and the aged. He was generous and devoted to the truth. He was
engaged in the welfare of all beings. He obeyed the instructions of his father and also those of the brahmanas. He
was the beloved brother of Bahlika and the great-souled Shantanu. Those great-souled ones were extremely fraternal towards each other. However, Devapi possessed a disease of the skin. In due course of time, the aged and best
of kings made arrangements for a consecration, in accordance with the sacred texts. The illustrious one performed
all the auspicious rites. But all the brahmanas and the elders, together with the citizens of the town and the country,
restrained him from consecrating Devapi. When the king heard about the prevention of the instatement, his voice
choked with tears. The king sorrowed over his son. He85 was generous, learned about dharma and devoted to the
truth. He was loved by the subjects. However, he was tainted by a disease of the skin. The gods do not approve of
a lord of the earth who is inferior in his limbs. Because of this, that best among kings was restrained by those bulls
among brahmanas. On seeing that he86 was distressed and was sorrowing over his son, and died because of this,
Devapi resorted to the forest. Bahlika also gave up the kingdom and went to his maternal uncle’s lineage. He abandoned his father and brothers and obtained another prosperous city instead. O king! On Bahlika’s instructions, after
his father had died, Shantanu, famous in the world, became the king and ruled the kingdom. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! In the same way, I was the eldest, but was deﬁcient in a limb.87 After a great deal of reﬂection, the
intelligent Pandu barred me from the kingdom. Though he was younger to me, Pandu obtained the kingdom as a
king. O destroyer of enemies! On his death, the kingdom belongs to his sons. If I could not obtain the kingdom,
how can you desire the kingdom? This kingdom rightfully belongs to the great-souled Prince Yudhishthira. With
his great qualities, he will be the protector of the lineage of the Kouravas. He is truthful. He is never distracted. He
abides by the sacred texts. He is loved by his friends and is virtuous. He is loved by the subjects and is kind towards his well-wishers. He has mastered his senses and is the protector of righteous ones. Forgiveness, patience,
control, uprightness, truthfulness to vows, learning, single-mindedness, compassion towards beings and control—
Yudhishthira has all these qualities of a king. You are not the son of a king and you are not an arya in your conduct.
You are always greedy and evil-minded towards your friends. You are insolent. How can you hope to seize a kingdom that, according to the line of succession, belongs to another? Devoid of your delusion, give them half of the
kingdom, with the vehicles and the attendants. O Indra among men! The remainder will be enough for you to obtain a living, together with your younger brothers.’”’
811(148)

‘Vasudeva said, “Having been thus addressed by Bhishma, Drona, Vidura, Gandhari and Dhritarashtra, the evil one
was not brought to his senses. Not understanding, he angrily arose, his eyes red with rage. Wishing to give up their
lives, the kings rushed after him. The king88 repeatedly instructed the kings, who were bereft of their senses. ‘Go
to Kurukshetra. It is Pushya today.’89 Driven by destiny, having made Bhishma the general, together with their soldiers, those lords of the earth then cheerfully left. Those lords of the earth have assembled eleven akshouhinis of
soldiers. Bhishma is at the forefront, with a palm tree on his standard.
‘“O lord of the earth! Therefore, do what is appropriate under the circumstances. O king! O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! I have repeated the words that were spoken in my presence by Bhishma, Drona, Vidura, Gandhari

and Dhritarashtra in the assembly of the Kurus. O king! Hoping for fraternity, I ﬁrst used conciliation, to prevent
dissension in the lineage of the Kurus and ensure the welfare of the subjects. When I saw that peace was not acceptable, I resorted to alienation and recounted your deeds, divine and human. When I saw that Suyodhana ignored
my words of conciliation, I assembled all the kings and tried to sow seeds of dissension. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! O lord! I showed them extraordinary and terrible manifestations and superhuman exploits. I censured the kings. I denigrated Suyodhana. I repeatedly tried to frighten Radheya and Soubala. I repeatedly recounted the meanness of the sons of Dhritarashtra. Through eloquence and counsel, I tried to create disunity among the
kings. Using conciliation again, I spoke to them about gifts, so that a division could be created in the lineage of the
Kurus and I could be successful in my objective. I said, ‘The children, all the Pandavas, will abandon their pride
and seek refuge with Dhritarashtra, Bhishma and Vidura. Let them give the kingdom to you and let them not remain as lords. Let it be as the king,90 Gangeya and Vidura have said. Let the entire kingdom be yours, only give up
ﬁve villages. O supreme among kings! Surely your father can sustain them.’ Having been spoken to in this way,
the evil-minded one was not ready to change his views. For that wicked one, I can see no other means but the
fourth one of chastisement.91 Those lords of the earth have marched out to Kurukshetra, to their perdition. I have
told you everything that occurred in the assembly of the Kurus. O Pandava! They will not give up the kingdom
without a war. All of them are headed for destruction and are confronting death.”’

Section Fifty-Six
Abhiniryana Parva
This section has 169 shlokas and four chapters.
Chapter 812(149): 84 shlokas
Chapter 813(150): 27 shlokas
Chapter 814(151): 27 shlokas
Chapter 815(152): 31 shlokas
Abhiniryana means the act of marching out. The two sides march out to Kurukshetra.
812(149)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Dharmaraja Yudhishthira heard these words of Janardana. In Keshava’s presence, the one
with dharma in his soul then spoke to his brothers. “You have heard what transpired in the assembly hall, in the assembly of the Kurus. You have also thought about everything that Keshava has said. O supreme among men!
Therefore, divide my soldiers now. Seven akshouhinis have assembled together for victory. Listen to the names of
seven generals when I recount their names—Drupada, Virata, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Satyaki, Chekitana and
the valorous Bhimasena. All these generals are warriors who are ready to lay down their lives. All of them are
learned in the Vedas and are brave. All of them possess good conduct and are devoted to their vows. All of them
are humble and know about policy. They are skilled in the art of war. They are skilled in the use of arrows and are
capable of ﬁghting with all weapons. One who will lead all seven armies must know about army formations. He
must be able to withstand Bhishma, who is like a ﬁre with ﬂames as arrows, on the ﬁeld of battle. O Sahadeva! O
descendant of the Kuru lineage! O tiger among men! You tell me ﬁrst. Who is capable of being our general?”
‘Sahadeva replied, “He has been with us in our times of unhappiness. He is a valiant king. He is conversant with
dharma and resorts to it. We resorted to him to obtain our share. Powerful Matsya Virata is skilled in the use of
weapons and is unassailable in battle. He can withstand Bhishma and those maharathas in the ﬁeld of battle.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘When Sahadeva, eloquent in the use of words, had spoken these words, Nakula followed
with these words. “He stands out in age, learning, fortitude, birth in a noble lineage, humility and greatness of family. He is illustrious and skilled in the use of all weapons. He learnt the use of weapons from Bharadvaja.1 He is
unassailable and is devoted to the truth. He has always rivalled Drona and the immensely strong Bhishma. He is a
general who prides himself on being foremost in the arrays of kings. He is surrounded by sons and grandsons, like
a tree with one hundred branches. In anger, together with his wife, this lord of the earth performed terrible austerities for Drona’s destruction. He is brave and adorns any assembly. That bull among kings has always supported us
like a father. Our father-in-law Drupada should be at the head of our army. He will be able to withstand both
Bhishma and Drona. That is my view. O king! This king knows about divine weapons and he is a friend of Angiras.”2
‘When Madri’s two sons had spoken, Vasava’s son Savyasachi, the descendant of the Kuru lineage, who was
like Vasava himself, spoke these words. “He arose through the power of austerities and by satisfying the rishi.3 He
is immensely strong and is a divine person. He is like the ﬁre in his complexion. He bore a bow and a sword. He
was clad in armour. The spirited one was ascended on a chariot that was yoked to celestial horses. He arose from

the bed of ﬁre. The valiant one’s chariot roared like a gigantic cloud. The brave one is capable of withstanding a
lion and he is like a lion in his valour. He has the sinews of a lion. He is mighty-armed. He has the chest of a lion.
He is immensely strong. The brave one roars like a lion. He has the shoulders of a lion. He is immensely radiant.
He has excellent brows. He has excellent teeth. He has an excellent chin. He has excellent arms. He has an excellent face and he is not thin. He has excellent clavicles. He has extremely large eyes. He has excellent feet. He has
an excellent stance. Like a rutting elephant, he cannot be penetrated by any weapon. He has been born for Drona’s
destruction. He is truthful and a master of his senses. I think that Dhrishtadyumna can withstand Bhishma’s
weapons, which are like the lightning in their touch and are like serpents with ﬂaming jaws. Like the ﬁre, they descend with the force of Yama’s messengers. They are like the terrible vajra in their impact and Rama4 himself confronted them once in battle. I do not see a man who can withstand the one with the great vow,5 with the exception
of Dhrishtadyumna. O king! That is my view. He is swift in the use of his hands. He is a colourful warrior. It is my
view that he should be our general. He is handsome and wears impenetrable armour. He is like an elephant that
leads the herd.”
‘Bhima said, “Shikhandi, Drupada’s son, has been born to kill him.6 O Indra among kings! This is what the assembled Siddhas and rishis said. When he uses divine weapons in the midst of battle, men gaze at his form, as if he
is the great-souled Rama.7 O king! When there is a ﬁght, I do not see anyone who can pierce Shikhandi with a
weapon in battle, when he is armoured and is astride his chariot. O king! In a duel, no one other than Shikhandi
can withstand Bhishma, who is great in his vows. I think that this brave one should be our general.”
‘Yudhishthira said, “O sons!8 The substance and lack of substance of everything in the universe9 and the
strengths and weaknesses of everything, past and future, are known to Keshava, who has dharma in his soul. Whoever Dasharha Krishna names should be our general, regardless of whether he is skilled in the use of weapons or
not, regardless of whether he is aged or old. O sons!10 He is the root, whether it is our victory, or our disaster. Our
lives, our kingdom, our successes, our failures, our happiness and our unhappiness are vested in him. He is the one
who has created and he is the one who has placed.11 Our success is based on him. Whoever is named by Dasharha
Krishna should be the general of our army. Let the one who is foremost among speakers speak, because the night is
passing. Having appointed a general under Krishna’s instructions, when the rest of the night has passed, we will
march out to the ﬁeld of battle, anointing our weapons with fragrances12 and performing auspicious ceremonies.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Having heard Dharmaraja’s intelligent words, Pundarikaksha glanced towards Dhananjaya and said, “O great king! It is also my opinion that the powerful and valiant warriors who have been named as
possible generals of the army are all capable and can crush the enemy. In a great war, they will generate fear in Indra, not to speak of the avaricious sons of Dhritarashtra, evil in their intelligence. O mighty-armed one! O destroyer of enemies! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! To please you, I have made great efforts to bring about peace.
We have paid off our debt to dharma and we can’t be blamed by those who wish to do that. That childish son of
Dhritarashtra thinks himself to be wise and thinks that he has become successful because of his strength. He thinks
that we are weak. It is best to arrange your army. I think that they can only be persuaded through death. Dhritarashtra’s sons will not be capable of standing up when they see Dhananjaya, an enraged Bhimasena, the twins who are
like Yama and the intolerant Dhrishtadyumna, seconded by Yuyudhana, Abhimanyu, Droupadi’s sons, Virata, Drupada, the leaders of the akshouhinis and the Indras among men who are ﬁrm in their valour. Our armies have substance. They are invincible. They are unassailable. There is no doubt that we kill the forces of Dhritarashtra’s son
in battle.” When Krishna had spoken in this way, those best of men were delighted in their hearts and a great roar
arose from them, “Get it yoked!” The soldiers swiftly rushed around.
‘There were the sounds of horses and elephants and the roar of wheels in every direction. There was the tumultuous sound of conch shells and drums in every direction. When the Pandavas marched out with their soldiers on
every side, the unassailable army looked like the overﬂowing Ganga. Bhimasena and Madri’s armoured sons were
at the front of the army. Subhadra’s son, Droupadi’s sons, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, the Prabhadrakas and the
Panchalas followed Bhimasena. The sound that arose was like the ocean at the time of the full moon. The delighted
soldiers roared as they proceeded and seemed to touch the heaven. The armed forces were happy and were capable
of penetrating the ranks of the enemy. Kunti’s son, Yudhishthira, advanced in their midst. Wagons, carts for vending, brothel houses, caravans, treasure chests, war machines, armouries, physicians, doctors, the invalids in the

army and the thin and weak troops and the attendants were gathered together by the king and advanced. The truthful Panchali Droupadi remained in Upaplavya with the women, surrounded by servant maids and servants. Pandu’s
sons advanced after leaving stationary and mobile troops behind to guard their base camp. They also left large defensive columns. O king! They proceeded while distributing cows and gold to the brahmanas who gathered around
and praised them, as they rode on chariots decorated with gems. The Kekayas, Dhrishtaketu, the lordly son of the
king of Kashi, Shreniman, Vasudana and the unvanquished Shikhandi were cheerful and satisﬁed. They were armoured and held weapons. They were adorned in ornaments. All of them surrounded and followed King Yudhishthira. Virata, Yajnasena of Somaka,13 Sudharma, Kuntibhoja, Dhrishtadyumna’s sons, forty thousand chariots,
ﬁve times that number of horses, ten times that number of infantry and sixty thousand riders were at the back.
Anadhrishti, Chekitana, the king of Chedi and Satyaki—all these surrounded Vasudeva and Dhananjaya and
marched. They reached Kurukshetra, armed and arrayed in battle formations. The Pandavas seemed to be like roaring bulls. On entering Kurukshetra, those destroyers of enemies blew on their conch shells. In similar fashion, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya also sounded their conch shells. When they heard the resounding roar of Panchajanya,14
which was like the roar of thunder, all the soldiers rejoiced. The sound of conch shells and drums mingled with the
leonine roars of those swift ones and echoed on earth, in the sky and among the oceans.
‘There was a spot that was plain and pleasant, with plenty of fodder and fuel. King Yudhishthira made the army
set up camp there, avoiding cremation grounds, sanctuaries of gods, hermitages of rishis and places of pilgrimage.
This was an agreeable region, without any salinity. It was pure and auspicious. Kunti’s son, Yudhishthira, the lord
of the earth, made arrangements for a camp there. When the exhausted mounts had rested, he cheerfully advanced
again, surrounded by hundreds and thousands of kings. Wandering around in every direction, Partha and Keshava
drove away hundreds of platoons from the army of Dhritarashtra’s son. Parshata Dhrishtadyumna and the powerful
charioteer Yuyudhana Satyaki measured out the camp.15 This reached up to the sacred river Hiranvati in Kurukshetra. It was easy to cross there. The water was pure and was free from stones and mud. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Keshava had a moat dug up there. For the sake of protection, he instructed that a platoon of troops
should be posted there. In the appropriate way, Keshava also instructed that hundreds and thousands of camps
should be erected for the other lords among men, along the lines of those for the great-souled Pandavas. They had
an abundance of water and kindling there and they were unassailable. They were stocked with items of consumption, food, grain and drink. There were separate and expensive camps for those kings. O Indra among kings! They
looked like vimanas that had descended on the surface of the earth. Hundreds of wise artisans, who were paid
wages, were employed there and there were extremely skilled physicians, with every kind of requirement. King
Yudhishthira ensured that strings of bows, bows, armour, weapons, honey, clariﬁed butter, mountainous heaps of
resin16 and sand, plenty of water and fodder, chaff and charcoal were made available to every camp. There were
giant machines used in war, iron arrows, javelins, swords, battle axes, bows and armour to be worn by the men on
their chests. There were elephants clad in armour, with spikes attached to them. They looked like mountains and
each was capable of ﬁghting a hundred thousand warriors. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On learning that
the Pandavas had set up their camp there, their friends arrived at that spot, with their soldiers and their mounts.
They had observed brahmacharya. They had drunk soma. They had given away large quantities of dakshina. Those
lords of the earth now assembled for the victory of the sons of Pandu.’
813(150)

Janamejaya said, ‘Yudhishthira advanced with his soldiers, with a desire to ﬁght and, protected by Vasudeva, set up
camp in Kurukshetra. He was followed by Virata and Drupada with their sons, and surrounded by hundreds of
kings, like the great Indra, protected by maharatha Adityas. On hearing this, what did King Duryodhana do? O one
rich in austerities! I wish to hear this in detail. On that terrible occasion, what transpired in Kurujangala? Even the
army of the gods would have trembled to ﬁght those who gathered there—the Pandavas, Vasudeva, Virata, Drupada, Dhrishtadyumna from Panchala, maharatha Shikhandi and valorous Yuyudhana, unassailable even to the gods.
O one rich in austerities! I wish to hear all this in detail, about what the Kurus and the Pandavas did.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘When Dasharha had left, King Duryodhana spoke to Karna, Duhshasana and Shakuni.
“Adhokshaja17 was unsuccessful and has returned to the Parthas. There is no doubt that he will speak to them in

anger. Vasudeva desires war between the Pandavas and me. Bhima and Arjuna will adhere to his desires. Ajatashatru will follow Bhima and Arjuna. I have acted badly towards him and his brothers in the past. Virata and Drupada
have had an enmity towards me. Those two leaders of armies will also follow Vasudeva. There will be a terrible
war that will make the body hair stand up. Therefore, with great attention, let us make all the arrangements for war.
Let the lords of the earth set up hundreds and thousands of camps in Kurukshetra. They should be spacious and
spaced so that the enemy cannot attack them. Water and kindling should be available nearby. The roads should be
such that supplies can be carried. There must be stores of treasure. Let them be stocked with many kinds of
weapons and adorned with ﬂags and banners. Let the roads emerging from the city be levelled. Let an announcement be made that we will march out tomorrow.” They promised that they would act in that way and followed the
instructions on the next day. The great-souled ones were delighted at the prospect of destroying the lords of the
earth.18 On hearing the king’s instructions, all the kings were enraged and arose from their expensive seats. They
slowly touched their arms, which were like clubs and had golden armlets and were smeared with sandalwood and
aloe. With hands like lotuses, they donned their headdresses and put on their lower and upper garments and ornaments. The foremost among charioteers tended to the chariots, those skilled in horses to the horses. Those who
were skilled about elephants got the elephants ready. All of them prepared large quantities of colourful and golden
armour and many different weapons. The foot soldiers took up many weapons and covered their bodies with
colourful and golden armour. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The city of Dhritarashtra’s son was festive. It
was full of cheerful and agitated men. The crowd of men looked like an ocean. The chariots, elephants and horses
were like ﬁsh. There was the roar of conch shells and drums. The stores of treasure were like jewels. The colourful
ornaments were like waves. The spotless weapons were like foam. The palaces were like a garland of mountains.
The roads and shops were like giant lakes. O king! That great ocean of the king of the Kurus was like the ocean,
with the warriors looking like a rising moon.’
814(151)

Vaishampayana said, ‘On remembering Vasudeva’s words, Yudhishthira again asked Varshneya, “How did the
wicked one speak? O Achyuta! At the present moment, what is the best course of action for us? How should we
behave so that we do not stray from our own dharma? O Vasudeva! You know the intentions of Duryodhana, Karna, Shakuni Soubala and also that of my brothers and me. You have heard the words of both Vidura and Bhishma
and you have heard everything that Kunti, great in her wisdom, wisely spoke. Reﬂect on all this again. O mightyarmed one! Reﬂect on all this and tell us unhesitatingly about our capacity.” On hearing these words of Dharmaraja, in conformity with dharma and artha, Krishna spoke these words, in a voice that rumbled like a cloud or a
drum. “I spoke beneﬁcial words in conformity with dharma and artha. But for the Kouravya, deceit is wisdom and
he did not listen. The one with the evil mind did not listen to Bhishma or Vidura, or to what I said. He ignored
everything. He does not desire dharma. He does not desire fame. The evil-minded one resorts to Karna and thinks
that he has won everything. Suyodhana even gave instructions for my capture. But the evil-souled one with a
wicked resolution failed to accomplish his wishes. Bhishma and Drona did not speak what they should have. O one
without decay! With the exception of Vidura, all of them follow him. Shakuni Soubala, Karna and Duhshasana are
stupid and told the foolish one things about you that should not be said. What is the point of repeating everything
that the Kouravas said? In brief, the evil-souled one treats you in a way that you do not deserve. In all the kings
who constitute your army is there as much evil and as much lack of good as there is in him? We should not completely forsake our interests and seek peace with the Kouravas. Therefore, war will follow.” O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! On hearing Vasudeva’s words, all the kings were silent and looked towards the king’s face. Yudhishthira understood the intentions of the lords of the earth. With Bhima, Arjuna and the twins, he gave the instructions that the yoking should be done.
‘When the instructions for yoking were given, the soldiers were delighted. A joyous sound was heard in the
army of the Pandavas. On seeing that those who should not be killed would be killed, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira
sighed and told Bhimasena and Vijaya,19 “I went to the forest and endured hardships to avoid an extreme calamity.
But in spite of our efforts, it is upon us. Despite our making efforts, it is almost as if we had made no efforts. We
have been unsuccessful in our attempts and great Kali20 is upon us. How will we ﬁght with those who should not

be killed and accomplish our task? How will we kill our preceptors and elders? That cannot be victory.” On hearing the words of Dharmaraja, Savyasachi, the scorcher of enemies, repeated to him the words that Vasudeva had
spoken. “Devaki’s son has conveyed the words of Kunti and Vidura. O king! You have understood them in their
entirety. It is my ﬁrm view that they will not suggest anything that is adharma. O Kounteya! Therefore, we should
not turn back without ﬁghting.” Vasudeva heard Savyasachi’s words. He smiled and told Partha, “It is just as you
have said.” O great king! The Pandavyas then ﬁrmly made up their minds about the war. With their soldiers, they
passed the night in comfort.’
815(152)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When night had passed, King Duryodhana deployed
his eleven akshouhinis. The lord of the earth divided all his men, elephants, chariots and horses into different battalions, depending on whether they were superior, average or inferior. There were axles,21 quivers, fenders,22
javelins, holders for arrows,23 spears, cases for arrows,24 assault poles,25 standards, ﬂags, javelins, many kinds of
ropes, nooses, carpets, kachagrahavikshepas,26 oil, molasses, sands, pots ﬁlled with poisonous snakes, resin, dirt,
wooden spikes with bells, coverlets of tiger skins, coverlets of leopard skins, syringes,27 horns, missiles,28 different
kinds of weapons, axes, spades, sesame oil, linseed oil and butter. With all these, the colourful form of the army
blazed like ﬁre. There were warriors clad in armour, ﬁrm in their knowledge of weapons. There were those who
were born in noble lineages and knew about horses. They were engaged as charioteers. The chariots were stocked
with herbs and minerals and were decorated with ﬂags and banners. Each chariot was yoked to four horses and
each was stocked with weapons and hundreds of bows. The horses were happy. One charioteer was in charge of
the two horses in front, and another for the two horses at the side. They were foremost among charioteers and each
charioteer knew about horses. Each was protected by a city and was incapable of being attacked by the enemy.
There were thousands of chariots with seats and golden garlands. Like the chariots, the elephants were decorated
and stocked with minerals. There were seven men on each elephant, making it look like a mountain full of jewels.
O king! There were two who held goads.29 There were two who were excellent archers. There were two who were
supreme in ﬁghting with swords. One held a spear and the ﬂag. O king! Kouravya’s entire army was full of thousands of crazy elephants and all of them were stocked with weapons and stores of treasure. There were tens of
thousands of horses clad in colourful armour. They bore ornaments and ﬂags. They were trained well and controlled well. Each was harnessed in gold. There were hundreds and thousands of them, all controlled by the riders.
There were the foot soldiers, with many different kinds of forms and nature. They had different kinds of armour
and weapons. Those men were adorned with golden garlands.
‘There were ten elephants for every chariot. There were ten horses for every elephant. There were ten foot soldiers for every horse, guarding its legs in every direction. For every chariot, ﬁfty elephants were kept in reserve.
For every elephant, there were one hundred horses. For every horse, there were seven men. A sena30 consisted of
ﬁve hundred elephants and the same number of chariots. Ten senas constituted a pritana and ten pritanas constituted a vahini. However, vahini, pritana, sena, dhvajini, sadini, chamu, akshouhini and varuthini are also used to
mean the same thing. In this way, the battle formations of the intelligent Kourava numbered eleven akshouhinis,
while the army of the Pandavas had seven akshouhinis. For men, ﬁve times ﬁfty is said to constitute a patti. Three
pattis constitute a senamukha, which is also known as a gulma. Ten gulmas make up a gana and there were tens of
thousands of ganas in Duryodhana’s army. These were armed ones who were eager to ﬁght. The mighty-armed
King Duryodhana examined many intelligent warriors and appointed those men as his senapatis.31 In proper form
and with honours, the best of men who were in charge of his separate akshouhinis were brought before him. These
kings were consecrated—Kripa, Drona, Shalya, maharatha Saindhava,32 Sudakshina from Kamboja, Kritavarma,
Drona’s son, Karna, Bhurishrava, Shakuni Soubala and maharatha Bahlika. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
From one day to another, and at different times of the day, he himself met them and gave them different kinds of
instructions. All of them were instructed in this way. They, and the soldiers who followed them, were happy and
wished to please the king and do what the king desired.’

Section Fifty-Seven
Bhishma-Abhishechana Parva
This section has 122 shlokas and four chapters.
Chapter 816(153): 35 shlokas
Chapter 817(154): 34 shlokas
Chapter 818(155): 38 shlokas
Chapter 819(156): 15 shlokas
Abhishechana means the act of consecration, typically with sprinkling of water. This section is so named because it is about Bhishma being consecrated as the commander-in-chief on the Kourava side.
816(153)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Dhritarashtra’s son joined his hands in salutation and spoke these words to Shantanu’s son,
Bhishma, accompanied by all the lords of the earth. “When there is a war, without a general, even a large army is
destroyed like a nest of ants. The views of two leaders are rarely identical and they seek to rival each other in valour and fame. O immensely wise one! It is said that all the brahmanas once assembled together. They raised kusha
grass as ﬂags and attacked the inﬁnitely energetic Haihayas. O grandfather! They were followed by the vaishyas
and the shudras. The three varnas were on one side. On the other side, there were the bulls among the kshatriyas.
In that war, the three varnas were repulsed again and again. Though the kshatriyas were alone, they triumphed over
that giant army. O grandfather! The supreme among brahmanas asked the kshatriyas about this and the ones who
knew about dharma told them about the precise reason. ‘In war, we listen to a single one who is immensely intelligent. All of you separately follow your own inclinations.’ Then the brahmanas made a single brahmana their general. He was brave and skilled in policy and they defeated the kshatriyas. Those who choose a single skilled and
brave one, untainted and devoted to their welfare, as their general are victorious over the enemies in battle. You are
the equal of Ushanas.1 You have always been my well-wisher. You cannot be led astray. You are established in
dharma. Become our general. You are like a sun to those who shine. You are like a moon to the herbs. You are like
Kubera to the yakshas. You are like Vasava to the Maruts. You are like Meru to the mountains. You are like Suparna2 to the birds. You are like Kumara3 to the demons.4 You are like the bearer of oblations5 to the Vasus. When we
are protected by you, like the residents of heaven are by Shakra, we will certainly be invincible, even to the thirty
gods. You march in front of us, like the son of the ﬁre6 leads the gods. We will follow you, like cows follow a
bull.”
‘Bhishma replied, “O mighty-armed one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is exactly as you say. However, you and the Pandavas are equal before me. O lord of men! I must speak about their welfare also. However, because I have pledged to do so, I must ﬁght in your cause. I do not see any other warrior on earth who is my equal,
with the exception of that tiger among men, Kunti’s son, Dhananjaya. He is mighty-armed. He knows all the divine
weapons. However, Pandava will never ﬁght me openly in the war. In an instant, through the strength of my
weapons, I can make this entire universe destitute of men, gods, asuras and rakshasas. O lord of men! But Pandu’s
sons cannot be slain by me. Therefore, I will always slay ten thousand warriors every day. O descendant of the
Kuru lineage! Unless they kill me ﬁrst in an encounter, in this way, I will bring about their downfall. O king! There

is one condition under which I will willingly become your general, not otherwise. You should hear about this. O
lord of the earth! Let Karna or me ﬁght ﬁrst. This son of a suta always seeks to rival me in battle.”
‘Karna said, “O king! As long as Gangeya7 is alive, I will never ﬁght. I will ﬁght with the one who wields the
Gandiva only after Bhishma has been killed.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘In the prescribed way, Dhritarashtra’s son then consecrated Bhishma, the giver of large
quantities of dakshina, as the general and he blazed forth. On the king’s instructions, drums and conch shells were
sounded in hundreds and thousands. Eager men played musical instruments. There were many types of roars like
lions and the noise of mounts. A shower of blood and mud descended from the sky. There were storms and the
earth trembled. There was the sound of elephants trumpeting. All this made the minds of all the warriors downcast.
There were invisible voices. Meteors streaked through the sky. Jackals uttered fearful howls. The directions
seemed to blaze. O king! When the king consecrated Gangeya as the general, there were terrible portents in hundreds. After consecrating Bhishma, the destroyer of enemy forces, as the general, he8 made the foremost of brahmanas recite and gave them a lot of cattle and gold. Strengthened by their benedictions and surrounded by his soldiers, he placed the son of the water in the forefront and marched out with his brothers. With a large army, he went
to Kurukshetra. With Karna, Kourava surveyed Kurushetra. O lord of men! He then set up camp in a level spot.
This region was pleasant and without salinity. There was plenty of fodder and kindling. The camp was as radiant as
Hastinapura itself.’
817(154)

Janamejaya said, ‘Bhishma, great in soul and son of the water, was supreme among those who wielded weapons.
He was the grandfather of the Bharatas and was like a standard for the entire earth. He was Brihaspati’s equal in
intelligence. He was the earth’s equal in forgiveness. He was the ocean’s equal in gravity. He was the equal of the
Himalayas in steadfastness. He was like a Prajapati in generosity. He was like the sun in energy. In destroying enemies with a shower of arrows, he was like the great Indra. He was consecrated in that terrible sacriﬁce of war,
which made the body hair stand up, for many nights. On hearing this, what did mighty-armed King Yudhishthira,
supreme among all wielders of weapons, say? What did Bhimasena, Arjuna and Krishna say?’
Vaishampayana replied, ‘Yudhishthira was immensely intelligent and was skilled about dharma and artha to be
followed in times of calamities. He summoned all his brothers and Satvata Vasudeva. The foremost among speakers spoke these comforting words. “Survey the army. Be attentive and armoured. Our ﬁrst battle will be with the
grandfather. Therefore, look for seven leaders for the army.”9
‘Vasudeva said, “O bull among the Bharata lineage! Now that the time has come, you have spoken what should
be said. The words that you have spoken are appropriate. O mighty-armed one! What you have proposed as the
next step appeals to me. Let us choose seven leaders for your army and consecrate them.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Then Yudhishthira summoned Drupada, Virata, the bull among the Shinis,10 Dhrishtadyumna of Panchala, King Dhrishtaketu, Shikhandi of Panchala and Sahadeva of Magadha. These seven brave
and great archers were delighted at the prospect of war. In the appropriate fashion, he consecrated them as the leaders of his army and Dhrishtadyumna as the overall general. He11 arose from the ﬁre for Drona’s destruction. When
all those great-souled ones were assembled together, Gudakesha Dhananjaya was made the lord of the generals.
Sankarshana’s12 younger brother, the handsome and immensely intelligent Janardana, was made Arjuna’s guide
and the controller of his horses.
‘On seeing that a great battle was imminent, the wielder of the plough13 entered King Pandava’s residence, in
the company of Akrura and the others, Gada, Samba, Ulmuka and so on, with Rukmini’s son14 and Akrura’s son
led by Charudeshna. The mighty-armed one was protected by the foremost among the Vrishnis, who arrived like
tigers intoxicated with their strength, like the Maruts protect Vasava. He was dressed in a blue silk garment and he
was like the summit of Mount Kailasa. The illustrious one’s gait was like that of a lion. His eyes were red with intoxication. On seeing him, Dharmaraja and the immensely radiant Keshava arose and so did Partha Vrikodara, the
performer of terrible deeds, the wielder of the Gandiva, and all the other kings who were present there. All of them
approached and worshipped the one who had the plough as a weapon. With Vasudeva leading the way, King Pan-

dava grasped him by the hand and all of them welcomed him. The one with the plough as a weapon saluted Virata,
Drupada and the elders. The destroyer of enemies then sat down with Yudhishthira.
‘Rohini’s son15 glanced at Vasudeva. When all the kings were seated around him, he said, “There will be an extremely fearful and terrible slaughter of men. I think that this is certainly because of destiny and is incapable of being averted. When you emerge from the battle with your well-wishers, I hope that I will see you again, without disease and without injuries on your bodies. There is no doubt that all the assembled kshatriya kings have been
cooked by fate. There will be a great slaughter, with ﬂesh, blood and mud. I repeatedly spoke to Vasudeva in private. ‘O Madhusudana! Behave impartially towards your relatives. The Pandavas and King Duryodhana are the
same to us. Therefore, if he wishes, you should help him again and again.’ But because of you, Madhusudana did
not act in accordance with my words. He has looked towards Dhananjaya and been devoted to you in every sentiment. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is my view that the victory of the Pandavas is certain, because that is
what Vasudeva has decided. Without Krishna, I have no interest in looking at this world. Therefore, I have followed whatever Keshava desires. But both these brave ones, Bhima and King Duryodhana, skilled in ﬁghting with
clubs, are my students and are equal in my affection. Therefore, I will visit the sacred tirthas along the Sarasvati. I
cannot remain indifferent to the destruction of the Kouravas.” Having spoken this, the mighty-armed one took his
leave of the Pandavas. Rama left to visit the tirthas, asking Madhusudana to return.’
818(155)

Vaishampayana said, ‘At that time, the great-souled King Bhishmaka Hiranyalomna, who was a friend of Indra
himself, arrived. He was the immensely famous lord of the Bhojas and Ahritis and was the lord of the southern region.16 His son was famous in the world as Rukmi. The lion of the kimpurushas lived on Gandhamadana and he
became his student and learnt the entire science of war, with its four branches, from him.17 The mighty-armed one
obtained the great Indra’s bow, which was divine and indestructible, and equal to Gandiva and Sharnga18 in energy. Those who reside in heaven possess three divine bows—Varuna’s Gandiva, the great Indra’s bow Vijaya and
Vishnu’s Sharnga, which is said to be a celestial bow that is full of energy. Krishna wields it and strikes terror in
the soldiers of enemies. The son of the chastiser of Paka19 obtained Gandiva from the ﬁre god in Khandava. The
immensely energetic Rukmi obtained Vijaya from Druma. Hrishikesha obtained the supreme bow Sharnga after
destroying the nooses of Mura, killing the energetic Mura, killing Naraka, the son of the earth, and obtaining sixteen thousand women and many jewels.20
‘Rukmi obtained the bow Vijaya, which roared like a cloud and was capable of terrifying the universe. He came
to the Pandavas. The brave one was insolent of the strength of his arms and had not forgiven the earlier instance of
Rukmini being abducted by the intelligent Vasudeva. He had taken an oath that he would not return without killing
Janardana. He had collected a giant army with four branches,21 capable of attacking at a great distance. With this,
he had pursued Varshneya, supreme among those who wield all weapons, wishing to kill him. It possessed many
weapons and armour and was like the overﬂowing Ganga. He attacked Varshneya, the lord and master of all yoga.
O king! But he was repulsed and ashamed. He did not return to Kundina.22 At the spot where the destroyer of enemy heroes was vanquished by Krishna in battle, he constructed a supreme city by the name of Bhojakata.23 It had a
large army and many horses and elephants. O king! This city is still famous on earth by the name of Bhojakata.
Surrounded by a large army, the immensely valorous king of Bhoja came to the Pandavas with an akshouhini. He
possessed armour, a sword, arrows, a bow, guards for his palms, a chariot and a ﬂag that had the complexion of the
sun. He entered that large camp of soldiers. When the Pandavyas got to know, to bring pleasure to Vasudeva, King
Yudhishthira arose and honoured him. On being shown respect by the sons of Pandu and having received the appropriate homage, he saluted all of them in return. After he had rested with his soldiers, in the midst of those brave
ones, he spoke to Kunti’s son, Dhananjaya, “O Pandava! If you are afraid, I will stand as your aide on the ﬁeld of
battle. In the course of the war, I will help you so that your enemies will not be able to bear it. There is no man on
this earth who is equal to me in valour. O Phalguna! When I have killed your enemies in battle, I will hand them
over to you.” Having been thus addressed in the presence of Dharmaraja and Keshava, in the hearing of all the
kings of the earth and the others, the intelligent Kounteya glanced towards Vasudeva and Pandava Dharmaraja. He
laughed and spoke in a tone of friendliness. “O brave one! At the time of the expedition with the cattle, I fought

with the immensely powerful gandharvas. Who was my aide then and who was my friend then? I fought in the terrible battle of Khandava, infested by gods and danavas. Who was my aide then? I fought in a battle with the Nivatakavachas and the Kalakeya danavas. Who was my aide then? O son!24 I fought with many Kurus in the city of
Virata. Who was my aide then? In battle, I am indebted to Rudra, Shakra, Vaishravana,25 Yama, Varuna, the ﬁre
god, Kripa, Drona and Madhava. I ﬁrmly wield the divine bow Gandiva, full of energy. I possess inexhaustible
quivers. I am sustained by divine weapons. I have been born in the lineage of the Kouravas. In particular, I am
Pandu’s son. I call myself Drona’s student. Vasudeva is my aide. How can I cause ill fame to myself by saying that
I am afraid? O tiger among men! I cannot speak such words to the wielder of the vajra himself. O mighty-armed
one! I am not frightened. I do not need your help. Go wherever you wish to. Or remain here, if it so pleases you.”
Rukmi then returned with that army, which was like an ocean. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In a similar fashion, he approached Duryodhana. Arriving there, that lord of the earth spoke in the same way. But since he prided
himself on his valour, he was rebuffed there too.26
‘O great king! Thus, two of them withdrew from the war—the Varshneya who was Rohini’s son and Rukmi, the
lord of the earth. Rama went on a visit to the tirthas and after Bhishmaka’s son had also departed, the Pandavas
again seated themselves in consultations. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Frequented by all the kings, Dharmaraja’s assembly looked like the ﬁrmament glittering with stars, with the moon lording over it.’
819(156)

Janamejaya asked, ‘O bull among brahmanas! When the soldiers and battle formations had been marshalled in Kurukshetra, driven by destiny, what did the Kurus do?’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O bull among the Bharata lineage! The soldiers and battle formations were ready. O great
king! Dhritarashtra spoke these words to Sanjaya. “O Sanjaya! Come and tell me everything and omit nothing,
about the marshalling of soldiers in the armies of the Kurus and the Pandavas. I think that destiny is supreme and
human endeavour amounts to nothing. I know about the taints and great destruction a war will give rise to. But I
am not able to restrain my foolish son, who was deceitful in gambling with the dice. I am incapable of restraining
him and ensuring my own self-interest. O suta! I have the intelligence to foresee these evils. But when I meet
Duryodhana, my mind becomes perverse. O Sanjaya! That being the case, what is going to happen will occur. That
apart, the revered dharma of a kshatriya is to give up his life in battle.”
‘Sanjaya said, “O great king! The question that you have posed is deserving of you. But it is not proper that you
should lay the entire blame on Duryodhana. O king! Listen especially to what I have to say on this. If a man confronts a calamity because of his own evil deeds, he should not ascribe the fault to time or destiny. O great king! If a
man commits every deed that is reprehensible, because of having committed those censurable crimes, he deserves
to be killed by all the worlds. O foremost among men! When the Pandavas and their advisers were deceitfully defeated in the game of dice, they bore their hardships because of their respect for you. Hear from me about the
slaughter that will happen in the course of the war of horses, elephants and inﬁnitely energetic kings. O great king!
Be steadfast when you hear about the destruction of all the worlds and the slaughter of all beings in the great war.
Do not be distracted. A man is not the agent of his good or evil deeds. A man is like a wooden puppet on a string.
Some are controlled by the great lord, others by the wishes of destiny, and still others because of their earlier
deeds. These three different sources can be seen.”’

Section Fifty-Eight
Uluka-Yana Parva
This section has 101 shlokas and four chapters.
Chapter 820(157): 18 shlokas
Chapter 821(158): 41 shlokas
Chapter 822(159): 13 shlokas
Chapter 823(160): 29 shlokas
Yana means moving or journey as a verb and conveyance as a noun. The parva is so named because Duryodhana sends Uluka as a messenger to
the Pandavas.
820(157)

‘Sanjaya said, “O great king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O Indra among kings! O king! When the greatsouled Pandavas were established along the Hiranvati, Duryodhana, together with Karna, Soubala and
Duhshasana, summoned Uluka and secretly told him, ‘O Uluka! O son of a gambler! Go to the Pandavas and the
Somakas. In Vasudeva’s hearing, go and tell them my words. “What has been thought of for many years has come
to pass. There will be a war between the Pandavas and the Kurus, terrible to the worlds. O Kounteya!1 You spoke
great and boastful words that Sanjaya recounted in the midst of the Kurus. The time has arrived. Carry out your
pledge. Do everything that you promised. O Pandava! Remember the anger, the robbing of the kingdom, the exile
to the forest and the molestation of Droupadi. Be a man. The purpose for which a kshatriya lady bears a son in her
womb has arrived. Display your strength, valour, bravery, supreme dexterity in use of weapons and manliness in
war and free yourself from your anger. Whose heart will not be shattered if he is dislodged from his prosperity for
a long time? Who will not be oppressed and distressed? If a brave one is born in a noble lineage and desires the
riches of others, how can his anger not be ignited, if his kingdom has been lost? Now act in accordance with the
great words that you have uttered. The learned say that one who does not act is an evil man. There are two objectives behind a battle—the subjugation of enemies and the restoration of the kingdom. Therefore, act in accordance
with your manliness. Defeat us and rule over the entire earth. Or be killed by us and go to the world of the brave. O
Pandava! Remember the exile from the kingdom, the hardship of dwelling in the forest and Krishna’s molestation.
Be a man. Display your wrath to those who have used unpleasant words against you repeatedly, in the course of
your wanderings. Wrath is manliness. O Partha! Be a man. Display your anger, strength, valour, knowledge, yoga
and dexterity in the use of weapons in battle.” O Uluka! On my behalf, speak these words to the foolish, ignorant
and glutton eunuch Bhimasena. “O Vrikodara! Though impotent, you took an oath in the midst of the assembly
hall. If you are capable, drink Duhshasana’s blood.” The weapons have been consecrated. Kurukshetra is free of
mud. The horses have been fed and are fat. The soldiers have been paid. Tomorrow, together with Keshava,
ﬁght.’”’2
821(158)

‘Sanjaya said, “The son of the gambler reached the spot where the soldiers of the Pandavas were encamped. He
approached the Pandavyas and spoke to Yudhishthira, ‘You know about the words spoken by messengers and the

words I speak are in accordance with the instructions of Duryodhana. Therefore, on hearing them, you should not
be angry.’
‘“Yudhishthira replied, ‘O Uluka! Do not be afraid. Speak, without any anxiety. What are the thoughts of Dhritarashtra’s avaricious and short-sighted son?’”
‘Sanjaya said, “Then, in the midst of the radiant and great-souled Pandavas, all the Srinjayas, the famous
Krishna, Drupada and his sons, Virata and all the other lords of the earth, he3 spoke these words. ‘The great-souled
king who is Dhritarashtra’s son has conveyed these words. O Yudhishthira! While the brave ones among the Kurus
hear, listen to them. “You were defeated in a game of dice and Krishna was brought into the assembly hall. A man
who prides himself on his manliness should be angered because of this. You were banished for twelve years in the
forest, exiled from your hearth. You lived for another year as Virata’s servant. O Pandava! Be enraged at the robbing of the kingdom and your exile in the forest. Remember Droupadi’s molestation and be a man. O Pandava!
Though impotent, Bhimasena took an oath. If he is capable, let him drink Duhshasana’s blood. The weapons have
been consecrated. Kurukshetra is free of mud. The roads have been levelled. The soldiers have been paid. Tomorrow, together with Keshava, ﬁght. How can you boast without encountering Bhishma in battle? That is like a foolish person who is attempting to climb Mount Gandhamadana. Drona is foremost among warriors. He is the equal
of Shachi’s consort4 in battle. O Partha! Without vanquishing him in battle, how can you hope to win back your
kingdom? He is the preceptor who wields the brahma bow. He is skilled in both the Vedas.5 He is a champion who
cannot be dislodged in battle. One cannot hope to separate him from his soliders. O Partha! It is a great delusion to
think that Drona can be defeated. We have never heard that Mount Meru has been overturned by the wind. Or perhaps the wind will move Meru and the sky may fall down on the earth. If what you have said is to come true, the
yugas will have to be reversed now. Having encountered the terrible and deadly weapons of either of them,6 which
elephant, horse or man will be able to return home safely? How can any being that touches the ground with its feet
remain alive in the ﬁeld of battle? You are like a frog that lives in its well. You do not know that an army of kings
has assembled. It is invincible and is like an army of the gods. It is protected by Indras among men, like heaven is
by the thirty gods. There are those from the east and the west, the south and the north. There are Kambojas,
Shakas, Khasas, Shalvas, Matsyas, Kurus from the middle regions, Mlecchas, Pulindas, Dravidas, Andhras and
Kanchyas. There is this extensive mass of warriors. Like the Ganga, it is incapable of being crossed. I am stationed
in the midst of my army of elephants. Why are you so stupid and feeble-minded that you wish to ﬁght with us?”’
‘“Having spoken these words to Dharma’s son, King Yudhishthira, Uluka turned towards Jishnu and said, ‘O
Arjuna! Fight without boasting. What is the need to boast so much? Success is the outcome of action. Success does
not come about through boasting. O Dhananjaya! In this world, if success came about because of boasting rather
than action, everyone would be successful. Even the wretched can boast a lot. I know that Vasudeva is your aide. I
know that Gandiva is as tall as a palm tree. I know that there is no warrior who is your equal. Knowing all this, I
took away your kingdom. Great success is not obtained because of the circle of dharma. Through his thoughts, the
creator brings all beings under his control. While you lamented, I enjoyed this kingdom for thirteen years. I will
rule it again for a longer time, after killing you, with your relatives. Where was your Gandiva when you were defeated at the game of dice and made a slave? O Phalguna! Where was Bhimasena’s strength then? You were not
saved by Bhimasena’s club or Partha and his Gandiva. Without the unblemished Krishna,7 there would have been
no deliverance. It was the beautiful one who freed you from your servitude. You were then engaged in work undertaken by subhumans, tasks that are performed by slaves. I then rightly said that you were like barren sesamum
seeds. Did Partha not wear a braid in Virata’s city then? Kounteya Bhimasena exhausted himself as a cook in Virata’s kitchen then. That showed my manliness. That is the way kshatriyas punish kshatriyas who ﬂee from the ﬁeld
of battle. They are consigned to the ranks of gamblers. They are restricted to kitchens. They are made to wear
braids. O Phalguna! Out of fear for Vasudeva, or out of fear for you, I will not hand over the kingdom to you. Together with Keshava, ﬁght. Illusion, magical tricks and terrible deceptions will not frighten me. I have gathered up
my weapons to do battle and they will only make me roar back in return. One thousand Vasudevas and one hundred Phalgunas may attack me. But I will use invincible arrows to drive them away in the ten directions. Go and
ﬁght with Bhishma. Break your head against a mountain. Swim across this deep ocean of men, using your arms.
Sharadvata8 is a giant ﬁsh. Vivimshati is a school of ﬁsh. Brihadbala is a giant wave. Soumadatti is a timingila.9

Duhshasana is the ﬂood. Shala and Shalya are the ﬁsh. Sushena and Chitrayudha are the serpentine crocodiles.
Jayadratha is the mountain. Purumitra is the depth. Durmarshana is the water. Shakuni is the shore. These weapons
are like ﬂows in this ocean of warriors. You will be immersed in it and your senses will be destroyed through exhaustion. Together with all your relatives, you will be slain. You will then grieve and lament all of this. Your mind
will then turn away, like an unholy one from heaven. O Partha! You will refrain from any thoughts about ruling the
earth. This kingdom will be extremely difﬁcult for you to rule. It will be like the achievement of heaven by someone who has no austerities.’”’
822(159)

‘Sanjaya said, “Uluka then again spoke many words to Arjuna, as he had been asked to do. He angered him with
the stakes of his words, like a virulent serpent. On hearing his words, the Pandavas were extremely enraged. They
were already angry and the son of the gambler incited them even more. They arose from their seats and ﬂailed their
arms around. They were wrathful like virulent serpents and glanced towards each other. With a drooping head,
Bhimasena glanced towards Keshava. His eyes were red at the corners. He sighed like a serpent. On seeing that the
son of the wind10 was distressed and extremely enraged, Dasharha smiled and replied to the son of the gambler. ‘O
son of a gambler! Leave swiftly and tell Suyodhana that his words have been heard. Their intent has been understood. It shall be the way he has said. But also tell Suyodhana these words from me. “O evil-minded one! Wait for
tomorrow. Be a man. O foolish one! You think that Janardana will not ﬁght and Partha has chosen him as a charioteer. Therefore, you need not be frightened. But there will be a terrible time when I will burn down all the kings in
my rage, like a ﬂame consumes straw. However, because of Yudhishthira’s instructions, I will be the charioteer of
the great-souled Phalguna. He himself knows the way to ﬁght. Even if you run away to the three worlds, even if
you enter the ground, you will see Arjuna’s chariot in front of you tomorrow. If you think that Bhimasena’s roar
amounts to nothing, you can be certain that Duhshasana’s blood will be drunk. Partha, or King Yudhishthira, or
Bhimasena, or the twins, do not pay the slightest attention to your contrary ramblings.”’”’
823(160)

lineage11

‘Sanjaya said, “The bull among the Bharata
listened to Duryodhana’s words. His eyes were extremely
red and he glanced at the son of the gambler. The immensely famous Gudakesha glanced towards Keshava. He
grasped his large arms and spoke to the son of the gambler. ‘He who relies on his own valour and challenges the
enemy is said to be a man. He is not frightened and acts in accordance with his complete strength. But he who
challenges enemies on the basis of the valour of others is the weakest among kshatriyas. In this world, he is among
the worst of men. You12 resort to the valour of others and think yourself to be brave. O foolish one! You are yourself a coward and you desire that others should be slain. You have consecrated the eldest among all the kings and
are boastful.13 His intelligence is directed towards welfare and he is in control of his senses. He is immensely wise
and his death is certain. O evil-minded one! We know of your intentions. You are the deﬁler of your lineage. You
think that out of kindness, the Pandavas will not slay Gangeya. O son of Dhritarashtra! You are boasting because
of his valour. But while all the archers look on, I will kill Bhishma ﬁrst. You son of a gambler!14 Go to the
Bharatas. Go and tell Dhritarashtra’s son, Duryodhana. Tell him that Savyasachi Arjuna has said that it will be this
way. There will be slaughter when the night has passed. His15 spirit is never dejected. He is true to his word. He
delighted the Kurus and in their midst said, “I will kill the Pandava soldiers and the Shalveyas. That will be my
burden. I can kill everyone in the world, with the exception of Drona. You need not have any fear on account of the
Pandavyas.” Therefore, you regard this kingdom as already having been obtained and think that the Pandavas have
lost. Filled with insolence, you do not see the disaster that confronts you. Therefore, in the ﬁrst encounter, I will
kill the eldest among the Kurus16 in everyone’s presence. When the sun has arisen, protect the one who speaks the
truth with banners and chariots. Bhishma is your refuge. But while you look on, I will use my arrows to make him
fall down from his chariot. Tomorrow, Suyodhana will know what it means to be boastful. He will see the grandfather pierced through my shower of arrows. In rage, in the midst of the assembly hall, Bhimasena spoke to the
short-sighted man who is your brother, Duhshasana. He does not know about dharma. He is always full of enmity.
He is evil in his intelligence. He is violent. O Suyodhana! He17 took an oath and you will see it come true. O Suyo-

dhana! You will soon witness the terrible fruits of pride, insolence, anger, harshness, abrasiveness, cruelty, bitter
words, hatred of dharma, resort to adharma, transgression of the elders, partiality of vision and all evil deeds. O
lord of men! With Vasudeva as my second, I will be enraged. O foolish one! How can you hope to remain alive or
aspire to the kingdom? Bhishma and Drona will be paciﬁed. The son of the suta will be brought down. You will
then lose all hope of remaining alive, your kingdom and your sons. O Suyodhana! You will see that your brothers
and your sons have been killed. When they are killed by Bhimasena, you will remember all your evil deeds. Keshava has no need to make a promise for a second time. I am telling you the truth. All of this will come true.’ O
king! The son of the gambler heard and remembered all these words. On obtaining leave, he left the way that he
had come.
‘“On returning from the Pandavas, the son of the gambler went to Dhritarashtra’s son. In the assembly of the
Kurus, he went and repeated everything that had been spoken. After listening to Arjuna and Keshava’s words, the
bull among the Bharata lineage spoke to Duhshasana, Karna and Shakuni. He ordered the king’s army and the
forces of the allies to be readied. Before sunrise, all the soldiers were yoked and arranged in battle formations. On
Karna’s instructions, messengers were sent out on chariots, camels and mares. Others went out on well-trained and
extremely fast horses. On Karna’s instructions, they surveyed the entire army. All the kings were instructed that
everything should be yoked before sunrise.”’

Section Fifty-Nine
Ratha-Atiratha-Samkhya Parva
This section has 231 shlokas and nine chapters.
Chapter 824(161): 12 shlokas
Chapter 825(162): 33 shlokas
Chapter 826(163): 22 shlokas
Chapter 827(164): 38 shlokas
Chapter 828(165): 27 shlokas
Chapter 829(166): 39 shlokas
Chapter 830(167): 14 shlokas
Chapter 831(168): 25 shlokas
Chapter 832(169): 21 shlokas
In increasing order of strength, rathas, maharathas and atirathas are charioteers. Samkhya means count or numbers and this section is so named
because these charioteers and their strengths are enumerated.
824(161)

‘Sanjaya said, “Having heard Uluka’s words, Kunti’s son, Yudhishthira, instructed the army to march out, with
Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront. That army had the four kinds of forces—infantry, chariots, elephants and horses.
It was as terrible and unshakeable as the earth itself. It was protected by Bhimasena and the others and maharathas
like Arjuna. Commanded by Dhrishtadyumna, it was invincible and was as pervasive as the ocean. The great
archer from Panchala,1 unassailable in battle, was at the forefront. Dhrishtadyumna led the troops, desiring an encounter with Drona. In accordance with their strength and inclinations, he assigned the rathas.2 The suta’s son was
assigned to Arjuna, Duryodhana to Bhima, Ashvatthama to Nakula, Shaibya to Kritavarma and Saindhava to
Varshneya Yuyudhana.3 In the encounter with Bhishma, he instructed Shikhandi to be at the forefront. Shakuni was
assigned to Sahadeva, Shala to Chekitana, Shalya to Dhrishtaketu, Goutama4 to Uttamouja and the ﬁve Trigartas to
Droupadi’s sons. He assigned Subhadra’s son5 to Vrishasena and the remaining kings, because he considered him
to be superior even to Partha in battle. Having thus divided the warriors, separately and collectively, the great
archer, whose complexion was like the ﬁre, earmarked Drona as his own portion. The great archer, Dhrishtadyumna, was the commander. The intelligent one arranged battle formations in the prescribed fashion and made up his
mind to do battle. He yoked the soldiers of the Pandavas in the appropriate places. He stood ready on the ﬁeld of
battle, for the victory of the sons of Pandu.”’
825(162)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “When Phalguna had sworn that he would kill Bhishma in battle, what did my evil sons,
Duryodhana and the others, do? I can already see my father Gangeya killed by Partha, the ﬁrm wielder of the bow,
in battle, with Vasudeva at his aide. The great archer, Bhishma, is supreme among warriors. His wisdom is inﬁnite.
What did he say when he heard the words that Partha spoke? Gangeya is greatly intelligent and valiant. He is extremely skilled. What did he do when he became the commander of the Kouravas?”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘At that, Sanjaya told him everything that was said by the inﬁnitely energetic Bhishma, the
aged one among the Kurus.

‘Sanjaya said, “O king! Shantanu’s son, Bhishma, became the commander. He delighted Duryodhana by speaking these words to him. ‘I bow down before Kumara,6 the general who wields a spear in his hand. There is no
doubt that I will be your general. I know about the tasks connected with soldiers, and in particular, about battle formations.7 I know the tasks that should be assigned to servants and those who are not servants.8 O great king! In
marching troops out, in engaging in battle and in pacifying enemies, I am learned, as learned as Brihaspati himself.
I know how to prepare the great battle formations of gods, gandharvas and humans. I will use those to confound
the Pandavas. Be bereft of your anxiety. I will ﬁght according to the right principles. I will protect your army. I will
follow the sacred texts. O king! Discard the fever from your mind.’
‘“Duryodhana said, ‘O Gangeya! I have no fear from gods and asuras combined. O mighty-armed one! I am
telling you this truthfully, not to speak of now, when you are our invincible general and Drona, tiger among men, is
stationed, eager to do battle. The two of you, foremost among men, are stationed on my side. Victory will be mine.
O foremost among the Kurus! It is certain that even the kingdom of the gods will not be difﬁcult to obtain. O
Kourava! But I wish to know the total number of rathas among us and among the enemy and also the atirathas. The
grandfather is skilled in knowing about the enemy and about us. With all these other lords of the earth, I wish to
hear this.’
‘“Bhishma said, ‘O Gandhari’s son! O Indra among kings! O lord of the earth! Listen to the number of rathas in
your own army, those who are rathas and those who are atirathas. There are many thousand, tens of thousands and
millions of rathas among your soldiers, but listen to the most important ones. You are foremost among the rathas
and so are all your brothers, Duhshasana and the others—one hundred together. All of you are skilled in striking
with weapons and are knowledgeable about slicing and piercing. You can ride on chariots and on the shoulders of
elephants. You know about ﬁghting with clubs, swords and shields. You are skilled drivers. You can strike with
weapons. You are skilled in use of weapons. You can bear burdens. In the use of arrows, you are the students of
Drona and Kripa Sharadvata. The spirited sons of Dhritarashtra have been wronged by the Pandavyas and will kill
the Panchalas, who are intoxicated with battle. O foremost among the Bharatas! I myself will be your supreme
commander. I will frustrate the Pandavas and pierce your enemies. But I should not speak about my own qualities.
They are known to you. Kritavarma of Bhoja, supreme among the wielder of weapons, is an atiratha. There is no
doubt that he will accomplish your objective in battle. He is invincible in the knowledge of weapons. He can strike
from a distance. He is ﬁrm in bearing weapons. He will kill your enemies, like the great Indra against the danavas.
It is my view that the great archer Shalya, the king of Madra, is an atiratha. He has always rivalled Vasudeva in
battle after battle. He has forsaken his own sister’s sons.9 Shalya is a supreme ratha. In battle, he will ﬁght with
Krishna, the wielder of the chakra and the club. Like the waves of an ocean, he will ﬂood the enemy with arrows.
Bhurishrava, skilled in the use of weapons, is your well-wisher and will be engaged in your welfare. Soumadatti10
is a great archer and is the leader of a mass of rathas. He will bring about a great reduction in the forces of the enemy. O great king! It seems to me that the king of Sindhu11 is the equal of two rathas. O king! That supreme among
rathas will ﬁght valiantly in battle. Earlier, he was oppressed by the Pandavas at the time of Droupadi’s abduction.
He will remember that molestation and will ﬁght with the enemy heroes. O king! After that, he resorted to terrible
austerities. He obtained the extremely rare boon that he would ﬁght with the Pandavas on the ﬁeld of battle. In battle, this tiger among rathas will remember that enmity. O son!12 He will ﬁght with the Pandavas, even giving up his
own life, which is so difﬁcult to abandon.’”’
826(163)

‘“Bhishma said, ‘It is my view that Sudakshina of Kamboja has the qualities of a single ratha. He will ﬁght with
the enemies in battle, desiring to accomplish your objectives. O supreme among kings! When this lion among
rathas strives in your cause, the warriors among the Kurus will witness his valour, like that of Indra. He controls a
mass of chariots that are ﬁerce, swift and armed. O great king! These Kambojas are like a swarm of locusts. Nila,
resident of Mahishmati, is clad in blue armour. The rathas under his control will rout the enemy. O king! In earlier
times, he had an enmity with Sahadeva.13 O king! O supreme among the Kurus! He will always ﬁght in your
cause. Vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti are supreme rathas. They are skilled in battle. O son!14 They are ﬁrm in their
bravery and are valiant. These two tigers among men will consume the soldiers of the enemy with clubs, spikes,

iron arrows and javelins that are hurled from the hand. Desiring battle, in the ﬁeld of battle, they will be like the
leaders of herds of elephants, sporting amidst their herds. They will roam around like the god of death. It is my
view that the ﬁve brothers from Trigarta are great rathas. In Virata’s city, an enmity was created between them and
Partha.15 O Indra among kings! In the battle with the army of the Parthas, they will be like sharks16 that stir up the
billowing waves of the Ganga. O Indra among kings! They are ﬁve rathas and Satyaratha is their leader. They will
remember those earlier deeds and will ﬁght in battle. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When he was
conquering the directions, Pandavya, Bhimasena’s younger brother and the one with the white horses, humiliated
them. These maharathas will attack and kill the Parthas, the supreme and best among their great archers and the
skilled kshatriyas. Your son Lakshmana and Duhshasana are both tigers among men. They will never retreat from
the ﬁeld of battle. They are young and delicate, but are spirited princes. They especially know about ﬁghting and
everything about leadership. It is my view that these two supreme rathas, tigers among rathas, are brave rathas who
are devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. They will accomplish great deeds. O great king! Dandadhara, bull among
men, is equal to a single ratha. Protected by his army, he will ﬁght when he advances into battle. O son!17 It is my
view that Brihadbala, the king of Kosala, is supreme among rathas and is a ratha. He is ﬁrm in speed and valiant.
He will ﬁght in battle, causing delight among his own forces. He is a great archer and is terrible in the use of
weapons. He is engaged in the welfare of the sons of Dhritarashtra. O king! Kripa Sharadvata is the leader of leaders among rathas. He will give up his own beloved life and will destroy your enemies. The preceptor Sharadvata is
maharshi Goutama’s son. Like Kartikeya, he was born from a clump of reeds. He is invincible. O son!18 He will be
like a ﬁre in the ﬁeld of battle. He will shatter this diverse army, with different types of weapons and bows.’”’
827(164)

‘“Bhisma said, ‘O lord of men! Your maternal uncle Shakuni is equal to a single ratha. There is no doubt that he
has brought about this enmity with the Pandavas and will ﬁght. His unassailable soldiers do not retreat from the
ﬁeld of battle. They carry many kinds of strange weapons and possess the speed of the wind. Drona’s son is a great
archer and is superior to all archers. He is colourful in the ﬁeld of battle and is a maharatha who is ﬁrm in wielding
weapons. O great king! When released from his bow, his arrows are like those of the wielder of the Gandiva himself and are linked together in one continuous line. But I cannot count this brave one in the list of supreme rathas,
though this greatly famous one is capable of burning up the three worlds. He has accumulated anger and energy
through austerities, while he dwelled in a hermitage. And since he was generous, Drona bestowed celestial
weapons on him. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O supreme among kings! But he has a single great taint and
because of that, I do not regard him as a ratha or an atiratha. He loves his own life too much. This brahmana always wishes for a long life. There is no one who is equal to him in either army. On a single chariot, he is capable
of slaying even the army of the gods. Through the slapping of his arms, this handsome one can cause mountains to
be shattered. The brave one has an inﬁnite number of qualities. He is a striker and his radiance is terrible. He
roams around and cannot be tolerated. He is like the god of death, with a staff in his hand. He is greatly intelligent
and has the neck of a lion. He is like the angry ﬁre that rages at the end of an era. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He is capable of pacifying what is left of this war.
‘“‘His father is immensely energetic. Though he is aged, he is superior to those who are younger. I have no
doubt that he will accomplish great deeds in the ﬁeld of battle. A ﬁre will be kindled from the force of his weapons
and the soldiers will be like deadwood. This will burn down the soldiers of Pandu’s sons, resolved as they are on
victory. This bull among men is a leader among all the leaders of rathas. He is the son of Bharadvaja. For the sake
of your welfare, he will be the performer of terrible deeds. This aged preceptor is the teacher of all those who have
been consecrated.19 He will bring about the end of the Srinjayas, but Dhananjaya is his beloved. The great archer
will never kill Partha, the performer of unsullied deeds. He will remember his role as a preceptor and the blazing
qualities obtained by him20 and will never kill him. The brave one has always praised Partha’s many qualities.
Bharadvaja21 looks upon him as more than his own son. On a single chariot, the powerful one can use his divine
weapons to slay the gods, the gandharvas and the danavas, even when they are united in the ﬁeld of battle.
‘“‘O king! I regard Pourava, tiger among kings, as a maharatha. It is my view that he is a valiant ratha who can
destroy the chariots of enemy heroes. With his own large army, he will scorch the forces of the enemy. He will

burn the Panchalas down, like the one with black trails burns deadwood. The prince Satyavrata is supreme among
rathas and is a maharatha. O king! He will stride amidst the enemy’s forces, like time. O Indra among kings! His
warriors will roam around, in diverse armour and weapons. They will roam around in battle, destroying your enemies. Karna’s son, Vrishasena, is foremost among ratha and is a maharatha. He is supremely strong among strong
ones and will destroy the forces of the enemy. O king! Jalasandha of Magadha is one of your supreme rathas and is
greatly energetic. He is the destroyer of enemy heroes and will lay down his life in battle. He is skilled in riding on
the shoulders of elephants and will ﬁght in the battle. Or the mighty-armed one will ﬁght from chariots and will
destroy the forces of the enemy. O great king! It is my view that this bull among men is a ratha. For your sake, he
will lay down his life, and that of his soldiers, in the great battle. He is a valiant warrior and is colourful in battle.
O king! He will cast aside his fear and ﬁght with the enemies.
‘“‘O king! It is my view that Bahlika, who cannot be restrained in battle, is an atiratha. The brave one is like
Vaivasvata’s22 equal in battle. He will never retreat from the ﬁeld of battle. O king! Like a storm, he will always
attack the enemy in battle. O great king! The general Satyavat is a maharatha. He is a charioteer who performs extraordinary feats in war and destroys the chariots of enemies. He will never be seen to be distressed at the prospect
of battle. He will astound the enemy who are arrayed in the path of his chariot. The virtuous one will perform
valiant deeds. That supreme man will be the performer of extremely great exploits in your cause.
‘“‘Alayudha is an Indra among rakshasas. He is the performer of cruel deeds and is extremely strong. O king!
He will remember his earlier enmity23 and kill the enemy. He is the supreme ratha among all the soldiers of the
rakshasas. He possesses the powers of maya and, ﬁrm in his enmity, will roam around in battle.
‘“‘The brave and powerful Bhagadatta is from Pragjyotisha. He is a skilled ratha and is foremost among those
who wield a goad on an elephant. In earlier times, there was a war between him and the wielder of the Gandiva. O
king! That lasted over many days and each desired to be victorious over the other. O Gandhari’s son! Subsequently, because of his friendship with the chastiser of Paka,24 he concluded an alliance with the great-souled Pandava.
This king is skilled in ﬁghting from the shoulders of elephants and he will ﬁght in this war, like Vasava, king of the
gods, on Airavata.’”’
828(165)

‘“Bhishma said, ‘Both brothers, Achala and Vrishaka, are invincible rathas. They will destroy your enemies. They
are strong. They are tigers among men. They are ﬁrm in their anger. They are ones who can strike. They are foremost among those from Gandhara. They are young and handsome. They are extremely strong. This friend of yours
is always devoted to you and is always harsh about wanting war. O king! He incites you in this war with the Pandavas. Karna Vaikartana is harsh, boastful and inferior. He is your adviser, leader and friend. He is insolent and has
been extremely uplifted by you. O king! He is not a full ratha. Nor is he an atiratha. Because he is always generous, he has been separated from the divine earrings he was born with. Because of Rama’s curse, the words of the
brahmana and because he will be separated from his implements,25 it is my view that he is only half a ratha. When
he meets Phalguna, he will not be able to escape with his life.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “The mighty-armed Drona, supreme among the wielders of weapons, then spoke. ‘It is exactly as
you have said and there is no falsehood in this at all. In battle after battle, I have seen him retreat. Karna is generous. But he is also distracted. It is my view that he is half a ratha.’ When he heard this, Radheya’s eyes widened in
anger. O Indra among kings! He spoke to Bhishma, lashing him with his words. ‘O grandfather! As you wish, you
pierce me with the arrows of your words. I am innocent, but you have hated me at every step. For Duryodhana’s
sake, I have tolerated all of this. You now think that I am incapable and am a coward. There is no doubt that I think
that you are half a ratha. O Gangeya! I do not lie when I say that you always wish ill to the Kurus and the entire
universe. But the king does not realize this. These kings are equal in their names and deeds. Who else but you will
reduce their energy just before the battle, by creating dissension among them? In describing their qualities, you are
highlighting their demerits. O Kourava! Age, grey hair, wealth and relatives cannot make a kshatriya a maharatha.
Kshatriyas are known to be foremost because of their strength, brahmanas are known to be foremost because of
their mantras, vaishyas are known to be foremost because of their riches and shudras are known to be foremost because of their years. You have differentiated between rathas and atirathas according to your own inclinations, be-

cause of your own desires and enmity. You are deluded. O Duryodhana! O mighty-armed one! Consider this in the
proper way. Discard Bhishma, whose sentiments are evil. He will bring about dissension. O king! Once there is
discord within the army, it will be difﬁcult to bring it together again. O tiger among men! This is true if the source
of the army is one, it is even more so when it comes from different origins. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In
this war, this division has already penetrated our warriors. He is sapping our energy, in front of our very eyes.
What does the dim-witted Bhishma know about the science of rathas? I will repluse the armies of the Pandavas.
When they encounter my invincible arrows, the Pandavas and the Panchalas will be dispersed in the ten directions,
like bulls before a tiger. Where is the turmoil of battle and the counsel of good advice and where is the aged and
evil-souled Bhishma, driven by destiny? He always boasts that he can alone ﬁght the entire universe. With his deluded vision, he does not think that any other man exists. The sacred texts certainly say that we must listen to the
aged. But it is also the view that one should not listen to the extremely old. They are like children. O tiger among
kings! In an excellent ﬁght, there is no doubt that I will kill the Pandavas alone, though the fame for this will accrue to Bhishma. O lord of men! You have appointed Bhishma your commander and the commander is credited
with qualities, never the warriors. O king! I will never ﬁght as long as Gangeya is alive. But once Bhishma has
been slain, I will ﬁght with all the maharathas.’”’
829(166)

‘“Bhishma said, ‘For the sake of Dhritarashtra’s son, I have taken up this extremely large burden of the war, as
great as the ocean. This has been thought of for many years. The time has now arrived and the body hair stands up.
O one who has been born from a suta! I must not cause false dissension and that is the reason you are still alive.
Jamadagni’s son, Rama, did not hurt me when he released great weapons.26 What can you do? Righteous ones do
not approve of the praise of one’s own might. O vile one! O deﬁler of your lineage! But I am telling you because
you have provoked me. All the kshatriya kings gathered at the svayamvara organized by the king of Kashi. I vanquished them on a single chariot and swiftly abducted the maidens. I alone repulsed thousands of such soldiers in
battle and vanquished them in battle. Once they confronted a hated man like you, a great destruction has arrived
before the Kurus. Be a man. Fight with Partha in battle, whom you seek to challenge. O extremely evil-minded
one! I will watch you escape from that ﬁght.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “Then the great-minded king who was Dhritarashtra’s son spoke up. ‘O Gangeya! Look towards
me. There is a great task that must be performed. You must ﬁrst think about what is my supreme welfare. Both of
you27 will perform great deeds for me. I wish to hear about the supreme rathas among the enemy. I wish to hear
about the atirathas and the leaders of masses of rathas. When it is morning and the night has passed, there will be a
war.’
‘“Bhishma said, ‘O king! I have recounted the numbers of your rathas and atirathas and also those who are half
of rathas. O king! O mighty-armed one! If you are curious, together with the lords of the earth, now listen to the
names among the Pandavas, to the strengths of the Pandavas and the number of their rathas. King Pandava, Kunti’s
descendant, is a foremost ratha. O son!28 There is no doubt that he will rage like a ﬁre in battle. O Indra among
kings! Bhimasena has eight times the qualities of a ratha. That man is energetic and insolent and possesses the
strength of ten thousand elephants. Madri’s two sons, bulls among men, are both rathas. They are like the Ashvins
in their beauty and energy. There is no doubt that they will remember their hardships and will roam around in the
front of the army, like Rudra. All these great-souled ones are tall and are like the trunks of shala trees. They are
more than a span taller than other men. All of these immensely strong sons of Pandu are capable of withstanding
lions. All of them have observed brahmacharya and are extreme ascetics. Those tigers among men are modest.
They are as proud of their strength as tigers. They are all superhuman in their speed, striking ability and combativeness. O bull among Bharatas! In their conquests, they have defeated all the kings of the earth. O Kourava! No
man can ever withstand their weapons, clubs or arrows, or string their bows and ﬁx their arrows. Even when they
were children, all of them were superior to you in raising the club, shooting arrows, running, striking targets, eating and wrestling in the dust. Proud of their strength, like tigers, they will attack your army. They will destroy it in
battle. Try to avoid the encounter with them. One by one, they can kill all the kings of the earth. O Indra among
kings! You have yourself witnessed what occurred at the time of the rajasuya sacriﬁce. They will remember

Droupadi’s molestation and the harsh words at the time of the gambling match. Like death, they will roam around
on the ﬁeld of battle. Gudakesha’s eyes are red and he has Vasudeva as an aide. O brave one! There is no ratha who
is equal to him in either army, nor among gods or earlier danavas, serpents, rakshasas and yakshas, not to speak of
men. I have not heard of any ratha who has been, or will be, as accomplished as the intelligent Partha. O great
king! Vasudeva is the charioteer and Dhananjaya is the warrior. The bow is the divine Gandiva and the horses have
the speed of the wind. The divine armour is impenetrable. The great quivers are inexhaustible. There are the
weapons of the great Indra, Rudra, Kubera, Yama and Varuna. His clubs are terrible to see. He has many weapons,
with the vajra as the foremost. There were thousands of danavas who lived in Hiranyapura. He slew them on a single chariot. Where is there a ratha like him? He is enraged. He is strong. Truth is his valour. That mighty-armed
one can destroy your army, while protecting his own. I can stand up to Dhananjaya, and so can the preceptor. O Indra among kings! But there is no third person, in either army. He will shower down arrows from his chariot, like
the cloud at the end of the summer season, when there is a mighty storm. The accomplished Kounteya has Vasudeva as an aide. He is young and skilled. Both of us are aged and exhausted.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “When the kings heard the words of Bhishma, their hearts trembled. Their sturdy arms had golden bracelets. They were anointed with sandalwood paste. In their minds, they remembered the earlier speed and
strength of the Pandavyas, as if they could see them in front of their eyes.”’
830(167)

‘“Bhishma said, ‘O great king! All the ﬁve sons of Droupadi are maharathas. It is my view that Virata’s son, Uttara, is also a great ratha. O great king! Abhimanyu is the leader of leaders among rathas. He will be the equal of
Partha in battle, perhaps even of Vasudeva. He is skilled and colourful in the use of weapons. He is spirited and
ﬁrm in his valour. He will remember the hardships his fathers faced and display his valour. The brave Madhava
Satyaki is the leader of leaders among rathas. He is the most intolerant among the Vrishni warriors. He has conquered all fear. O king! I think that Uttamouja is a great ratha and that the valiant Yudhamanyu, bull among men, is
a foremost ratha. They have many thousands of chariots, elephants and horses. To bring pleasure to Kunti’s son,
they will ﬁght along with the Pandavas and against your soldiers, willing to give up their lives. O Indra among
kings! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! They will be like the ﬁre and the wind, helping each other.
The aged Virata and Drupada are invincible in battle. It is my view that those extremely valiant bulls among men
are maharathas. Though they are aged in years, they are devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. They will strive with
their extreme capacity to walk the path travelled by heroes. O Indra among kings! They have an alliance with them
and possess valour and strength. They follow the conduct of aryas. They are great archers. They are bound by the
noose of affection. O bull among men! Because of various reasons, all mighty-armed men become brave or cowards. But these two are ﬁrm in their affection towards Partha, they are united in their purpose. O lord among men!
They will act with all their strength, giving up their lives against the enemy. They each control a separate akshouhini and will strive ﬁercely. They will protect their relatives and perform great deeds. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! They are great archers and are heroes in this world. They will give up their own lives. While preserving their resolutions, they will perform great exploits.’”’
831(168)

‘“Bhishma said, ‘O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In my view, Shikhandi, the destroyer of enemy
cities and the son of the king of Panchala, is a foremost ratha on Partha’s side. He will ﬁght in the battle, destroying the earlier state of affairs.29 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He will establish his supreme fame among
your soldiers. He has many soldiers, among the Panchalas and the Prabhadrakas. He will perform great deeds with
his array of chariots. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dhrishtadyumna is the overall commander of all the soldiers. O Indra among kings! It is my view that he is an atiratha. He is the student of Drona, a maharatha. He will
ﬁght in the war, destroying the enemies in battle, like the illustrious Pinaki,30 when he is enraged at the destruction
of an era. Those who love war talk about his array of chariots. They are as extensive as the ocean and are like the
masses of gods in battle. O king! O Indra among kings! In my view, Dhrishtadyumna’s son, Kshatradharma, is
equal to half a ratha. He is young and still lacks in training. Shishupala’s brave son, Dhrishtaketu, is the king of

Chedi and is a maharatha. He is a great archer and has a matrimonial alliance with the Pandavas.31 O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Together with his sons, the brave lord of Chedi will perform great exploits that will be difﬁcult even for a maharatha to accomplish. O Indra among kings! It is my view that Kshatradeva, the destroyer of
enemy cities, is devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas and is a supreme ratha on the side of the Pandavas. Jayanta,
Amitouja and Satyajit are maharathas. All these great-souled ones, supreme among the Panchalas, are maharathas.
O son!32 They will ﬁght in the battle, like enraged elephants. Aja and Bhoja are valiant maharathas on the Pandava
side. They will strive to their utmost capacity to help the Pandavas. They are swift in the use of weapons. They are
colourful in battle. They are skilled. They are ﬁrm in their valour. O Indra among kings! The ﬁve brothers from
Kekaya are indomitable in war. All of them are foremost among rathas and all of them have red ﬂags. Those with
the names Kashika, Sukumara, Nila, King Suryadatta, Shankha and Madirashva are foremost among rathas and all
of them possess the signs of battle. They are skilled in the use of all weapons. It is my view that all of them are
great-souled. It is my view that King Chitrayudha is a supreme ratha. He adorns the ﬁeld of battle and is devoted to
Kiriti. Chekitana and Satyadhriti are maharathas on the Pandava side. It is my view that those two tigers among
men are foremost among rathas. O Indra among kings! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is no doubt in
my mind that Vyaghradatta and Chandrasena are foremost among rathas. O Indra among kings! Senabindu, who
has the name of Krodhahanta, is a lord who is the equal of Vasudeva and Bhimasena. In the course of the battle, he
will ﬁght valiantly with your soldiers. You should think of himself as a supreme ratha, proud in battle, and equal to
Drona, Kripa and I myself. The king of Kashi is extremely swift in the use of weapons and can be prided on being
a supreme ratha. He is the vanquisher of enemy cities and it is my view that he possesses the qualities of a single
ratha. Drupada’s young son, Satyajit, is valorous and proud in battle and is the equal of Dhrishtadyumna. He
should be counted as an atiratha. He desires fame and will perform supreme deeds for the Pandavas. There is another great and brave ratha who is skilled and is devoted to the cause of the Pandavas. He is extremely brave and
he is the king of Pandya. He is a great archer and is ﬁrm in wielding the bow. He is a supreme ratha on the Pandava
side. O foremost among Kouravas! Both Shreniman and King Vasudana are atirathas. O scorcher of enemies! That
is my view.’”’
832(169)

‘“Bhishma said, ‘O great king! Rochamana is a maharatha on the Pandava side. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He will ﬁght against the enemy soldiers in this battle, like an immortal. Kuntibhoja’s son, Purujit, is a great
archer and is extremely strong. He is Bhimasena’s maternal uncle and it is my view that he is an atiratha.33 He is a
brave and great archer, skilled and trained. He is capable of ﬁghting in colourful ways. It is my view that he is a
bull among rathas. He will ﬁght with valour, like Maghavan34 against the danavas. He has many famous warriors,
all of whom are skilled in ﬁghting. The brave one will ﬁght for the sake of his sister’s son. Engaged in ensuring the
welfare of the sons of Pandu, the king will perform extremely great deeds. O great king! The lord of the
rakshasas35 is the son of Bhimasena and Hidimba. It is my view that he knows several things about maya and is the
leader of leaders among rathas. O son!36 He loves war and will use maya to ﬁght in the ﬁeld of battle. There are
brave rakshasas and advisers who follow his instructions. There are many other lords from many countries. With
Vasudeva at the forefront, they have assembled for the sake of the Pandavas. O king! These are the principal ones
on the side of the great-souled Pandavas—those who are, in my view, rathas, atirathas and equal to half a ratha. O
king! They will lead Yudhishthira’s terrible army in battle, protected by the brave Kiriti, like the great Indra himself. Those brave ones are marching against you in battle, desiring victory. I will ﬁght against them, wishing for
victory, or death in the ﬁeld of battle. I will face Partha and Vasudeva together, the wielder of the chakra and the
Gandiva. They are supreme men, like the sun and the moon in conjunction at the time of twilight. I will lead the
rathas, together with your soldiers, against the soldiers of the sons of Pandu. I will be at the head of the battle. O
king! I have recounted the foremost rathas and atirathas to you, both yours and theirs. O king! O Indra among
Kouravas! I have also mentioned some who are half a ratha. There are Arjuna, Vasudeva and the other kings. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As soon as I see them, I shall drive them back. But I will not kill the mightyarmed Shikhandi from Panchala, when I see him with weapons raised, marching against me in battle. The world
knows that in order to bring pleasure to my father, I gave up the kingdom that was due to me and adopted a vow of

brahmacharya. I instated Chitrangada in the kingdom of the Kouravas and consecrated the infant Vichitravirya as
the heir apparent. Among all the kings on the earth, I then became famous as Devavrata. I will never kill someone
who has been born as a woman, or someone who has been a woman earlier. O king! You may have heard that
Shikhandi was earlier a woman. She was born a woman and became a man later. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will not ﬁght with him. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O king! I will kill all the other lords of the earth,
whomsoever I encounter on the ﬁeld of battle, with the exception of the sons of Kunti.’”’

Section Sixty
Amba-Upakhyana Parva
This parva has 755 shlokas and twenty-eight chapters.
Chapter 833(170): 22 shlokas
Chapter 834(171): 9 shlokas
Chapter 835(172): 23 shlokas
Chapter 836(173): 18 shlokas
Chapter 837(174): 26 shlokas
Chapter 838(175): 30 shlokas
Chapter 839(176): 42 shlokas
Chapter 840(177): 24 shlokas
Chapter 841(178): 38 shlokas
Chapter 842(179): 31 shlokas
Chapter 843(180): 39 shlokas
Chapter 844(181): 36 shlokas
Chapter 845(182): 16 shlokas
Chapter 846(183): 27 shlokas
Chapter 847(184): 18 shlokas
Chapter 848(185): 23 shlokas
Chapter 849(186): 36 shlokas
Chapter 850(187): 40 shlokas
Chapter 851(188): 18 shlokas
Chapter 852(189): 18 shlokas
Chapter 853(190): 23 shlokas
Chapter 854(191): 20 shlokas
Chapter 855(192): 30 shlokas
Chapter 856(193): 66 shlokas
Chapter 857(194): 22 shlokas
Chapter 858(195): 20 shlokas
Chapter 859(196): 19 shlokas
Chapter 860(197): 21 shlokas
Upakhyana is a short tale or episode and this section is so named because it has the short account of Amba, who was reborn as Shikhandi.
This section ends Udyoga Parva and everything is set for the war.
CHAPTER 833(170)

‘Duryodhana asked, “O foremost among the Bharata lineage! When you see Shikhandi in the ﬁeld of battle, with
arrows raised and ready to slay you, what is the reason for you not to kill him? O mighty-armed one! You said earlier that you would kill the Panchalas and the Somakas. O Gangeya! O grandfather! Tell me the reason for this.”1
‘Bhishma replied, “O Duryodhana! Together with the lords of the earth, listen to the reason why I will not kill
Shikhandi when I see him in the ﬁeld of battle. My father, King Shantanu, was a bull among the Bharata lineage
and had dharma in his soul. O bull among men! In course of time, he met his destiny. O foremost among the
Bharata lineage! I then fulﬁlled my promise. I consecrated my brother Chitrangada as the great king. When he
died, abiding by the instructions of Satyavati and in accordance with the decreed rites, I instated Vichitravirya as
the king. O Indra among kings! Though he was young, he was consecrated by me in accordance with dharma. Vichitravirya had dharma in his soul and glanced towards me for everything. O son!2 I desired to obtain brides for
him and reﬂected on those who would be equal in beauty and lineage. O mighty-armed one! At that time, I heard
that the three daughters of the king of Kashi would be given away in a svayamvara.3 All of them were unrivalled

in beauty and their names were Amba, Ambika and Ambalika. O bull among the Bharata lineage! All the kings of
the earth had been summoned there. O Indra among kings! Amba was the eldest and Ambika was the one in the
middle, while Ambalika was the youngest princess. On a single chariot, I went to the capital of the lord of Kashi.
O mighty-armed one! O lord of the earth! I saw the three ornamented maidens there and the kings, the lords of the
earth, who had assembled there. Established in battle, I challenged all those kings. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I raised those maidens onto my chariot. Knowing that they were being offered as viryashulka,4 I raised them
onto my chariot and told all the lords of the earth who had assembled there, ‘Bhishma, Shantanu’s son, is taking
these maidens away by force.’ I repeated the challenge. ‘O kings! Use the limits of your strength to set them free.
O lords of men! I am forcibly abducting them, in front of your eyes.’ At this, all those lords of the earth arose, with
weapons upraised. Enraged, they instructed their charioteers to yoke the chariots. Some were on chariots that were
like the clouds. Others were on elephants and were warriors who fought on elephants. Other lords of the earth were
on the backs of horses. They arose, with weapons upraised. O lord of the earth! Those lords of the earth surrounded me from all directions. With a great mass of chariots, they attacked me from all sides. I repulsed them with a
great shower of arrows. I vanquished all those kings, like the king of the gods against the danavas. I brought down
their colourful and gold-embellished standards. With a single arrow each, I brought them down on the ground. O
bull among men! I laughed and used my ﬂaming arrows to bring down their horses, elephants and chariots in that
battle. On seeing the dexterity of my palms, they were shattered and retreated. After vanquishing those lords of the
earth, I returned to Hastinapura. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O mighty-armed one! I recounted my deed
to Satyavati and handed over the maidens for my brother.”’
CHAPTER 834(171)

‘Bhisma said, “O best of the Bharata lineage! I approached my mother, the mother of brave ones and saluting her,
told the daughter of the Dasha lineage,5 ‘I have vanquished the kings and have obtained these daughters of the lord
of Kashi for Vichitravirya. I have abducted them in accordance with the norms of viryashulka.’ O king! She inhaled the fragrance of my head. With her eyes ﬁlled with tears, Satyavati told me, ‘O son! It is through good fortune that you have obtained victory.’ With Satyavati’s permission, a date was ﬁxed for the marriage. The eldest
daughter of the lord of Kashi spoke these bashful words. ‘O Bhishma! You are knowledgeable about dharma and
you are skilled in all the sacred texts. You should listen to my words and then act towards me in accordance with
dharma. In my mind, I had earlier chosen the lord of Shalva as my groom. Without this being known to my father,
he had also chosen me in secret. I desire someone else. O king! O Bhishma! Especially because you are a Kourava,
how can you, who have studied the sacred texts, make someone like that live in this household? O bull among the
Bharata lineage! Now that you know this, make up your mind about what should be done. O mighty-armed one!
You should do that which is appropriate. O lord of the earth! It is evident that King Shalva is waiting for me. O
mighty-armed one! O supreme among those who uphold dharma! You should take pity on me. O brave one! We
have heard that you are famous in this world for being truthful to your vows.’”’
CHAPTER 835(172)

‘Bhishma said, “O lord of men! I then informed Kali6 Satyavati, the advisers, the brahmanas and the priests and
allowed the eldest maiden, Amba, to leave. On obtaining the permission, the maiden went to the capital of the lord
of Shalva. She was protected by aged brahmanas and accompanied by her nurse. Travelling the entire distance, she
went to that lord of men and told King Shalva these words. ‘O mighty-armed one! O immensely radiant one! I
have arrived here, before you.’ O lord of the earth! But the lord of Shalva smiled and told her, ‘O one with the
beautiful complexion! You have belonged to another one before this and I do not wish you as my wife. O fortunate
one! Therefore, return again to the descendant of the Bharata lineage! After you have been forcibly abducted by
Bhishma, I do not desire you. You were won by Bhishma and seemed to be delighted then. He defeated all the
lords of the earth in a great battle. O one with the beautiful complexion! You have gone to another one before. I am
a king who is instructed by dharma and am skilled in knowledge. How can I accept as my wife a lady who has
gone to someone else before? O fortunate one! Go wherever you wish. Do not waste your time here.’ O king!

Amba was struck by the arrows of the god of love and told him, ‘O lord of the earth! Do not speak in this fashion. I
wasn’t happy when I was abducted by Bhishma, the destroyer of enemies. After driving away the lords of the
earth, he used force on me and I was weeping. O lord of Shalva! I love you. Love me back in return. I am an innocent maiden. Dharma does not approve of the abandoning of those who love you. I have come here after obtaining
the permission of Gangeya, who never retreats from the ﬁeld of battle. I have obtained his permission and have
come here before you. O lord of the earth! The mighty-armed Bhishma does not want me. I have heard that all
Bhishma’s exertions were for the sake of his brother. O king! Gangeya has given my sisters, Ambika and Ambalika, whom he had also abducted, to his younger brother Vichitravirya. O lord of Shalva! I have never desired any
man other than you. O tiger among men! I swear on my head that I have not thought of anyone but you. O Indra
among kings! I have come before you and I have not gone to any other man earlier. O Shalva! I am telling you the
truth. I swear on my own self that this is the truth. O one with the large eyes! Love me. A maiden has come to you
of her own accord. I have not been to any other man earlier. O Indra among kings! I desire your favours.’ O foremost among the Bharata lineage! But though she spoke in this way, Shalva abandoned the daughter of the king of
Kashi, the way a snake discards its old skin. She sought his favours with these and many other words. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! But the king who was the lord of Shalva did not show her his favours. Then the eldest
daughter of the king of Kashi was overcome by anger. With tears in her eyes and with her voice choking with
tears, she said, ‘O lord of the earth! Having been discarded by you, I will go wherever I wish. I will go to the virtuous. It has been rightly said that where there is virtue, there is truth.’ O Kouravya! The maiden spoke in this way
and lamented piteously. But the lord of Shalva abandoned her and Shalva repeatedly said, ‘O one with the beautiful hips. Go. Go from here. I am frightened of Bhishma. You are Bhishma’s property.’ She was thus addressed by
Shalva, who was not far-sighted. She departed wretchedly from the city, weeping like a female osprey.”’
CHAPTER 836(173)

‘Bhishma said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As she departed from the city, she thought to herself. ‘There
is no young woman on earth who faces such a difﬁcult situation as me. I have been separated from my relatives. I
have been treated badly by Shalva. I am incapable of returning to the city of Varanasahrya.7 Bhishma granted me
permission because I wished to go to Shalva. Will I blame myself or the unassailable Bhishma? Or should it be my
foolish father who arranged for the svayamvara? Is it my own fault that I did not jump down from Bhishma’s chariot? When that terrible war raged on earlier, should I have descended and run away to Shalva? The consequences
are that I have to endure the fruits of this conduct, like a foolish person. Shame on Bhishma. Shame on my evil father, whose intelligence is foolish. He offered me as viryashulka, as if I am a woman who can be offered at a price.
Shame on me. Shame on King Shalva. Shame on the creator. It is because of everyone’s bad sentiments that I now
confront this calamity. In every way, a man must endure what destiny has determined. But Shantanu’s son, Bhishma, is the chief reason for my hardship. I see that I now have to exact vengeance on Bhishma, through austerities
and ﬁghting. It is my view that he is the reason behind my misery. But which lord of the earth is capable of withstanding Bhishma in battle?’ Having reﬂected in this way, she left the city.
‘“She went to the hermitages of great-souled ascetics who were sacred in their conduct. Surrounded by those ascetics, she spent a night there. O mighty-armed one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The one with the sweet
smiles told them everything about herself and the details of what had happened, the abduction, the release and the
abandonment by Shalva. A great brahmana named Shaikhavatya lived there. He was rigid in his vows and aged in
his austerities. He was a preceptor in the sacred texts and in the aranyakas.8 Shaikhavatya, the great ascetic and
sage, spoke to the distressed maiden, who was sighing and was overcome by grief and misery. ‘O fortunate one!
Now that this has happened, what can ascetics do for you? We are immensely fortunate ones who live in hermitages. We are great souls engaged in austerities.’ O king! But she told him, ‘Show me a favour. I wish to wander
around and perform extremely difﬁcult austerities. Because of my stupidity, I must have performed deeds in earlier
bodies. I have must acted in evil ways and this must certainly be the fruit. O ascetics! I am not interested in returning to my relatives. I have been rejected. I am unhappy. I have been wronged by Shalva. O ascetics! O those who
are devoid of sin! I wish to be instructed here. You are the equals of the gods. Be compassionate towards me.’ He

then consoled the maiden with examples, sacred knowledge and reasons. Together with the other brahmanas, he
comforted her and promised that he would act accordingly.”’
CHAPTER 837(174)

‘Bhishma said, “Then all the ascetics engaged themselves in their respective tasks. The ones who followed dharma
wondered about the maiden and thought, ‘What will we do?’ A few among those ascetics said, ‘We should take her
back to her father’s residence.’ Others thought that I9 should be censured. Some others thought of going to the lord
of Shalva and asking him to take her back. Others said no to this, because she had been rejected by him. All the
ascetics, rigid in their vows, again said, ‘O fortunate one! This having occurred, what can we learned ones do? O
fortunate one! Listen to these beneﬁcial words. There is no need for you to wander around. O fortunate one! Depart from here and go to your father’s residence. The king, your father, will know what should be done next. You
possess all the qualities. O fortunate one! Go and dwell there happily. O fortunate one! You have no refuge other
than your father. O one with the beautiful complexion! For any arya lady, the husband or the father is the refuge. A
husband is the refuge when things are smooth. A father is the refuge when things are rough. Roaming around is
extremely difﬁcult, especially for someone who is delicate. O beautiful one! Being a princess, you are naturally
delicate. O fortunate one! O one with the beautiful complexion! There are many taints associated with dwelling in
a hermitage. There will be none in your father’s residence.’ The brahmanas spoke these words to the ascetic lady.
‘On seeing you alone in this deserted and dense forest, kings will solicit you. Therefore, do not set your mind on
this.’
‘“Amba replied, ‘I cannot go again to my father’s residence in the city of Kashi. There is no doubt that I will be
disrespected by my relatives. O ascetics! It was different when I dwelt in my father’s residence as a child. O fortunate ones! I will not go where my father is now. O foremost among brahmanas! I wish to practise austerities under
the protection of ascetics, so that I do not confront great ill fortune, in this world or the next.’”
‘Bhishma said, “When those brahmanas were reﬂecting on this, the ascetic rajarshi Hotravahana arrived in that
forest. All the ascetics honoured the king. They worshipped and welcomed him and offered him a seat and water.
After he had seated himself and had rested, in his hearing, those residents of the forest again spoke to the maiden.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing the story of Amba, the daughter of the king of Kashi, her mother’s father10 trembled and arose. O lord! He placed the maiden on his lap and comforted her. He asked her about
the entire story of the reasons behind her hardships. In detail, she told him exactly what had happened. Then the
rajarshi was overcome by great grief and misery. The extremely great ascetic thought in his mind about what
should be done next. He trembled and in great grief, told the distressed maiden, ‘O fortunate one! Do not go to
your father’s residence. I am your mother’s father. O daughter! Depend on me. I will dispel your sorrows. O
daughter! You have become desiccated. I think you have had enough. Listen to my words and go to the ascetic
Rama,11 Jamadagni’s son. Rama will remove your extremely great unhappiness and sorrow. If he does not listen to
his words,12 he will kill Bhishma in battle. Go to the foremost among the Bhargavas, whose energy is like that of
the ﬁre of destruction. That great ascetic will establish you on a smooth path.’ She repeatedly shed many tears. She
lowered her head before Hotravahana, her mother’s father, and said, ‘I will follow your instructions and will go.
But will I be able to see that arya, famous in the world? How will Bhargava destroy my terrible misery? I wish to
learn about this and I will go there after that.’”’
CHAPTER 838(175)

‘“Hotravahana said, ‘O child! You will see Rama, Jamadagni’s son, in the great forest. He is engaged in terrible
austerities.He is devoted to the truth. He is extremely strong. The rishis,13 those who are learned in the Vedas, the
gandharvas14 and the apsaras15 always worship Rama on Mahendra, the foremost among mountains. O fortunate
one! Go there. He is aged in austerities and is ﬁrm in his vows. After saluting him by lowering your head, tell him
these words of mine. O fortunate one! Tell him once again about what you desire. On hearing my name, Rama will
do everything that you wish for. O child! Rama is my friend. He is affectionate towards me and is my well-wisher.
The brave one is Jamadagni’s son. He is supreme among those who wield all weapons.’

‘“While King Hotravahana was speaking to the maiden in this way, Akritavrana, Rama’s devoted follower, appeared.16 All the sages arose in their thousands and so did King Hotravahana from Srinjaya, aged in years. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! As is appropriate, those residents of the forest asked about each other’s welfare.
Then they seated themselves around him17 and conversed about delightful subjects, beautiful and celestial ones. O
Indra among kings! They were happy and delighted. When they had ﬁnished, the great-souled rajarashi Hotravahana asked Akritavrana about Rama, foremost among maharshis. ‘O Akritavrana! Where is it possible to see Jamadagni’s powerful and mighty-armed son, foremost among those who have knowledge of the Vedas?’
‘“Akritavrana said, ‘O lord! O king! Rama always speaks about you. “Rajarshi Srinjaya is my beloved friend.”
It is my belief that Rama will be here tomorrow morning. You will see him when he comes here, desiring to meet
you. O rajarshi! Why has this maiden come to the forest? Who does she belong to and what is her relationship to
you? I wish to know this.’
‘“Hotravahana replied, ‘O lord! She is my daughter’s daughter. She is the beautiful daughter of the king of
Kashi. O unblemished one! She is the eldest and, with her sisters, was at the svayamvara. She is famous by the
name of Amba and she is the eldest daughter of the lord of Kashi. O one rich in austerities! Ambika and Ambalika
are younger to her. O brahmarshi! For the sake of these maidens, all the kshatriya kings gathered in the city of
Kashi and there was a great festival. Then the immensely valorous and greatly energetic Bhishma, Shantanu’s son,
slighted the kings and abducted the three maidens. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!18 The pure-souled Bhishma vanquished the lords of the earth and went to Gajasahrya19 with the maidens. The lord then handed them over
to Satyavati, for the sake of a marriage with his brother Vichitravirya. O bull among brahmanas! On seeing that
arrangements had been made for a marriage, in the midst of the ministers, this maiden told Gangeya, “In my mind,
I have chosen the brave lord of Shalva as my husband. O one who is learned about dharma! When I have thought
of someone, you should not give me to someone else.” When he heard these words, Bhishma consulted with his
ministers. Bhishma made up his mind to give her up and with Satyavati’s permission, gave her leave to go to Shalva, the lord of Soubha. O brahmana! The maiden was delighted at that time and went and told him, “I have been
given up by Bhishma. Act towards me in accordance with dharma. O bull among kings! In my mind, I have chosen
you earlier.” However, suspicious of her conduct, Shalva rejected her. Deciding to undertake austerities, she came
to this hermitage. I recognized her when she recounted her lineage. She thinks that Bhishma alone is responsible
for her unhappiness.’
‘“Amba said, ‘O illustrious one! It is just as Srinjaya King Hotravahana, the creator of my mother’s body, has
said. O one rich in austerities! I do not wish to go back to my own city. O great sage! I will be insulted there and
am ashamed. O supreme among brahmanas! I will do what the illustrious Rama asks me to. O illustrious one! It is
my view that this is what I should do.’”’
CHAPTER 839(176)

‘“Akritavrana said, ‘O fortunate one! O woman! O child! There are two hardships. Which of these do you actually
wish to redress? O fortunate one! If it is your view that the lord of Soubha should be urged, then, desirous of your
welfare, the great-souled Rama will ask him accordingly. Or if you wish to see Bhishma, the son of the river, vanquished in battle by the intelligent Bhargava Rama, he will do that also. O one with the beautiful smiles! We will
think about what should be done after hearing your words, and those of Srinjaya.’
‘“Amba replied, ‘O illustrious one! When he abducted me, Bhisma acted out of ignorance. O brahmana! Bhishma did not know that my mind was set on Shalva. Before deciding, you should bear this in mind too. Having decided in accordance with what is right, then determine what should be done. O brahmana! Decide what needs to be
done about both Bhishma, tiger among the Kurus, and the king of Shalva. I have told you exactly about the reasons
for my unhappiness. O illustrious one! In accordance with the reasons, decide on a course of action.’
‘“Akritavrana said, ‘O fortunate one! O one with the beautiful complexion! What you have said about dharma is
correct. Now listen to these words of mine. O timid one! If the son of the river had not taken you to Gajasahrya, on
the instructions of Rama, Shalva would have bowed down his head and accepted you. O fortunate one! O beautiful
one! But you have been won over and abducted. O one with the beautiful waist! Therefore, King Shalva has a

doubt about you. Bhishma is insolent about his manliness and victory. I think it is appropriate that action should be
taken against Bhishma.’
‘“Amba replied, ‘O brahmana! That has always been the great desire in my heart, if only I could kill Bhishma in
battle. O mighty-armed one! Whether you think that the fault lies with Bhishma or King Shalva, chastise the one
because of whom I have faced this extreme misery.’”
‘Bhishma said, “While they were conversing in this way, the day passed. O best of the Bharata lineage! It was
night and a pleasant and cool breeze blew. Then Rama appeared, like the blazing ﬁre in his energy. O king! He was
surrounded by his disciples. The sage had matted hair and was clad in bark. The unblemished one with an indomitable soul held a bow in his hand and a sword and a battle axe. O tiger among kings! He approached King
Srinjaya. On seeing him, all the ascetics and the immensely ascetic king arose, hands joined in salutation. So did
the ascetic maiden. They eagerly honoured Bhargava with madhuparka.20 Having been shown homage, he seated
himself among them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Jamadagni’s son and rajarshi Srinjaya conversed about
earlier times. When this conversation was over, in due course of time, the rajarshi spoke these sweet words, full of
meaning, to the immensely strong Rama, foremost among the Bhrigus. ‘O Rama! This is my daughter’s daughter.
O lord! She is the daughter of the king of Kashi. O one who knows what should be done! Listen to her and decide
on an appropriate course of action.’ Rama replied, ‘Tell me your supreme account.’ She approached Rama, who
was like a blazing ﬁre. The beautiful one lowered her head at Rama’s feet. She touched them with hands that were
like the petals of lotuses and stood before him. Her eyes were ﬁlled with tears and she wept in grief. She sought
refuge with the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage, the one who is everyone’s refuge.
‘“Rama said, ‘O daughter of a king! You are like Srinjaya to me. Tell me about the grief in your mind and I will
act in accordance with your words.’
‘“Amba replied, ‘O illustrious one! O one who is great in his vows! I have sought refuge with you. I am immersed in this ocean and mud of sorrow. O lord! Save me.’”
‘Bhishma said, “Rama saw her beauty, her youthful age and her extremely delicate form and began to think.
‘What is she going to say?’ Flooded by compassion, Rama, supreme among those of the Bhrigu lineage, thought in
this fashion for a long time. Rama spoke to the one with the beautiful smiles. ‘Tell me.’ She told Bhargava everything, exactly as it had happened. After having heard the words of the princess, Jamadagni’s son made up his mind
and told the one with the beautiful thighs, ‘O beautiful one! I will send word to Bhishma, foremost among the Kurus. When he has heard my words, in conformity with dharma, that lord of men will act accordingly. O fortunate
one! If Jahnavi’s son21 does not act in accordance with my words, I will use the energy of my weapons to burn
him down in battle, together with his advisers. O princess! Or if you are so inclined, I will force the brave lord of
Shalva to a course of action.’
‘“Amba replied, ‘O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! When Bhishma heard that my mind had earlier turned towards King Shalva, he discarded me. I went to the king of Soubha and spoke words that were difﬁcult to speak.22
But doubting my character, he did not accept me. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! You should think about all
this and then use your own intelligence to decide on the right course of action. Bhishma, the one who is mighty in
his vows, is the root cause of my hardship. He used force to overcome and abduct me. O mighty-armed one!
Bhishma is the reason behind this unhappiness. Kill him. O tiger among the Bhrigu lineage! It is because of him
that I am wandering around in this supreme misery. O Bhargava! He is greedy and insolent because of his victory.
O unblemished one! It is appropriate that you should take revenge against him. O lord! When the descendant of the
Bharata lineage was abducting me, I thought of this resolution in my mind, that the one who is great in his vows
should be killed. O Rama! O unblemished one! Therefore, fulﬁl this desire of mine. O mighty-armed one! Kill
Bhishma, like Purandara23 slew Vritra.’”’
CHAPTER 840(177)

‘Bhishma said, “O lord! Having been thus asked to kill Bhishma, Rama spoke to the weeping maiden, who kept
urging him repeatedly. ‘O descendant of Kashi! O one who is beautiful in complexion! I do not voluntarily take up
weapons, except for the sake of those who are learned about the brahman.24 What else can I do for you? O

princess! Both Bhishma and Shalva will listen to my words and obey my instructions. O one with the unblemished
limbs! I can do that. Do not grieve. O beautiful one! But I cannot take up weapons in any way, unless I am instructed to do so by brahmanas. That is my resolution.’
‘“Amba replied, ‘O illustrious one! Dispel the grief that Bhishma has unleashed on me. O lord! Without any delay, kill him.’
‘“Rama said, ‘O daughter of Kashi! If you speak the word, no matter how revered he is, Bhishma will follow my
instructions and lower his head at your feet.’
‘“Amba replied, ‘O Rama! If you wish to do that which brings me pleasure, kill Bhishma in battle. Since you
have made your promise, it is proper that you should make that pledge come true.’”
‘Bhisma said, “O king! While Rama and Amba were arguing in this way, Akritavrana spoke these words to Jamadagni’s son. ‘O mighty-armed one! You should not give up the maiden who has sought refuge with you. O
Rama! Kill Bhishma, who roars like an asura, in battle. O Rama! O mighty sage! If Bhishma challenges you in
battle, he will either be vanquished, or he will act in accordance with your words. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! The task of this maiden will then be done. O brave one! O lord! The words that you have spoken will come
true. O Rama! O great sage! Once upon a time, you took a pledge. O Bhargava! You promised the brahmanas that
if a brahmana, a kshatriya, a vaishya or a shudra came to hate brahmanas, you would kill him in battle. O one who
provides refuge! Even for the sake of your own life, you said you were incapable of forsaking a terriﬁed person
who seeks refuge with you, even if all the kshatriyas assemble against you in battle. O Bhargava! You said you
would slay such insolent ones. O Rama! Bhishma, the extender of the Kuru lineage, is triumphant. O descendant of
the Bhrigu lineage! Confront him in a battle and ﬁght with him.’ ‘“Rama replied, ‘O supreme among rishis! I remember the promise I made in earlier times. I will do what can be achieved through conciliation. O brahmana! The
task that this maiden from Kashi has set her mind on is great. I will take this maiden and myself go to Bhishma.
Insolent in war, if he does not act in accordance with my words, it is my certain resolution that I will kill that insolent person. The arrows that I unleash do not remain in bodies.25 You learnt that earlier, in the battle with the kshatriyas.’”
‘Bhishma said, “Having spoken in this way, the immensely intelligent Rama arose, together with those who
knew about the brahman, having made up his mind to leave. The ascetics spent the night there. They offered oblations into the ﬁre. They prayed and meditated. Then they departed, desiring to kill me. O great king! O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! With those bulls among brahmanas and with the maiden, Rama went to Kurukshetra. Having reached the Sarasvati, those great-souled ascetics, with the foremost among the Bhrigus at the forefront, began
to dwell there.”’
CHAPTER 841(178)

‘Bhishma said, “O king! On the third day after he had established himself on that level terrain, the one who is great
in his vows sent word to me, saying that he had arrived. On learning that the immensely strong lord, the store of
energy, had arrived on the outskirts of my kingdom, I was delighted. O Indra among kings! With a cow in front of
me and surrounded by brahmanas, sacriﬁcial priests who were the equals of the gods and other priests, I went
there. On seeing me arrive, Jamadagni’s powerful son received the homage and spoke these words to me. ‘O
Bhishma! What were your thoughts when you abducted the daughter of the king of Kashi against her wishes? You
then abandoned her later. You have dislodged her from both inferior and superior dharma.26 Who can now go to
someone who has been touched by you? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Because she has been abducted by
you, she has been refused by Shalva. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O tiger among men! Therefore, following my counsel, take her back and let the princess abide by her own dharma. O king! O unblemished one! You do
not deserve to treat her with such neglect.’ On seeing that his mind wasn’t that agitated,27 I spoke to him. ‘O brahmana! There is no way that I can give her to my brother again. O Bhargava! She has told me that she has given
herself to Shalva earlier. Having obtained my permission, she went to the city of Soubha. Because of fear, compassion, avarice or gain, I cannot abandon the dharma of kshatriyas. That is the vow that I follow.’

‘“Rama’s eyes dilated with anger and he said, ‘O bull among the Kurus! If you refuse to act in accordance with
my words, I will kill you today, together with your advisers.’ In great rage, Rama spoke these words repeatedly.
His eyes were wide with anger. I repeatedly tried to pacify that scorcher of enemies with sweet words. But I was
incapable of pacifying that tiger of the Bhrigu lineage. I then bowed my head down before that supreme among
brahmanas and asked, ‘What is the reason behind your desire to ﬁght with me? When I was a child, you yourself
taught me the four kinds of weapons.28 O mighty-armed one! O Bhargava! You have instructed me and I am your
student.’ His eyes red with anger, Rama told me, ‘O Bhishma! You know that I am your preceptor. O Kouravya! O
lord of the earth! Yet, to bring about my pleasure, you are refusing to take back the daughter of Kashi. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! I am not interested in peace with you. O mighty-armed one! Take her back and save
yourself and your lineage. Since you have tainted her, she will not ﬁnd a husband.’
‘“When he spoke in this way, I told Rama, the destroyer of enemy cities, ‘O brahmarshi! Since this cannot be
done, what is the point of striving towards it? I see my earlier teacher, Jamadagni’s son. O illustrious one! I seek
your favours, like in earlier times. Who will allow a woman to dwell in his house, established like a snake, knowing that she desires another? This is the great taint associated with women. O immensely radiant one! Even the fear
of Vasava will not make me give up dharma. Without any delay, show me your favours, or do whatever you must
do. O pure-souled one! O lord! An ancient shloka has been heard, chanted by the great-souled and immensely intelligent Marutta. “If a preceptor does not know what should be done and what should not be done, if he deviates
from the right path and if he is arrogant, it is one’s duty to abandon him.” Because you are my preceptor, I have
been affectionate and have greatly honoured you. But you are not acquainted with the conduct of a preceptor and I
will therefore, ﬁght with you. However, I cannot kill a preceptor in battle, especially one who is a brahmana, especially one who is rich in austerities. I am at peace with you. If one sees a brahmana with an upraised weapon, as if
he is the kin of a kshatriya, and angrily kills him in the ﬁeld of battle, without running away from the ﬁght, dharma
is clear that no sin is committed from killing a brahmana. O one rich in austerities! I am a kshatriya. I am established in the dharma of kshatriyas. A man does not commit adharma if he reacts in response to what another person
has done. Instead, his welfare is ensured. If a person knows about artha and dharma and about the time and the
place, even if he has doubts about what ensures artha, there is no doubt that he should do that which ensures welfare. In this case, there is doubt about where artha lies. But you are acting as if you know what is right. O Rama!
Therefore, I will ﬁght with you in a great battle. You will witness the valour of my arms and my superhuman bravery. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! Given this, I will do whatever I can. O brahmana! I will ﬁght with you in
Kurukshetra. O Rama! O great sage! Prepare yourself for the duel. O Rama! You will be killed by hundreds of my
arrows. Sanctiﬁed by my weapons in that great battle, you will obtain the worlds that you have earned for yourself.
O one who is in love with war! Return from here and go to Kurukshetra. O mighty-armed one! O one rich in austerities! I will ﬁght with you there. O Rama! That is the place where you had once sanctiﬁed your father.29 O
Bhargava! I will kill you there and sanctify you there. O Rama! O one who is unassailable in war! Go there swiftly.
You have boasted in the past, saying that you are a brahmana. O Rama! You have often boasted in assemblies that
you have exterminated kshatriyas from the world. But listen to my words. At that time, Bhishma had not been born
and there were no kshatriyas like me, who could dispel your insolence about war and your love for ﬁghting. O
mighty-armed one! But Bhishma, the destroyer of enemy cities, has been born now. O Rama! There is no doubt
that I will destroy your insolence in war.’”’
CHAPTER 842(179)

‘Bhishma said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then Rama began to laugh and spoke to me. ‘O Bhishma! It
is your good fortune that you wish to ﬁght with me in battle. O Kouravya! Together with you, I will go to Kurukshetra. O scorcher of enemies! I will do what you have asked me to and you should also go there. O Bhishma! Let
your mother Jahnavi watch me kill you with hundreds of arrows, so that you become the food of vultures, crows
and cranes. O king! Let the goddess,30 worshipped by siddhas31 and charanas,32 be miserable when she sees you
slain by me today and weep. The immensely fortunate river, the daughter of Bhagiratha, does not deserve to see
this.33 But she has given birth to an evil and diseased one like you, who cherishes war. O Bhishma! Come with me

and let us go together. Let there be a battle today. O Kouravya! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Take everything, chariots and other things.’ Rama, the vanquisher of enemy cities, spoke these words to me. O king! I bowed
my head before him and said that it would be this way.
‘“After speaking these words, desirous of ﬁghting, Rama went to Kurukshetra. I entered the city34 and told
Satyavati everything. I performed the propitiatory rites and was blessed by my mother. O immensely radiant one!
The brahmanas pronounced sacred words of benediction. I mounted a beautiful and silver chariot, yoked to white
horses. It had been constructed well and had been prepared well. It was strewn with the hides of tigers. It was
loaded with great weapons and every kind of implement. O king! It was driven by a brave charioteer born in a noble lineage, skilled in the knowledge of horses. He had often witnessed my deeds. I was covered in beautiful and
white armour. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! I grasped a white bow. O lord of men! A white umbrella was
held aloft my head and white whisks were brandished. I was attired in white. My headgear was white. All my ornaments were white. Applauded with benedictions of victory, I left Gajasahrya. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I
arrived in Kurukshetra, the ﬁeld where the battle would be fought. O king! Goaded by the charioteer, the horses,
with the speed of the mind and the wind, swiftly bore me to the supreme ﬁeld of battle. Like me, the powerful
Rama also swiftly reached Kurukshetra. O king! In battle, we wished to show our valour to each other. I stood before the supreme ascetic Rama, so that he could see me. I grasped my supreme conch shell and began to blow on it.
O king! All the brahmanas, the ascetics who lived in the forest, the gods and the masses of rishis assembled to witness the divine battle. Celestial garlands manifested themselves repeatedly. Divine musical instruments sounded.
There was the rumbling of masses of clouds. All the ascetics who followed Bhargava surrounded the ﬁeld of battle
as witnesses.
‘“The goddess who is my mother desires the welfare of all beings. O king! She manifested herself before me
and said, ‘What is it that you wish to do? O extender of the Kuru lineage! I will go to Jamadagni’s son and plead
with him. I will repeatedly tell him, “Do not ﬁght with Bhishma, your student.” O son! O king! And you should
not behave so obstinately towards a brahmana. Why do you wish to ﬁght with Jamadagni’s son in a battle?’ She
censured me. ‘O son! Do you not know that Rama, the destroyer of kshatriyas, is equal to Hara35 in valour? Why
do you wish to ﬁght with him?’ I joined my hands in salutation before the goddess. O foremost among the Bharata
lineage! I accurately told her everything that had transpired at the svayamvara. O Indra among kings! I told her
how I had tried to obtain Rama’s favours earlier and about the ancient love of the daughter of the king of Kashi.
My mother, the great river, then went to Rama. For my sake, the goddess sought to pacify the rishi Bhargava. She
said, ‘Do not ﬁght with Bhishma, your student.’ He replied to her, ‘It is Bhishma that you should restrain. I am
here because he is not doing what I desire.’”
‘Sanjaya36 said, “Out of affection towards her son, Ganga then returned to Bhishma. But his eyes were red with
anger and he did not pay heed to her words. The great ascetic, foremost among the Bhrigus, with dharma in his
soul, then appeared. The supreme among the brahmanas challenged him again to the battle.”’
CHAPTER 843(180)

‘Bhishma said, “I laughed and spoke to the one who stood ready for battle. ‘You are standing on the ground and I
do not wish to ﬁght with you while I am established on my chariot. O brave one! O mighty-armed one! O Rama!
Mount a chariot and armour yourself, if you wish to ﬁght with me in battle.’ In that ﬁeld of battle, Rama smiled
and told me, ‘The earth is my chariot. O Bhishma! The Vedas bear me, like well-trained horses. The wind is my
charioteer. The mother of the Vedas is my armour.37 O descendant of the Kuru lineage! I am protected well by
these and will ﬁght in the battle.’ O son of Gandhari! Rama’s truth is his valour and while speaking in this way, he
covered me on all sides with a great shower of arrows. I then saw Jamadagni’s son stationed on a celestial chariot.
It was stocked with all kinds of radiant weapons that were extraordinary to look at. It was created from his mind
and was sacred. It was as expansive as a city. It was yoked to celestial horses that were ready. It was decorated
with gold. O mighty-armed one! It was adorned with a banner that had the sign of the moon embellished on it. He
held a bow and his quivers were fastened. He had guards on his arms and ﬁngers. His friend Akritavrana, learned
in the Vedas and beloved of Bhargava, acted as his charioteer. Wishing to ﬁght, Bhargava delighted my heart by

repeatedly saying, ‘Attack’ and challenging me to do battle. He was unassailable and extremely strong and was
like the rising sun. Alone, I approached Rama, the destroyer of kshatriyas. When I was at a distance of three shots
of an arrow,38 I restrained my mounts. I descended. Putting aside my bow, I advanced towards that supreme of
rishis. I showed homage to Rama, supreme among brahmanas, in the prescribed fashion and offered him worship,
speaking these supreme words. ‘O Rama! I will ﬁght with you in battle, though you are better than me and superior. You are my preceptor. You follow dharma. O lord! Bless me so that I may be victorious.’
‘“Rama replied, ‘O foremost among the Kurus! This is what should be done by those who desire prosperity. O
mighty-armed one! This is dharma for those who ﬁght with their superiors. O lord of the earth! Had you not approached me like this, I would have cursed you. O Kourava! Make every effort to ﬁght in this battle and resort to
fortitude. I cannot bless you for your victory, because I am standing here, wishing to defeat you. Go and ﬁght in
accordance with dharma. I am pleased with your conduct.’”
‘Bhishma said, “I bowed before him and swiftly ascended my chariot. Desiring battle, I once again blew on my
conch shell, which was decorated with gold. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A battle then ensued between
him and me. As we sought to defeat each other, it lasted for many days. He was the ﬁrst one to strike me, with nine
hundred and sixty-nine arrows that were shafted with the feathers of cranes. They were like the ﬁre in their energy.
O lord of the earth! My four mounts and my charioteer were restrained in that battle. But since I was armoured, I
remained ﬁrm. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I bowed to the gods and brahmanas. While he stood established on that ﬁeld of battle, I smiled and replied to him. ‘Though you have behaved harshly towards me, I have
honoured you as a preceptor. O brahmana! Listen again to what must be done if one wishes to accumulate a store
of dharma. I will not strike the Vedas that are there in your body, your great brahmana characteristics, or the extremely great austerities that you have collected. O Rama! I will strike the dharma of kshatriyas that you have resorted to. When a brahmana raises his weapons, he becomes like a kshatriya. Behold the valour of my bow. Behold
the strength of my arms. O brave one! I will slice your bow and arrows into two.’ O bull among the Bharata lineage! I shot a sharp arrow39 at him. The ends of his bow were shattered and it fell down on the ground. I shot nine
hundred arrows towards Jamadagni’s son. They had lowered tufts and were shafted with the feathers of cranes.
They were directed towards his body and were spurred on by the wind. Those arrows sped on, seeming to spout
blood, like serpents. All the limbs in his body were wounded and blood ﬂowed out from those wounds. O king! At
that time, Rama looked like Meru spouting out its minerals, or an ashoka tree at the end of the winter, covered with
red blossoms, or like a kimshuka tree.40
‘“At this, Rama was overcome by anger and took up another bow. He showered down sharp arrows, with golden
shafts, on me. There were many terrible arrows, capable of piercing the heart. They were extremely fast and made
me tremble. They were like ﬂames, or the poison of snakes. I again summoned my patience in that battle. Enraged
in that battle, I unleashed one hundred arrows at Rama. They were sharp and were like the ﬁre or the sun, or like
the venom of snakes. Struck by these, Rama seemed to lose his consciousness. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I
was overcome by compassion and censured myself. ‘Shame on battles and on kshatriyas!’ O king! I was overcome
by sorrow and repeatedly said, ‘I am evil. I have committed a sin by acting like a kshatriya. My preceptor is a
brahmana. He has dharma in his soul. He has been oppressed by my arrows.’ O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
I did not strike Jamadagni’s son any more. Having heated the earth, once the day was over, the one with the thousand rays41 departed and the ﬁght was over.”’
CHAPTER 844(181)

‘Bhishma said, “O lord of the earth! My charioteer was revered for his skill in these matters. He removed the
shafts from himself, from the horses and from me. The horses were bathed and rolled around on the ground. They
obtained water and were refreshed. When the sun arose in the morning, the battle resumed. On seeing me swiftly
approach, stationed and armoured on my chariot, the powerful Rama ensured that his chariot was also completely
ready. When I saw that Rama was desirous of doing battle, I cast aside my excellent bow and swiftly descended
from my chariot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As earlier, I showed him homage and then mounted my
chariot again. Without any fear and ready to ﬁght, I stood before Jamadagni’s son. He enveloped me with a great

shower of arrows. I also covered him with a shower of arrows. O king! Enraged, Jamadagni’s son again released
arrows at me and they were like snakes with ﬂaming mouths. O king! Swiftly, I repeatedly sliced them down in the
sky with hundreds and thousands of sharp bhallas.
‘“O mighty-armed one! At this, Jamadagni’s powerful son released divine weapons at me and I repulsed them
with my weapons. I wished to perform the superior deeds. In every direction, a great roar could be heard in the ﬁrmament. I used the vayavya42 weapon against Jamadagni’s son. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Rama countered this with his guhyaka weapon.43 I invoked the mantra and released the agneya weapon.44 The lord Rama
countered this with a varuna weapon.45 In this fashion, I countered Rama’s celestial weapons and Rama, the destroyer of enemies and knowledgeable in divine weapons, repulsed mine. O king! Rama, supreme among brahmanas and Jamadagni’s immensely strong son, then suddenly turned to the left and enraged, struck me in the chest.
O foremost among the Bharata lineage! I fainted and fell down on that supreme chariot. O foremost among the
Bharata lineage! On seeing me in that miserable state and oppressed by Rama’s arrows, my charioteer quickly carried me away to the distance of one goruta.46 All of Rama’s followers, Akritavrana and the others, were extremely
delighted when they saw that I had fallen down pierced, having lost my consciousness. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They cheered, and so did the maiden from Kashi.
‘“When I had regained consciousness and got to know what had happened, I told my charioteer, ‘O charioteer!
Go where Rama is. I have regained my senses and my pain has gone.’ O Kouravya! The extremely beautiful horses
seemed to be dancing. They were as ﬂeet as the wind. The charioteer bore me back on them. O Kourava! On having reached Rama, wishing to vanquish him, I was angry and covered the raging one with a net of arrows. Those
arrows ﬂew straight. But in that battle, Rama sliced them down with his own arrows, shooting three arrows for
each one that I did. All my arrows were extremely sharp. However, in that great battle, all of them were sliced into
two by hundreds of Rama’s arrows. Wishing to kill Rama, Jamadagni’s son, I again unleashed a ﬂaming arrow that
was extremely radiant and was like time itself. He was struck deeply and pierced by that arrow. Rama swiftly lost
consciousness and fell down on the ground. When Rama fell down on the ground, a lamentation arose everywhere.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The world was anxious, as if the sun had fallen down. Extremely anxious and
overcome by grief, all the ascetics and the maiden from Kashi rushed towards the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage. They embraced him and comforted him gently, with cool water in their hands. O Kourava! They pronounced
benedictions for his victory.
‘“Rama arose. Though he was confused, he spoke these words to me. ‘O Bhishma! Stand there. You are dead.’
He afﬁxed an arrow to his bow and released it. In that great battle, the swift arrow struck me on my left side. I was
extremely agitated, like a tree whirled by the wind. O king! In that great battle, he killed my horses with swift
weapons. His dexterity with arrows was such that he could carry away a single one of my body hair. To counter
him in that battle, I also used swift weapons. O mighty-armed one! I unleashed an arrow that could not be countered and all those arrows, Rama’s and mine, remained in the air47 and swiftly covered the sky in every direction.
The sun was covered in this net of arrows and no longer provided any heat. The wind could not pass through them,
as if it had been restrained by clouds. The wind trembled and dashed against the sun’s rays. From this friction, a
ﬁre was created in the sky. The arrows blazed, because of the colourful ﬁre that had been created by them. O king!
Everything on the ground was then reduced to ashes. O Kourava! Rama was angry and shot hundreds, thousands,
millions,48 one hundred millions, ten thousands, ten trillions and billions of swift arrows at me. But in that battle, I
sliced them down with my own arrows, which were like the poison of snakes. O king! I shattered them and made
them fall down on the ground, like serpents. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Thus did the battle continue
then. When twilight had passed, my preceptor withdrew.”’
CHAPTER 845(182)

‘Bhishma said, “O supreme among the Bharata lineage! When I encountered Rama the next day, there was again a
terrible and tumultuous battle. From one day to the next, the brave lord, who has dharma in his soul and knows
about the use of divine weapons, released many celestial weapons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But, in
that terrible battle where one is ready to give up one’s precious life, I repulsed them with weapons that could be

used for countering. When many weapons were thus destroyed, the immensely energetic Bhargava became wrathful. He fought, ready to give up his own life. Having been restrained by weapons, Jamadagni’s great-souled son
grasped a spear that was terrible in form. It was like a ﬂaming meteor that had been created by time itself. It blazed
at the tip and covered the world with its energy. It ﬂamed towards me, like the sun at the time of destruction. With
my ﬁery arrows, I sliced it into three and it fell down on the ground. At that, a breeze with a sacred fragrance began to blow. When this was sliced down, Rama’s anger was ignited. He hurled twelve other terrible spears at me.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I am incapable of describing their forms, their energy and their speed. But I
watched them in confusion. They advanced from all the directions, like giant meteors, or the ﬁre. They had many
forms and energy and ﬂamed at the tips. They were like twelve suns, at the time of the destruction of the world. O
king! When I saw that net of arrows49 extending, I sliced them down with my net of arrows. In that battle, I shot
twelve arrows and countered those spears, terrible in form. Jamadagni’s great-souled son then hurled another terrible spear at me. It possessed a golden shaft and was colourful, with a golden tassel. It was like a giant meteor and
was ﬂaming. O Indra among men! I repulsed it with my sword and shield and it fell down. In that battle, I used divine arrows against Jamadagni’s son and showered his celestial horses and his charioteer. On seeing that his
colourful spear, which had the form of an unleashed snake, had been repelled, the great-souled one, the oppressor
of the Haihaya,50 was overcome by anger and grasped a divine weapon. A mass of ﬂaming arrows, without
tufts,51 manifested itself, like a terrible swarm of locusts. They pierced and completely overwhelmed my body, my
horses, my chariot and my charioteer. My chariot was covered everywhere with those arrows. O king! And so were
my mounts and my charioteer. The yoke of the chariot, the wheels and the axle were shattered through those arrows. When that shower of arrows was exhausted, I also showered arrows on my preceptor in return. Bhargava’s
body, and his mass of brahmana energy, were pierced by those arrows and began to discharge a lot of blood. Rama
was tormented by my net of arrows. I was also suffering from many deep wounds. When the sun headed for the
mountain behind which it sets, the ﬁghting ended in the afternoon.”’
CHAPTER 846(183)

‘Bhishma said, “O Indra among kings! The unblemished sun arose in the morning and Bhargava’s battle with me
resumed again. Rama, supreme among those who wield weapons, stationed on a fast-moving chariot, showered a
net of arrows on me, like Shakra at a mountain. My charioteer, my well-wisher, was hurt by that shower of arrows
and fell down from the chariot. I was dejected. Being greatly struck by the force of those arrows, my charioteer became deeply unconscious and fell down on the ground. Oppressed by Rama’s arrows, my charioteer gave up his
life. O Indra among kings! For an instant, I was also overcome by fear. O king! When my charioteer was killed and
my mind was agitated, Rama hurled deadly arrows at me. While I was still overwhelmed on account of the charioteer, Bhargava powerfully drew his ﬁrm bow and pierced me with an arrow. O king! It was an arrow that drank
blood. It struck me on the clavicle. O Indra among kings! When I fell down, it fell down with me on the ground. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! Rama then thought that I was dead. He repeatedly roared in delight, thundering
like a cloud. O king! When I fell down, Rama rejoiced. Together with his followers, he emitted a loud roar. The
Kurus were at my side and there were others who had come to witness the ﬁght. When I fell down, they were
supremely distressed.
‘“O lion among kings! When I fell down, I saw eight brahmanas. They possessed the radiance of the sun and the
ﬁre. They surrounded me from every direction and in that ﬁeld of battle, supported me with their arms. Supported
by those brahmanas, I did not actually touch the ground. I was held up in the air by them, as if they were relatives.
It was as if I was asleep in the air and they sprinkled drops of water on me. O king! The brahmanas who were supporting me spoke to me. ‘Do not be scared. Everything will be ﬁne.’ Sustained by those words, I suddenly arose
and saw my mother, foremost among rivers, stationed on my chariot. O Indra among Kouravas! I saw that the great
river was controlling and steering my horses. I touched my mother’s feet and those of Arshtishena52 and ascended
my chariot. She had protected my chariots, my horses and my implements. I joined my hands in salutation and
asked her to leave. I then myself controlled those horses, which were as ﬂeet as the wind. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! I fought with Jamadagni’s son, until the day was over. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! In

that battle, I shot an arrow at Rama. It was fast and extremely powerful. It pierced him in the heart. Oppressed by
that arrow, Rama lost his senses. He let go of his bow and sank down on the ground on his knees. When Rama, the
one who gave away thousands,53 fell down, clouds covered the sky and showered copious quantities of blood.
Meteors fell down in hundreds. There were storms and earthquakes. Suddenly, Svarbhanu54 swallowed up the
blazing sun. Harsh winds began to blow. The earth trembled. Vultures, crows and cranes were delighted and circled around. The directions blazed. A jackal repeatedly howled in a terrible voice. Drums sounded in horrible
tones, though they had not been struck. When the great-souled Rama became unconscious and fell down on the
ground, there were all these terrible and fearful portents. The soft rays of the sun were covered. Enveloped in dust,
it prepared to set. Night arrived, with a cool and pleasant breeze. Both of us withdrew from the ﬁght. O king! In
this way, there was a ceaseﬁre then. When day dawned, it started again. From one day to another, it thus went on
for twenty-three days.”’
CHAPTER 847(184)

‘Bhishma said, “O Indra among kings! O lord of the earth! That night, I bowed my head before the brahmanas, the
ancestors, all the gods, the beings who roam in the night and to night itself. I retreated to my bed and in private,
reﬂected about this in my mind. ‘This extremely terrible and great battle between Jamadagni’s son and me has
been going on for many days. I cannot defeat the immensely valiant brahmana in the ﬁeld of battle. He is immensely strong. If I am capable of vanquishing Jamadagni’s powerful son, let the gods be favourable and show me
the way tonight.’ O Indra among kings! Wounded by arrows, I fell asleep that night. The foremost among brahmanas had raised me when I had fallen down from the chariot. They had held me and comforted me, asking me not
to be afraid. O great king! When it was almost dawn, on my right side, they appeared in a dream. O extender of the
Kuru linage! Listen. They surrounded me and spoke these words. ‘O Gangeya! Arise and do not be frightened.
You have nothing to be scared of. O tiger among men! We are protecting you, because you have sprung from our
own bodies. There is no way in which Rama, Jamadagni’s son, can defeat you in battle. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! But you will vanquish Rama in battle. You will recognize this beloved weapon of yours. When you were
in an earlier body, you used to be familiar with it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This was created by Vishvakarma. It is Prajapatya and is known by the name of prasvapan.55 Rama does not know about this, nor does any
other man on earth. O mighty-armed one! O Indra among kings! Remember it and use it with force. O lord of men!
Rama will not be killed with this weapon. O one who shows honours! Therefore, there will be no sin if you use it.
Oppressed by the force of your arrow, Jamadagni’s son will fall asleep. O Bhishma! Having thus defeated him, you
will then make him rise up again, with this beloved weapon of yours, named sambodhana.56 O Kouravya! When
you are stationed on your chariot in the morning, act as we have asked you to. Whether one is asleep, or whether
one is dead, we regard the two as equal. O king! Rama will never become mortal. Therefore, when it arrives before
you,57 use prasvapan.’ O king! Having said this, all those supreme among brahmanas disappeared. All those eight
were similar in form. All of them were radiant, like the sun personiﬁed.”’
CHAPTER 848(185)

‘Bhishma said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When night was over, I woke up. I thought about my dream
and was extremely delighted. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then a tumultuous battle started between him
and me. It was extraordinary for all beings and made the body hair stand up. Bhargava showered arrows down on
me. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I countered them with a net of arrows. Thereupon, the greatly ascetic
was again supremely enraged. Like it had happened the day before, he angrily hurled a spear at me. It was like Indra’s vajra to the touch. It was as resplendent as Yama’s staff. It ﬂamed like the ﬁre and licked all directions of that
ﬁeld of battle. O tiger among the Bharata lineage! With great force, it struck me on the shoulder. It was like the altar of a sacriﬁcial ﬁre in the sky.58 Thus wounded by the mighty-armed Rama, whose eyes were red, terrible
streams of blood began to ﬂow, like minerals streaming from mountains.
‘“I was extremely angry at Jamadagni’s son. I hurled an arrow at him. It was like death, like the poison of serpents. O great king! The brave one, supreme among brahmanas, was struck on the forehead and shone like a

mountain, with a peak at the top. He was extremely angry and turned towards me. Powerfully, he drew his bow
and shot an arrow at me. It was like time and death. It was terrible and was capable of destroying enemies. Like a
hissing serpent, the terrible arrow struck me on the chest. O king! Covered with blood, I fell down on the ground.
When I regained my senses, I hurled an unblemished spear at Jamadagni’s intelligent son. It ﬂamed like lightning.
It struck that foremost among brahmanas between the arms. O king! He lost his senses and began to tremble. His
friend Akritavrana, the great ascetic and brahmana, embraced him and repeatedly comforted him with auspicious
words. Thus comforted, Rama, the one with the great vows, became angry and was overcome with intolerance. He
manifested the supreme weapon known as brahma. To counter it, I also used the supreme brahma weapon. It
blazed, appearing like something at the end of an era.59 O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The two brahma
weapons encountered each other in mid-air, without reaching either Rama or me. O lord of the earth! The sky became only a great mass of energy and all the beings were distressed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Because
of the energy of those weapons, the rishis, the gandharvas and the gods were extremely tormented and oppressed.
The earth, with its mountains, forests and trees, trembled. The tormented beings were supremely afﬂicted. O king!
The sky blazed. The ten directions were full of smoke. Those that were in the sky were no longer capable of remaining in the ﬁrmament. There was a great lamentation in the world, with the gods, the asuras and the rakshasas.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I decided that this was the time and prepared to release my beloved prasvapan weapon, as those who knew about the brahman had asked me to. As soon as I thought about the weapon in my
mind, it appeared before me.”’
CHAPTER 849(186)

‘Bhishma said, “O king! At this, there was the sound of a great tumult in the sky. ‘O Bhishma! O descendant of the
Kuru lineage! Do not release prasvapan.’ But I aimed that weapon at the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage. While I
was aiming prasvapan, Narada spoke these words to me. ‘O Kourvaya! The masses of gods are established in the
ﬁrmament. They are restraining you now. Do not use prasvapan. Rama is an ascetic with brahmana qualities. He is
a brahmana and your preceptor. O Kouravya! You should never show him disrespect in any way.’ Then I saw those
eight, who knew about the brahman, stationed in the sky. O Indra among kings! They smiled and spoke softly to
me. ‘O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Do as Narada has asked you to. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
That will be supremely beneﬁcial for the world.’ In that ﬁeld of battle, I then withdrew the weapon prasvapan. In
that battle, in accordance with the prescription, I readied the blazing brahmastra.60 O prince! On seeing that the
weapon had been withdrawn, Rama was enraged. He suddenly raised his voice and spoke these words. ‘I have
been defeated by the extremely evil-minded Bhishma.’61 Then Jamadagni’s son saw his father, and his father, and
his father also.62
‘“They surrounded him and in a comforting voice, spoke these words. ‘O son! Never act in such a rash way
again, especially ﬁghting with a kshatriya like Bhishma. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! It is the dharma of
kshatriyas to ﬁght. The supreme riches of brahmanas are studying and observing vows. Earlier, we asked you to do
this for a speciﬁc purpose63 and you took up arms and performed a ﬁerce deed. O son! You have fought enough
with Bhishma. You have been defeated. O mighty-armed one! Withdraw from the ﬁeld of battle. O fortunate one!
Let there be an end to wielding the bow. O unassailable one! O Bhargava! Give it up and practise austerities.
Bhishma is Shantanu’s son and he has been restrained by all the gods. They have asked him to withdraw from the
battle. They have repeatedly told him, “Do not ﬁght with Rama, your preceptor. O extender of the Kuru lineage! It
is not proper for you to defeat Rama in battle. O Gangeya! In the ﬁeld of battle, show respect to this brahmana. We
are your seniors and therefore, we are restraining you.” Bhishma is foremost among the Vasus. O son! It is fortunate that you are still alive. Shantanu’s son, Gangeya, is an immensely famous Vasu. How can he be defeated by
you? O Rama! Refrain. Arjuna is foremost among the Pandavas. He is Purandara’s powerful son. He is the brave
Nara Prajapati, the ancient and eternal god.64 He is famous in the three worlds as the valiant Savyasachi. At the
right time, it has been ordained by the self-creating one65 that he will be the cause of Bhishma’s death.’ Thus addressed by his ancestors, Rama replied to his ancestors. ‘I will not refrain from this battle. That is the vow that I
observe. I have never withdrawn from the forefront of battle earlier. O grandfathers! If it so pleases you, let the son

of the river withdraw from the ﬁght. There is no way that I will withdraw from this ﬁght.’ O king! Then those
sages, with Richika at the forefront and with Narada, approached me and said, ‘O son!66 Honour the supreme
brahmana and withdraw from the battle.’ I told them, ‘No, because of my respect for the dharma of kshatriyas, my
vow in this world is that I will never withdraw from a ﬁght. I will not withdraw and retreat. I will not be pierced by
arrows on my back. Greed, misery, fear or the possibility of gain cannot make me abandon this eternal dharma.
This is my ﬁrm resolution.’ O king! Then all the sages, with Narada at the forefront and Bhagirathi, my mother,
stood in the midst of that ﬁeld of battle. Firm in my resolution to continue ﬁghting, I stood in that ﬁeld of battle,
with an arrow ﬁxed to my bow.
‘“In that ﬁeld of battle, they again spoke collectively to the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage. ‘O Bhargava! Be
paciﬁed. The heart of brahmanas is like butter. O Rama! O Rama! O supreme among brahmanas! Refrain from
ﬁghting. O Bhargava! Bhishma is incapable of being killed by you and you by Bhishma.’ All of them addressed
him in this way and obstructed him in the ﬁeld of battle. His ancestors made the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage
lay down his weapons. Then I again saw those eight, who were knowledgeable about the brahman. They were as
resplendent as eight rising planets. While I stood on the ﬁeld of battle, they spoke these affectionate words to me.
‘Go to the mighty-armed Rama, your preceptor. Do what is beneﬁcial for the world.’ On seeing that Rama had
withdrawn because of the words of his well-wishers and for the welfare of the world, I acted in accordance with
the words that had been spoken to me. I was severely wounded. But I went up to Rama and honoured him. Rama,
the great ascetic, smiled affectionately at me and said, ‘O Bhishma! In this world, there is no kshatriya like you
who roams the earth. Go. In this ﬁght, I have been extremely satisﬁed with you.’ In my presence, Bhargava summoned the maiden. In the midst of those ascetics, he spoke these miserable words.”’
CHAPTER 850(187)

‘“Rama said, ‘O beautiful one! In the sight of all the worlds, to the supreme extent of my capacity, I have shown
great manliness. But in battle, I have not been able to establish my superiority over Bhishma, supreme among
those who wield weapons, even though I exhibited my supreme weapons. This is the ultimate of my power. This is
the ultimate of my strength. O fortunate one! Go wherever you wish. What else can I do for you? Seek refuge with
Bhishma. There is no other recourse for you. Unleashing his great weapons, Bhishma has vanquished me.’”
‘Bhishma said, “Having spoken in this way, the great-minded Rama sighed and was silent. The maiden then
spoke to the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage. ‘O illustrious one! It is just as your illustrious self has said. The intelligent Bhishma is invincible in battle, even to the gods. You have performed my task to the best of your capacity
and the best of your endeavours. In this battle, you have been unrestrained in valour and have used many weapons.
But in the end, he could not be surpassed in battle. Under no circumstances, will I go back to Bhishma again. O
one rich in austerities! O extender of the Bhrigu lineage! Instead, I will go where I can myself bring Bhishma
down in battle.’ Her eyes red with anger, the maiden spoke in this way. Thinking about my death, she made up her
mind to engage in austerities. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After taking leave from me, Rama, supreme
among the Bhrigu lineage, went with the sages to Mahendra, from where he had come. Praised by the brahmanas, I
ascended my chariot and having entered the city, told my mother, Satyavati, everything that had transpired. O great
king! She congratulated me. I instructed wise men to watch over the maiden’s doings and from one day to another,
they reported to me her goings, words and deeds. Every day, they were engaged in ensuring my welfare. From the
moment the maiden left for the forest to perform austerities, I was miserable and wretched. It was as if I had lost
my senses. O son!67 No kshatriya can vanquish me in battle with valour, except one who knows about the brahman, has performed austerities and is rigid in his vows.
‘“O king! Because of my fear, I informed Narada and Vyasa about her deeds. Both of them told me, ‘O Bhishma! You should not be despondent about the deeds of the daughter of Kashi. Through human efforts, who can
counteract destiny?’ O great king! The maiden resorted to a circle of hermitages that was on the banks of the Yamuna and engaged in superhuman austerities. She gave up food. She became thin and coarse. She had matted hair.
She became covered with dirt and mud. Rich in austerities, she lived on air for six months and was like a pillar.
Later, the beautiful one went to the banks of the Yamuna and stood in the water for one year, without taking any
food. After that, for another year, she survived on a single leaf every day. She was terrible in her anger and stood

on the tips of her toes. She continued in this way for twelve years and heated up heaven. None of her relatives
were capable of restraining her. She went to Vatsabhumi,68 frequented by siddhas and charanas. This was the hermitage of great-souled ascetics whose deeds were sacred. In that sacred region, she bathed day and night. O king!
O Kouravya! The maiden from Kashi roamed around, as she willed, in the hermitage of Nanda, in the sacred hermitage of Uluka, the hermitage of Chyavana, the region of the brahman, Prayaga, the sacriﬁcial region of the gods,
the forests of the gods, Bhogavati, the hermitage of Koushika, the hermitage of Mandavya, the hermitage of Dilipa, Rama’s lake69 and the hermitage of Pailagargya. O king! O lord of the earth! The maiden from Kashi bathed at
these tirthas and performed terrible austerities.
‘“O Kouraveya! My mother arose from the water and asked her, ‘O fortunate one! Why are you undergoing this
pain? Tell me truthfully.’ O king! The unblemished one joined her hands in salutation and replied, ‘O one with the
beautiful eyes! Bhishma has not been defeated by Rama in battle. When he raises his arrows, who else can strive
against that lord of the earth? I will myself observe extremely difﬁcult austerities for Bhishma’s destruction. O
goddess! I will roam around the earth in order to kill that king. May this be the fruit that I obtain in another body.’
The river that goes to the ocean then said, ‘O beautiful one! You are following a crooked path. O one with the unblemished limbs! O lady! This desire of yours is impossible to accomplish. O maiden from Kashi! O beautiful one!
If you observe a vow for Bhishma’s destruction, if you indeed give up your body in this vow, you will only become a crooked river that has water during the rainy season. You will have terrible tirthas that no one will recognize. You will only ﬂow during the rains and will remain dry for eight months. You will have terrible and fearful
crocodiles and will be horrible to all beings.’ O king! Having spoken thus, my immensely fortunate and beautiful
mother smiled and tried to restrain the maiden from Kashi.
‘“The one with the beautiful complexion did not eat or drink water, sometimes for eight months, sometimes for
ten months. O Kourvaya! In her desire for more tirthas, the daughter of the king of Kashi again roamed around and
fell into70 Vatsabhumi. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! She became a river in Vatsabhumi, known as
Amba.71 She only ﬂows in the rainy season. She has many crocodiles and terrible tirthas. She is crooked. O king!
Through her austerities, half of the maiden became a river in Vatsa. The other half remained a maiden.”’
CHAPTER 851(188)

‘Bhishma said, “All the ascetics saw that she was ﬁrm in her resolution to perform austerities. O son!72 They tried
to stop her and asked, ‘What do you wish to accomplish?’ The rishis were aged in their austerities and the maiden
replied to them, ‘I have been abandoned by Bhishma and have been dislodged from the dharma I would have obtained through a husband. O ones rich in austerities! I have consecrated myself for his death and not for the sake of
any world.73 I have resolved that I will achieve peace only through Bhishma’s death. It is because of his deeds that
I have obtained this eternal and inﬁnite misery. I have been deprived of the world of a husband. I am neither a
woman, nor a man. O ones rich in austerities! I will not desist until I have slain Gangeya in battle. This is the resolution in my heart and I am engaged for this purpose. I am disgusted with my state as a woman and I have made up
my mind to become a man. I wish to exact vengeance on Bhishma. I should not be dissuaded again.’ The god who
wields the trident, Uma’s consort, manifested himself. In the midst of the maharshis, he showed his own form to
the beautiful one. He satisﬁed her with a boon and she asked for my defeat. The god replied to the intelligent one,
‘You will kill him.’ At this, the maiden spoke to Rudra. ‘O god! How can a woman like me be victorious in battle?
O Uma’s consort! Since I am a woman, my mind is deep.74 O lord of beings! You have promised Bhishma’s defeat. O one with the bull on the banner!75 Act so that your promise comes true, so that I can kill Bhishma, Shantanu’s son, in battle.’ The Mahadeva, with the bull on his banner, spoke truthfully to the maiden. ‘O fortunate one!
I do not utter false words. What I have said will come true. You will attain manhood and will kill Bhishma in battle. When you enter another body, you will remember everything. You will be born as a maharatha in Drupada’s
lineage. You will be an extremely honoured warrior who is swift in the use of weapons. O fortunate one! Everything will be exactly as I have said it will be. You will become a man after some time has passed.’ Having thus
spoken, Mahadeva Kapardi Vrishadhvaja76 disappeared, while all the brahmanas looked on. In the sight of those

maharshis, the unblemished one, the one with the beautiful complexion, gathered wood from the forest. She constructed an extremely large funeral pyre and set ﬁre to it. O great king! When the ﬁre was blazing, with rage igniting her senses, she said, ‘This is for Bhishma’s destruction.’ O king! On the banks of the Yamuna, the eldest
daughter of Kashi entered the ﬁre.”’
CHAPTER 852(189)

‘Duryodhana asked, “O Gangeya! How did the one who had been a maiden earlier become Shikhandi? O grandfather! O foremost among men in a battle! Tell me that.”
‘Bhishma said, “O Indra among kings! O lord of the earth! The beloved wife and queen of King Drupada did not
have any sons. O great king! At that time, King Drupada satisﬁed Shankara for the sake of an offspring. Having
determined to bring about our death, he resorted to terrible austerities.77 He said, ‘O illustrious one! I wish to have
a son to exact vengeance on Bhishma.’ But he obtained a daughter from Mahadeva, not a son. The god of gods
replied, ‘You will have a female child, who will be male. O lord of the earth! Return. It will not be otherwise.’ He
returned to the city and told his wife, ‘O queen! I have made endeavours for a son and have performed great austerities. But Shambhu has said that we will have a daughter who will later become a man. When I repeatedly
pleaded with him, Shambhu replied, “That is destiny and it cannot be otherwise. It is fated that way.”’ When her
season arrived, King Drupada’s spirited wife puriﬁed herself and united with Drupada. As had been decreed by
destiny, she conceived at the right time, through Parshata.78 O lord of the earth! This is what Narada told me. O
descendant of the Kuru lineage! O descendant of the Kuru lineage! When the lotus-eyed queen conceived, out of
hope for a son, the mighty-armed King Drupada happily tended to his beloved wife. King Drupada was childless.
O lord of men! At the right time, Drupada’s illustrious queen gave birth to a daughter who was supreme in her
beauty. O Indra among kings! The king was without a son and had it proclaimed, ‘A son has been born to me.’ O
lord of men! King Drupada concealed the facts and had all the rites performed for a son, as if he had a son. Drupada’s queen protected the secret and made every effort to say that a son had been born. Other than Parshata, no one
else in the city knew. Out of respect for the words of the god with extraordinary energy,79 he concealed that it was
a daughter and said that it was a son. The king performed all the rites connected with birth and everything else that
was decreed, as if it was a male child. He was known as Shikhandi. I alone knew, through a spy, through Narada’s
words, through the words of the god80 and through Amba’s austerities.”’
CHAPTER 853(190)

‘Bhishma said, “Drupada took great care about all his relatives. O Indra among kings! Shikhandi81 became
supremely skilled in painting and the arts. In the use of arrows and other weapons, she became Drona’s student. O
great king! The beautiful82 mother asked the king to ﬁnd a wife for the daughter, as if she were a son. Parshata
saw that his daughter had become mature. Knowing that she was a woman, with his wife, he began to worry. Drupada said, ‘My daughter has become mature and this increases my sorrows. Following the words of the one who
wields the trident, I have concealed her. O great queen! That can never turn out to be false. How can the creator of
the three worlds utter a falsehood?’ The wife replied, ‘O king! If it pleases you, listen to the words that I have to
say. O son of Prishata! Having heard, you should then carry out your own tasks. O king! Let her take a wife in accordance with the prescribed rites. It is my ﬁrm view that his83 words will come true.’ Having thus decided on a
course of action, the couple chose as a bride the daughter of the lord of Dasharna. King Drupada, lion among men,
asked about all the kings who had pure lineages. As Shikhandi’s wife, he chose the daughter of the king of Dasharna. The king of Dasharna was known as Hiranyavarma. The lord of the earth gave his daughter away to Shikhandi.
King Hiranyavarma of Dasharna was an extremely powerful king. He was unassailable and possessed a large army.
He was high-minded.
‘“O supreme among kings! When the marriage had been performed, the maiden attained maturity and so did the
maiden Shikhandi. Having obtained a wife, Shikhandi returned to Kampilya.84 For some time, the maiden did not
know that she85 was a woman. When Hiranyavarma’s daughter got to know this about Shikhandi, she was

ashamed and reported to her nurses and friends that Shikhandi, the daughter of the king of Panchala, was a maiden.
O tiger among kings! The nurses from Dasharna were supremely distressed and sent messengers86 with the news.
All the messengers told the lord of Dasharna about the deception, exactly as it had happened and the king was
ﬁlled with anger. O great king! At that time, Shikhandi conducted himself like a male in the royal household. Disregarding the fact that he was a woman, he sported himself happily. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O Indra
among kings! When Hiranyavarma heard about this a few days later, he was afﬂicted with anger. The king of
Dasharna was overcome with terrible rage. He sent a messenger to Drupada’s abode. Kanchanavarma’s87 messenger went to Drupada. He took him aside and privately said, ‘O king! The king of Dasharna has spoken these words.
O unblemished one! He is extremely enraged at having been deceived by you. “O king! I have been insulted by
you and your bad counsel, that out of the delusion in your heart, you have sought my daughter for your own
daughter. O evil-minded one! You will now reap the fruits of that deception. Be steady. I will uproot you, with
your relatives and your advisers.”’”’
CHAPTER 854(191)

‘Bhishma said, “O king! Thus addressed by the messenger, Drupada was like a thief who had been caught in the
act and could not utter a word. He made extreme efforts to pacify his in-law, through messengers who used sweet
words to argue this wasn’t the case. But the king88 again ascertained the truth of the matter, that the daughter of
Panchala was actually a maiden, and swiftly marched out. In accordance with the words of the nurses, he sent messengers to all his inﬁnitely energetic friends about the deception that had been practised on his daughter. That
supreme among kings assembled an army. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He made up his mind to invade
Drupada. O Indra among kings! King Hiranyavarma consulted with his friends about what should be done vis-avis the king of Panchala. All the great-souled kings decided, ‘O king! If it is true that Shikhandi is a woman, we
will bind the king of Panchala and take him home. We will instate another king as the king of Panchala. We will
kill King Drupada, together with Shikhandi.’ Having learnt about their resolution, the lord of men89 again sent his
kshatta90 to Parshata with the words, ‘Be steady. I am going to kill you.’ King Drupada was timid by nature. In
addition, the lord of men was guilty. He was overcome by dreadful fright. After having sent the messenger from
Dasharna away, Drupada became extremely distressed. The lord of men, the king of Panchala, met his wife in private and spoke these words to Shikhandi’s beloved mother. His heart was overcome by great fear and oppressed
with grief. ‘My extremely powerful in-law is full of anger. King Hiranyavarma will attack me with an army. I am a
fool. What will I now do about our daughter? It is suspected that your son Shikhandi is actually a woman. Having
determined that this is the truth and thinking that he has been deceived, with his friends, his forces and his followers, he wishes to destroy me. O one with the beautiful hips! O lovely one! Tell me what is true and what is false. O
fortunate one! Having heard your words, I will act accordingly. I am in danger and so is the child Shikhandi. O
queen! O one with the fair complexion! You also confront a great hardship. I am asking you to tell me everything.
O one with the beautiful hips! O one with the beautiful smiles! Do not be frightened about Shikhandi. Knowing the
truth, I will make arrangements. O one with the beautiful thighs! I was myself deceived because of the lawful rites
that had been performed for a son. Thus I deceived the king of Dasharna, the lord of the earth. O immensely fortunate one! Tell me and I will act for our welfare.’ The lord of men knew, but wished to establish his innocence before others.91 Thus addressed, the queen replied to the lord of the earth in public.”’
CHAPTER 855(192)

‘Bhishma said, “O lord of men! O mighty-armed one! Then Shikhandi’s mother told her husband everything about
the maiden Shikhandi. ‘O king! I was without a son and was scared of my co-wives. Though Shikhandi was born
as a girl, I reported that she was male. O best of men! O bull among kings! Out of affection towards me, you performed the rites for a son, though those for a daughter should have been performed. O king! Then you got the
daughter of the lord of Dasharna as a wife. You remembered the purport of the words the god had spoken earlier.
Though born as a girl, she would become a man later. So we overlooked it.’ On hearing this, Drupada Yajnasena
reported the entire truth to his advisers. O king! The king consulted with them, about what should be done to pro-

tect the subjects. O Indra among men! Though he had himself deceived the king of Dasharna, he was certain the
matrimonial alliance was an appropriate one and was attentive to the consultations. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! The city was naturally protected for times of emergency. O Indra among kings! He fortiﬁed it more and
adorned it everywhere. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Together with his wife, the king was extremely distressed at this enmity with the lord of Dasharna. Thinking about this great enmity with his in-law in his mind, he
began to worship the gods. O king! On seeing him thus devoted to the gods and worshipping them, his wife, the
queen, spoke these words. ‘In times of prosperity, the worship of the gods is truly praised by the virtuous. Great
worship is recommended for those who are immersed in an ocean of grief. Worship all the gods. Let there be large
quantities of donations. Let oblations be offered into the ﬁre, so that Dasharna can be countered. O lord! Think in
your mind about how he can be restrained without a ﬁght. Through the grace of the gods, all of this will happen. O
one with the large eyes! Have consultations with your ministers, so that the city is not destroyed. O king! Act accordingly. O lord of the earth! Destiny, together with human endeavour, brings great success. But when they act
against each other, neither succeeds. Therefore, together with your advisers, take appropriate measures for the city.
O lord of the earth! Then worship the gods, as you please.’ The spirited maiden, Shikhandi, was overcome with
grief at seeing them converse in this fashion and was ﬁlled with shame. She thought, ‘It is because of me that both
of them are suffering.’ She made up her mind to kill herself.
‘“Having been overcome by terrible misery, she decided this and left the residence for the deep and deserted forest. O king! This happened to be ruled by a yaksha92 named Sthunakarna. O lord! Because they were afraid of
him, people avoided that forest. Sthuna’s abode was constructed with bricks and was plastered white. It was full of
smoke from parched grain. It had high walls and a gate. O king! Drupada’s daughter, Shikhandi, entered there. She
fasted for many days and dried her body out. The yaksha Sthuna had eyes like honey and showed himself to her.
‘Why have you begun to do this? Tell me and I will do it without any delay.’ She replied to the yaksha, ‘This is impossible to accomplish.’ However, the guhyaka93 told her, ‘I will do it. O daughter of a king! I am the follower of
the lord of riches.94 I am one who grants boons. I will even give what cannot be granted. Tell me what you wish.’
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then Shikhandi told everything, in complete detail, to the foremost of yakshas, Sthunarkarna. ‘O yaksha! My father faces a calamity and will soon be destroyed. In great anger, the lord of
Dasharna is invading him. The king with the golden armour95 is great in his strength and great in his energy. O
yaksha! Therefore, save me and my father and my mother. You have promised that you will relieve my unhappiness. O yaksha! O unblemished one! Through your favours, make me a man, before that king attacks my city. O
great yaksha! O guhyaka! Bestow your favours on me.’”’
CHAPTER 856(193)

‘Bhishma said, “O bull among the Bharata lineage! The yaksha heard Shikhandi’s words. Overpowered by destiny,
he thought about this in his mind. O Kourava! This was indeed destined for my grief. He said, ‘O fortunate one!
Listen to me. I will do what you desire, but there is a condition. For a limited period of time, I will give you my
male organ. But I tell you truthfully that when that time is over, you must return to me. I am a lord whose wishes
always come true. I can roam in the sky and can assume any form at will. Save your city and your relatives
through my favours. O daughter of a king! I will bear your female organ. Promise me this and I will do what
brings you pleasure.’ Shikhandi replied, ‘O illustrious one! I will return your male organ to you. O one who roams
in the night! You will only bear my female organ for a limited period of time. When King Hemavarma96 has returned to Dasharna, I will become a maiden again and you will become a man.’ O king! Having said this, they
made an agreement with each other. They transferred to each other their respective organs. O lord of men! The
yaksha Sthunakarna wore the female organ and Shikhandi obtained the yaksha’s blazing form. O king! Having become a man, Shikhandi from Panchala happily entered the city and went and met his father. He told Drupada
everything, exactly as it had happened. On hearing this, Drupada was overcome with joy. Together with his wife,
he remembered Maheshvara’s words.
‘“O king! He sent a message to the lord of Dasharna. ‘My son is a man. You should have faith in me.’ The king
of Dasharna suddenly approached. Drupada, the king of Panchala, was full of grief and anger. When the lord of

Dasharna approached Kampilya, he sent a messenger, supreme in the knowledge of the brahman, to him,97 with
the words, ‘Honour him well and tell him this, on my instructions. “O evil-minded one! You chose my daughter for
your daughter. There is no doubt that you will witness the fruits of that disrespect today.”’ O supreme among
kings! Having been thus addressed, the brahmana messenger left for the city, under the instructions of the king of
Dasharna. The foremost one approached Drupada in the city. O Indra among kings! Together with Shikhandi, the
king of Panchala honoured him well and offered him a cow and the gift given to a guest.98 He did not accept those
honours and spoke these words in reply. ‘The brave king Kanchanavarma has spoken thus. “O vile one! You have
deceived me for the sake of your daughter. O evil-minded one! You will reap the fruits of that wicked deed. O lord
of men! Give me a ﬁght. In the head of the battle today, I will uproot you, together with your advisers, your sons
and your relatives.”’ O best of the Bharata lineage! In the midst of his ministers, the king heard all these insulting
words, spoken by the lord of Dasharna through that foremost messenger. He bowed and said, ‘O brahmana! You
have delivered the words that my in-law has spoken. My messenger will carry the reply.’ Drupada sent a brahmana
messenger, knowledgeable in the Vedas, to the great-souled Hiranyavarma. O king! He went to the king who was
the lord of Dasharna and repeated the words spoken by Drupada. ‘Let proper enquiries be made to show that my
son is a man. Someone has uttered a falsehood. What has been heard should not be faithfully believed.’ On hearing
Drupada’s words, the king was distressed. He despatched supreme ladies, who were extremely beautiful in form, to
ascertain if Shikhandi was a woman or a man. Having been sent, they learnt the truth. O Indra among Kouravas!
They reported everything to the immensely powerful king of Dasharna—that Shikhandi was a man. Having done
this, the king was delighted. He approached his in-law and cheerfully dwelt with him. That lord of men happily
gave Shikhandi elephants, horses, cows and many hundreds of servant-maids. Having been honoured and having
again conveyed his daughter,99 King Hemavarma was paciﬁed that there had been no sin and returned happily.
Shikhandi was also delighted.
‘“After some time had passed, Naravahana Kubera100 was touring through the worlds and arrived in Sthuna’s
residence. The protector of riches hovered over his house101 and inspected it. He saw that the yaksha Sthuna’s
abode was colourfully ornamented, with many kinds of garlands. There was parched grain and fragrances and
beautiful canopies. It was delightful with the smoke of incense. It was adorned with ﬂags and pennants. There was
food and drink, grain and meat and a supply of liquor. When he saw that place, decorated in every direction, the
lord of the yakshas spoke to the yakshas who were following him. ‘O inﬁnitely valiant ones! Sthuna’s residence is
decorated well. But why is the extremely evil-minded one not appearing before me now? The evil-souled one
knows that I am here. But he does not appear before me. It is my view that a severe punishment should be levied
on him.’ The yakshas replied, ‘O king! A daughter named Shikhandi was born to King Drupada. For her, and for
some reason, he has given her his marks of a man. He has accepted the marks of a woman. Having become a
woman, he remains in his house. That is the reason he has not appeared. He is ashamed that he now has the form
of a woman. O king! That is the reason you have not seen Sthuna today. Having heard this, do what you think is
proper. Let the vimana be stationed here.’ The lord of yakshas replied, ‘Let Sthuna be brought here.’ And repeatedly said, ‘I will punish him.’ O lord of the earth! O great king! On being summoned by the Indra among the yakshas, he went and stood there, ashamed in his female form. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! The lord of riches
was extremely wrathful and cursed him. ‘O guhyaka! This female form of the sinful one will remain.’ Thus did the
great-souled lord of the yakshas speak. ‘O one who has committed an evil act! Since you have insulted the yakshas
in your wicked wisdom and have given your organ away to Shikhandi, accepting the organ of a woman, in your
extremely vile intelligence, you have committed an act that has never been done before. Therefore, from now on,
you will be a woman and not a man.’ For the sake of Sthuna, the yakshas sought to appease Vaishravana.102 They
repeatedly asked him to set a time limit to the curse. O son!103 Then the great-souled Indra among the yakshas
replied to his followers, all those masses of yakshas, wishing to set a limit to the curse. ‘When Shikhandi has been
killed in battle, the yaksha Sthuna will regain his old form. Let the great-spirited one not be anxious.’ Having thus
spoken, the illustrious god, worshipped by the yakshas and the rakshasas, departed with all his followers, who
could travel in an instant.

‘“Having been cursed, Sthuna lived there. At the appointed time, Shikhandi came to the one who travels in the
night. He approached him and said, ‘O lord! I have arrived before you.’ Sthuna was delighted and repeatedly told
him, ‘I am pleased with you.’ On seeing that the prince Shikhandi had arrived, without being deceitful about it, he
told him everything that had transpired. The yaksha said, ‘O son of a king! It is because of you that Vaishravana
has cursed me. Go and happily travel the world, as you desire. I think that this, your coming here and the sight of
Poulastya,104 has been destined from earlier and cannot be countered.’ O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having been thus addressed by the yaksha Sthuna, Shikhandi was ﬁlled with great joy and returned to his city. He worshipped brahmanas, gods, sanctuaries and crossroads with many fragrances and garlands and a great deal of riches.
Drupada of Panchala and his relatives found extreme delight in his son, Shikhandi, who had accomplished his objective. O bull among the Kurus! He gave Shikhandi to Drona as a student. O great king! This was a son who had
been a woman earlier. Shikhandi, the son of a king, together with Parshata Dhrishtadyumna and all of you, learnt
the four parts of Dhanurveda. O son!105 Through spies, who pretended to be stupid and were deaf and blind, appointed by me against Drupada, I got to know exactly what was going on. O great king! Thus, Drupada’s offspring
is both a woman and a man. O foremost among the Kouravas! He became a supreme ratha.106 The eldest daughter of the king of Kashi was known by the name of Amba. O bull among the Bharata lineage! She was born in Drupada’s lineage as Shikhandi. When he appears before me with a bow in his hand, desiring to ﬁght, I will not glance
at him even for an instant and will not strike. This has always been my vow and it is renowned throughout the
earth. O descendant of the Kourava lineage! I will not shoot arrows at a woman, one who has earlier been a
woman, one who has the name of a woman and one who has the form of a woman. Because of this reason, I will
not kill Shikhandi. O son!107 I know the truth about Shikhandi’s birth. Therefore, I will not kill him, when he
seeks to slay me. Bhishma would rather kill himself than kill a woman. When I see him stationed in battle, I will
not kill him.”
‘Sanjaya said, “On hearing this, King Kouravya Duryodhana thought for some time, reﬂecting that this was worthy of Bhishma.”’
CHAPTER 857(194)

‘Sanjaya said, “When the night had passed and it was morning, in the midst of the entire army, your son again
asked the grandfather. ‘O Gangeya! The supreme army of the Pandaveyas has many men, elephants and horses and
is full of many maharathas. It is protected by immensely strong and great archers, Bhima, Arjuna and the others,
with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront. It is as if it is protected by the guardians of the world themselves.108 It is
unassailable. It is as unstoppable as a raging ocean. In a great battle, this ocean of soldiers cannot be rufﬂed even
by the gods. O Gangeya! O immensely radiant one! By what time will you be able to destroy it, or the great archer
the preceptor, or the immensely strong Kripa? Or Karna, who prides himself in war, or Drona’s son,109 supreme
among brahmanas? All of you in my army are knowledgeable about the use of divine weapons. Therefore, I wish
to know this. I have always had a supreme curiosity in my heart about this. O mighty-armed one! Tell me about
this.’”
‘Bhishma replied, “O foremost among the Kurus! O lord of the earth! This is indeed worthy of you, that you
should ask about the strengths and weaknesses of the enemy and about your own side. O king! O mighty-armed
one! Hear about the limits of my strength in battle, the limits of my weapons and the valour of my arms in battle.
In battle, an ordinary man must be fought without deceit. Those who know maya110 must be fought with maya.
That is the determination of dharma. Let me divide the days, taking the forenoon of each day as my share. O immensely radiant one! I think that I can take ten thousand warriors as my share. It is my view that I can take one
thousand rathas as my share. O mighty-armed one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this fashion, I can kill
the soldiers of the Pandavas. In this way, always armoured and always ready, I can destroy this great army over a
certain period of time. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If I am stationed in battle and unleash my great
weapons, which are capable of killing hundreds and thousands, I can kill them in one month.”
‘Sanjaya said, “O Indra among kings! On hearing Bhishma’s words, King Duryodhana then asked Drona,
supreme among the Angiras lineage. ‘O preceptor! In how much time can you slay the soldiers of the sons of Pan-

du?’ Drona smiled and replied, ‘O best of the Kurus! I am aged. My energy and strength are weak. It is my view
that with the ﬁre of my weapons, I can consume the army of the Pandavas in one month, just like Bhishma, Shantanu’s son. That is the limit of my power and strength.’ Kripa Sharadvata said two months and Drona’s son
promised the destruction of the army in ten nights. But Karna, skilled in the use of great weapons, promised it in
ﬁve nights. When the son of the one who heads to the ocean111 heard the words of the suta’s son, he laughed out
aloud and spoke these words. ‘O Radheya! As long as you have not encountered Partha in battle, wielding arrows,
a sword and a bow, with Achyuta Vasudeva steering the chariot, till that time you can think in this way. You are
capable of speaking a lot and saying anything that you want.’”’
CHAPTER 858(195)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O best of the Bharata lineage! Having heard this, Kounteya112 summoned his brothers in
private and spoke these words to them. “I have spies in the army of Dhritarashtra’s son. When night had passed,
they brought me this news. Duryodhana asked the son of the river, the one who is great in his vows. ‘O lord! How
long will you take to kill the soldiers of the Pandus?’ He told the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra that he would
take a month. Drona promised the same period of time. Goutama113 said double the time. We hear that Drona’s
son, skilled in the use of great weapons, promised ten nights. When Karna, skilled in the use of divine weapons,
was asked in the assembly of the Kurus, he promised to kill the army in ﬁve days. O Arjuna! Therefore, I wish to
hear your words. In how many days can you destroy the enemies in battle?” Thus addressed by the king, Gudakesha Dhananjaya looked towards Vasudeva and replied in these words. “All of them are great-souled and skilled in
the use of weapons. They can ﬁght in many ways. O great king! There is no doubt that they will kill your soldiers.
But I speak the truth when I say that you should not be tortured in your mind. When I have Vasudeva as an aide, on
a single chariot, I can slay the three worlds in an instant, with the immortals, with their mobile and immobile objects, and with everything that is the past, the present and the future. That is my view. I possess the terrible and
great weapon that Pashupati gave me when there was a duel with the hunter.114 At the end of a yuga, that is employed by Pashupati to destroy all the beings. O tiger among men! I know how to use that. Gangeya does not know
this, nor do Drona and Goutama. O king! Neither do Drona’s son and the son of the suta. One should not use such
divine weapons to kill ordinary people in battle. Without resorting to deceit, we will vanquish our enemies in battle. O king! These tigers among men are your aides. All of them are skilled in the use of divine weapons. All of
them delight in war. All of them have bathed themselves in Vedanta115 and are invincible. O Pandava! They will
even kill the soldiers of the gods in battle. Shikhandi, Yuyudhana,116 Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Bhimasena, the
twins, Yudhamanyu, Uttamouja, Virata and Drupada, who are the equals of Bhishma and Drona in battle, and you
yourself are capable of annihilating the three worlds. You are like Vasava in your radiance. If a man looks at you in
anger, there is no doubt that he will soon cease to exist. O Kourava!117 I know this.”’
CHAPTER 859(196)

Vaishampayana said, ‘The sky was clear in the morning. On the instructions of Dhritarashtra’s son, Duryodhana,
the kings advanced towards the Pandavas. All of them had bathed and puriﬁed themselves. They were garlanded
and were dressed in white garments. They wielded weapons and banners. Benedictions had been pronounced on
them and oblations offered into the ﬁre. All of them were learned in the Vedas. All of them were brave. They were
excellent in the observance of vows. All of them had performed deeds. All of them possessed many auspicious
signs. They were extremely strong and wished to earn supreme worlds118 in the ﬁeld of battle. All of them were
focused in their minds and trusted each other. Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti, the Kekayas and the Bahlikas—all
of them marched out, with Bharadvaja119 at the forefront. There were Ashvatthama, Shantanu’s son, Saindhava
Jayadratha, rathas from the south, the west and the mountainous regions, Shakuni, the king of Gandhara, everyone
from the east and the north, Shakas, Kiratas, Yavanas, Shibis and Vasatis. Their own soldiers accompanied and surrounded the maharathas. All these maharathas marched out in the second division of the army—Kritavarma with
his soldiers, the immensely strong Trigartas and King Duryodhana, surrounded by his brothers. Shala, Bhurishra-

va, Shalya and Brihadbala from Kosala followed at the rear, with Dhritarashtra’s son at the forefront. These maharathas desired to ﬁght and were armoured. They advanced over the plain ground to the western120 side of Kurukshetra. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Duryodhana set up a camp there and with its decorations, it looked
like a second Hastinapura. O Indra among kings! Even skilled men who lived in the city, could not distinguish between the city and the camp. The Kouravya king constructed many other similar fortresses, in hundreds and thousands, for the kings. O king! The hundreds of dwellings of the troops stretched out on that ﬁeld of battle in a circle
and extended over ﬁve yojanas.121 According to their energy and their strength, the lords of the earth entered their
respective camps. There were thousands of these and they were opulent. For those great-souled ones and their soldiers, and also for those who would not ﬁght, King Duryodhana apportioned out excellent food. There were elephants, horses, men, artisans, others who followed, bards, singers, minstrels, traders, courtesans and whores.122
There were also those who had gathered as spectators. In the proper way, King Kourava attended to all of them.’
CHAPTER 860(197)

Vaishampayana said, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In a similar way, Kounteya Yudhishthira, the son of
Dharma, urged his warriors, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront. He instructed the leaders of the Chedis, the
Kashis and the Karushas, who were ﬁrm in their valour, the general Dhrishtaketu, the destroyer of enemies and the
slayer of foes, Virata, Drupada, Yuyudhana, Shikhandi and the two great archers from Panchala, Yudhamanyu and
Uttamouja. The brave ones wore colourful armour and were adorned in golden earrings. They blazed like a ﬁre in a
sacriﬁcial altar, when clariﬁed butter is poured into it. The great archers were as resplendent as planets. The lord of
the earth, bull among men, honoured the soldiers in the appropriate fashion and instructed the soldiers to advance.
Pandu’s son ﬁrst sent Abhimanyu, Brihanta and all the sons of Droupadi, who were led by Dhrishtadyumna. Yudhishthira despatched Bhima, Yuyudhana and Pandava Dhananjaya in the second part of the army. As the delighted
warriors collected their weapons of war and moved and dashed around, the sound seemed to touch heaven. With
the other kings and with Virata and Drupada, the king himself marched at the rear. That army with terrible archers
had Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront. It looked like the Ganga, overﬂowing, retreating and then ﬂowing again. So
as to confuse the intelligence of the sons of Dhritarashtra, the king again regrouped his army. Pandava ordered
Droupadi’s sons, great archers, Nakula, Sahadeva, all the Prabhadrakas, ten thousand horses, two thousand elephants, ten thousand infantry, ﬁve thousand chariots and the invincible Bhimasena to be the ﬁrst division of the
army. He placed Virata, Jayatsena from Magadha, the two maharathas from Panchala, Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja, both of whom were valiant and great-souled and wielded clubs and bows, in the middle. Vasudeva and Dhananjaya also followed them in the centre. These men wielded weapons and were consumed with rage. Those brave
ones carried twenty thousand ﬂags. There were ﬁve thousand elephants and chariots everywhere, with infantry and
soldiers, brandishing bows, swords and clubs. There were thousands in the front and thousands at the rear. The other kings mainly surrounded the spot where Yudhishthira himself was, with his soldiers and an ocean of troops. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were thousands of elephants, tens of thousands of horses and thousands
of chariots and infantry. Depending on these, he marched against Dhritarashtra’s son, Suyodhana. There were hundreds and thousands, and tens of thousands, of men at the rear. In thousands and tens of thousands, those delighted
men sounded thousands of kettledrums and tens of thousands of conch shells.’
This ends Udyoga Parva.

