Section Sixty-Five
Dronabhisheka Parva
This parva has 634 shlokas and ﬁfteen chapters.
Chapter 978(1): 49 shlokas
Chapter 979(2): 37 shlokas
Chapter 980(3): 23 shlokas
Chapter 981(4): 15 shlokas
Chapter 982(5): 40 shlokas
Chapter 983(6): 43 shlokas
Chapter 984(7): 36 shlokas
Chapter 985(8): 39 shlokas
Chapter 986(9): 73 shlokas
Chapter 987(10): 51 shlokas
Chapter 988(11): 31 shlokas
Chapter 989(12): 28 shlokas
Chapter 990(13): 80 shlokas
Chapter 991(14): 37 shlokas
Chapter 992(15): 52 shlokas
Abhishekha means instatement or consecration and the parva is named after Drona’s consecration as the supreme commander. After the consecration, this section also describes the eleventh day of the battle. Drona promises to capture Yudhishthira alive. Despite a lot of ﬁghting,
nothing of great signiﬁcance occurs on the eleventh day, though Drona kills some Panchala warriors.
CHAPTER 978(1)

Janamejaya asked, ‘Devavrata was unmatched in spirit, energy, strength, bravery and valour. On hearing that he
had been killed1 by Shikhandi of Panchala, what did King Dhritarashtra, with his senses overcome by sorrow, do?
O brahmana rishi! His valiant father was slain. O illustrious one! His son wished to obtain the kingdom after vanquishing the great archers, the Pandavas, with rathas like Bhishma and Drona. O illustrious one! When the
supreme among archers was killed, what did Kouravya2 do? O supreme among brahmanas! Tell me all this.’
Vaishampayana replied, ‘Hearing that his father had been killed, Dhritarashtra, the lord of men, could ﬁnd no
peace. Kouravya3 was overcome by anxiety and sorrow. The king continually reﬂected on his misery. Gavalgana’s
son,4 pure in soul, again came before him. It was night and Sanjaya had returned to the city of Nagasahrya from
the camp. O great king! On hearing that Bhishma had been killed, Ambika’s son was extremely distressed. Wishing for the victory of his sons, Dhritarashtra lamented in woe and asked…
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O son!5 The Kurus were driven by destiny. After conquering the misery as a consequence
of Bhishma, whose valour was terrible, what did they do? The immensely energetic, brave and invincible one had
been killed. The Kurus were immersed in an ocean of grief. What did they do? O Sanjaya! The great army of the
great-souled Pandavas was capable of leading to the greatest fear in the three worlds. On Devavrata, the bull
among the Kurus, having been killed, what did the kings do? O Sanjaya! Tell me.”
‘Sanjaya said, “O king! Listen, with a concentrated mind, to my words. I will tell you what your sons did when
Devavrata was killed in battle. O king! Truth was Bhishma’s valour. When he was killed, those on your side, and
the Pandavas, thought about this separately. Having thought about the dharma of kshatriyas, they were both astounded and delighted. Having censured their own dharma, they bowed down before that great-souled one. They
thought of the inﬁnitely energetic Bhishma lying down on his bed of arrows. O tiger among men! His pillow was
made out of straight-tufted arrows. Having made arrangements for Bhishma’s protection, they conversed with each

other. Having circumambulated Gangeya, they took his permission. Then they glanced towards each other, eyes
red in anger. Driven by destiny, the kshatriyas emerged again to do battle. Trumpets and drums made a loud noise.
Your soldiers, and those of the enemy, marched out. O Indra among kings! When Jahnavi’s son fell down, the day
had passed. Destiny had robbed them of their senses and they had been overcome by anger. They disregarded the
beneﬁcial words that the great-souled Gangeya had spoken. The best ones of the Bharata lineage marched out,
armed with weapons. Because of your delusion and that of your sons, and because of the death of Shantanu’s son,
the Kouravas, together with the kings, seemed to have been summoned by death. They were like cattle without a
herdsman, in a forest that was full of carnivores. Without Devavrata, they were extremely anxious in their minds.
The best of the Bharata lineage had been brought down. The army of the Kurus looked like the ﬁrmament, devoid
of stars, or the sky without any air, or the earth with crops destroyed, or words without reﬁnement, or the ancient
army of the asuras after Bali had been brought down, or a beautiful woman6 who is a widow, or a descending river
whose waters have dried, or a cow hemmed in by wolves in the forest when the leader of the herd has been killed,
or a large mountainous cavern rendered impotent because the lion has been killed. O foremost among the Bharata
lineage! After Jahnavi’s son was brought down, the army of the Bharatas was like a feeble boat being tossed
around on the great ocean by a tempest striking it from all directions. It was sorely afﬂicted by the brave and powerful Pandavas, who did not waver in their aim. With its horses, chariots and elephants, that army was extremely
anxious. The men were seen to be distressed and dispirited. The kings and the soldiers were individually frightened. Without Devavrata, they were submerged in the nether regions.
‘“The Kouravas then remembered Karna, who was like Devavrata himself. He was foremost among those who
wielded all weapons and he was as resplendent as a guest. They resorted to him, like a person confronting a
calamity turns to a friend. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the kings cried out, ‘Karna. Karna. Radheya,
the son of a suta, is prepared to lay down his life for our welfare. Together with his advisers and relatives, the immensely illustrious one has not fought for ten days. Summon him quickly.’ While all the kshatriyas looked on,
when Bhishma counted the rathas in accordance with their strength and valour, the mighty-armed one was counted
as only half a ratha.7 Karna, bull among men, is twice that.8 Though he was thus enumerated among rathas and
atirathas, he is foremost and is revered by all brave ones. He is keen to ﬁght with Yama, Kubera, Varuna and the
lord of the gods. O king! At that time, he angrily spoke to Gangeya. ‘O Kouravya! As long as you are alive, I will
never ﬁght. O Kourava! But if you manage to kill the Pandaveyas in the great battle, I will take Duryodhana’s permission and leave for the forest. O Bhishma! But if you are slain by the Pandavas and ascend to heaven, I will kill
all those whom you think to be rathas on a single chariot.’ O great king! Having thus spoken, the immensely illustrious Karna did not ﬁght for ten days, with your son’s permission. O king! Bhishma exhibited valour in the battle
and in the encounter, bravely killed innumerable warriors on the side of the Pandaveyas. The greatly energetic and
brave one, who never wavered in his aim, was then brought down. Like those wishing to cross with a boat, your
sons thought of Karna. Together with all the kings, your sons exclaimed and said, ‘Karna! This is the time for you
to come.’ He is unassailable in his manliness and he received instructions in weapons from Jamadagni’s son.9 Our
minds turned towards Karna, as if towards a friend in times of hardship. O king! He is alone capable of saving us
from this great fear, like Govinda always saves the thirty gods from extremely grave calamities.”’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Thus did he10 speak about Karna, supreme among warriors. Dhritarashtra sighed like a
serpent and spoke these words to him. “Your minds then turned towards Vaikartana Karna. You saw that Radheya,
the son of a suta, was ready to lay down his life. Did the warrior succeed in saving the distressed ones? Truth is his
valour. They were depressed and frightened and sought safety with him, having honoured him. That warrior is
foremost among all archers. But when Bhishma, the refuge of the Kouravas, was slain, did he succeed in ﬁlling the
breach and did he ﬁll the enemy with fear? Did he bring success to my sons, who were wishing for victory?”’
CHAPTER 979(2)

‘Sanjaya said, “On learning that Bhishma had been slain, Adhiratha’s son, the son of a suta, wished to save the Kurus, who were like a shattered boat in the fathomless ocean. He bore fraternal feelings towards the distressed ones.
He wanted your son’s army to cross over. On hearing that Shantanu’s maharatha and undecaying son, Indra among

men, had been brought down, Vrisha Karna,11 the destroyer of enemies and supreme among those who wield
bows, swiftly arrived. After Bhishma, supreme among rathas, was slain by the enemy, the Kurus were like a boat
submerged in the ocean. He wished that your son’s army might be able to cross over.
‘“Karna said, ‘He possessed fortitude, intelligence, valour, energy, self-control, truth, all the qualities of a hero
and divine weapons. Humility, affection and pleasant speech existed in Bhishma. He was always grateful and
killed those who hated brahmanas. These attributes were eternal in him, like Lakshmi in the moon. That destroyer
of enemy heroes has now obtained peace and I think that all the other warriors have already been killed. Because
everything in this world is assigned by action, there is nothing that is permanent. When the one who was great in
his vows has been slain, who can certainly say today that the sun will rise tomorrow? He possessed the power of
the Vasus. He was born from the energy of the Vasus. That lord of the earth has returned to the Vasus again. O Kurus! You should sorrow for your riches, your sons, the earth and the army.’”12
‘Sanjaya said, “The granter of boons, the one who was great in his powers, was brought down. Shantanu’s son
was foremost in the world and was greatly energetic. The Bharatas were defeated and dispirited. O king! Karna began to console your sons and your soldiers and hearing this, the brave ones lamented and shed tears from their
eyes, as copious as the words of woe. But urged by the kings, they returned again to the great battle and roared
again. The bull among all maharathas then spoke these delightful words to the bulls among rathas.
‘“Karna said, ‘This transient world is always moving.13 Noticing this, I think of everything as temporary. When
all of you were present, how could that bull among the Kurus, who was like a mountain, be brought down in battle? Shantanu’s maharatha son has been brought down, as if the sun has resorted to the ground. The kings are unable to withstand Dhananjaya, like trees against a storm that uproots mountains. With the foremost ones killed,
they are dispirited and their bravery has been destroyed by the enemy. I will be their protector now and protect the
army of the Kurus in battle, just as the great-souled one did. Such a burden now devolves on me. I notice that this
world is transient. Since that skilled one has been brought down in the battle, why should I have any fear about the
battle? I will roam around on the ﬁeld of battle and use my straight-tufted arrows to convey the bulls among the
Kurus14 to Yama’s abode. Knowing that fame is the supreme objective in this world, I will kill the enemy in battle, or lie down myself. Yudhishthira possesses steadfastness, intelligence, dharma and spirit. Vrikodara is the
equal of one hundred elephants in valour. Arjuna has enterprise and is the son of the lord of the thirty gods. That
army is not easy to defeat, even by the immortals. The twins are the equal of Yama in battle and that army also has
Satyaki and Devaki’s son. It is like death with a gaping mouth. A coward who approaches that army will not return. The learned ones say that austerities have to be countered with austerities and force with force. My mind is
ﬁrmly ﬁxed on resisting the enemy and protecting my own. O charioteer! I will go and counter the power of those
intelligent ones and obtain victory today. I will accomplish this deed of a virtuous man, or give up my life and follow Bhishma. I will kill large numbers of the enemy in battle, or having been slain, will go to the world of heroes.
The women and children are crying for help. The manliness of Dhritarashtra’s son has been defeated. O charioteer!
I know my duty. Therefore, I will vanquish the enemies of the son of Dhritarashtra. I will protect the Kurus and
slaughter the sons of Pandu, even if it means that I have to give up my life in this dreadful ﬁght. I will kill large
numbers of the enemy in battle and give the kingdom to Dhritarashtra’s son. Fasten my beautiful, golden and
bright armour, radiant with jewels. Bring my helmet, like the sun in brilliance, and my bow and arrows, like virulent snakes. Fasten sixteen quivers and divine bows. Also bring swords, lances, heavy clubs and the conch shell
that is decorated with gold. Bring my victorious and golden standard, with the complexion of a lotus and bearing
the marks of a victorious and healthy elephant. Have it cleaned with an excellent garment and decorate it with
colourful garlands and nets. Bring swift and white horses that have the hue of the clouds. They should be well-fed
and bathed in water from golden pots, and sanctiﬁed with mantras. They should possess golden harnesses. O son of
a charioteer! Quickly. Quickly. Bring an excellent chariot with nets of gold, decorated with gems and with the radiance of the moon and the sun. Let it be furnished with all objects and weapons. Let it be yoked to swift horses.
Bring colourful and powerful bows with the supreme of bowstrings, so that they are capable of striking. Let the
large quivers be ﬁlled with arrows. Let me be dressed with body-armour. Swiftly bring me everything needed for
departure. O brave one! Let golden and brass vessels be ﬁlled with perfume. Bring garlands and adorn my body

with them. Let the drums quickly announce my victory. O charioteer! Take me swiftly to the spot where Kiriti,
Vrikodara, Dharma’s son and the twins are. I will confront and kill them in battle. Or I will be slain by the enemy
and follow Bhishma. That army has King Yudhishthira, who is ﬁrmly devoted to the truth, Bhima, Arjuna, Vasudeva, Satyaki and the Srinjayas. I think that it cannot be defeated by the kings. But even if Death, who robs everything, were to continually protect Kiriti in this encounter, I will confront him in battle and slay him. Or I will follow Bhishma’s path to Yama. I am not saying that I will go there in the midst of these brave ones. Those who create dissension among friends and those who are weak in their devotion are evil-minded and are not my aides.’”15
‘Sanjaya said, “He rode out on an excellent, supreme and ﬁrm chariot, which possessed a beautiful seat that was
decorated with gold. It had a standard and was yoked to steeds that were as ﬂeet as the wind. He rode out for victory. The bull among rathas, on white horses, was worshipped by the great-souled Kurus. The terrible archer left for
the battle and went to where the bull among the Bharata lineage16 was. The army was large and had standards.
Karna’s chariot was embellished with gold, pearls, jewels and diamonds. It was yoked to well-trained horses and
roared like the sound of the clouds. It was as energetic as the sun. The archer was resplendent on his resplendent
chariot. He was like the ﬁre in his complexion and like the ﬁre in his brilliance. Adhiratha’s maharatha son was
stationed on his chariot, like the king of the gods established on his own vimana.”’
CHAPTER 980(3)

‘Sanjaya said, “The great-souled and inﬁnitely energetic one was lying down on his bed of arrows. He was like an
ocean that had been dried up by a mighty wind. Savyasachi had used his divine weapons to bring down the great
archer and shattered the hopes your sons entertained for victory and their armour and their peace. He was like an
island for those who wish to cross an ocean that cannot be traversed. He was covered in a mass of arrows, like
ﬂows in the river Yamuna. He was like the intolerable and giant Mount Mainaka, brought down on the ground, like
the sun which has been dislodged from the ﬁrmament and has fallen down on earth. This was as unthinkable as
Shatakratu being vanquished by Vritra in earlier times. All the soldiers were confounded at Bhishma having been
brought down in the battle. He was the bull among all the soldiers. He was the objective of all archers. Your father,
great in his vows, was covered with Dhananjaya’s arrows. The brave one, bull among men, was lying down on a
bed meant for heroes.
‘“On seeing Bhishma, the middle one of the Bharata lineage, Adhiratha’s son descended from his chariot. He
was tormented and his voice was choked with tears. He joined his hands in salutation. Having worshipped him, he
spoke these words. ‘O fortunate one! I am Karna. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Speak sacred and auspicious words to me today. Open your eyes and look at me. No man can ever enjoy the fruits of his good deeds on
earth, since you, aged and devoted to dharma, are lying down on the ground. O supreme among the Kurus! In ﬁlling the treasury, in counsel, in constructing vyuhas, in using weapons, I do not think I can see anyone like you
among the Kurus. You are united with intelligence and purity. You have saved the Kurus from danger. Having deluged the warriors, you are now proceeding to the world of the ancestors. O best of the Bharata lineage! The Pandavas will now cause a destruction of the Kurus, like enraged tigers destroying deer. The brave Kurus are acquainted with Gandiva’s roar and will be terriﬁed by Savyasachi now, like the asuras by the wielder of the vajra. In today’s battle, the Kurus and the other kings will be frightened by the sound released from Gandiva, like the clap of
thunder. The brave one17 will be like a ﬁre before kindling and will be like a great conﬂagration that burns down
trees. Kiriti’s arrows will destroy the sons of Dhritarashtra in this way. O illustrious one! Wherever the wind and
the ﬁre advance together in a forest, they burn down as they wish. There is no doubt that Partha is like ﬁre before
kindling. O tiger among men! There is no doubt that Krishna is like the wind. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
On hearing Panchajanya’s roar and Gandiva’s sound, all the soldiers will be overcome by terror. The destroyer of
enemies will advance on a chariot with a monkey on the banner. O brave one! Without you, the kings will not be
able to withstand that sound. Other than you, who among the kings is capable of ﬁghting with Arjuna on the ﬁeld
of battle? The learned ones speak about his celestial deeds. The encounter between the intelligent one and Tryambaka18 was superhuman. As a result of this, he obtained a boon that is difﬁcult for those with unclean souls to get.
If you permit me, I will ﬁght with that excellent Pandava today. I am incapable of tolerating him. He is like an ex-

tremely terrible and poisonous snake which kills with its glances alone. I have placed death, or victory, at the forefront.’”’
CHAPTER 981(4)

‘Sanjaya said, “When he spoke in this way, the aged grandfather of the Kurus heard him. His mind was delighted
and he spoke words that were appropriate to the time and the place. ‘May you be established amidst your wellwishers, like the ocean among rivers, the sun among all stellar bodies, truth among the virtuous, fertile ground
among seeds and clouds among all beings. May your relatives depend on you, like the immortals on the one with a
thousand eyes.19 Through the strength of your own arms and your valour, you did what brought pleasure to Dhritarashtra’s son. O Karna! You went to Rajapura and killed the Kambojas.20 You went to Girivraja21 and vanquished the kings, with Nagnajit at the forefront, and the Ambashthas, the Videhas and the Gandharas. O Karna! In
earlier times, you brought those who dwelt in the Himalayas and Kiratas, who were harsh in battle, under Duryodhana’s suzerainty. In every such place, you fought for Duryodhana’s welfare. O brave one! O Karna! You conquered many greatly energetic ones. O son!22 Just as Duryodhana, with his relatives, his kin and his friends, is the
refuge of the Kouravas, so are you. I am granting you an auspicious permission. Go and ﬁght with the enemy. Lead
the Kurus in battle and bring victory to Duryodhana. You are like my grandson, just as Duryodhana is. According
to dharma, all of us are yours, just as we are his.23 O best of men! Learned ones say that in this world, association
with the virtuous is more important than a relationship resulting from birth. Do not make your relationship with the
Kurus false. Protect Duryodhana’s army, as if it were your own.’ On hearing these words, Vaikartana Karna honoured his feet and quickly went to the spot where the warriors were. He saw that large and extensive mass of men.
The broad-chested and well-armed soldiers were arranged in battle formation. On seeing the great archer, Karna,
arrive for battle, the Kurus honoured him. They slapped their arms and roared like lions. They twanged their bows
and made other kinds of sounds.”’
CHAPTER 982(5)

‘Sanjaya said, “O king! On seeing Karna, tiger among men, stationed on his chariot, Duryodhana was delighted
and spoke these words. ‘Now that it is protected by you, I think this army has found a protector. Now do what we
are capable of, and what seems to be appropriate.’
‘“Karna replied, ‘O tiger among men! O king! You are the wisest. You tell us. Someone whose objective is at
stake, sees things in a way that another person never can. O lord of men! All of us wish to hear your words. It is
my view that you will never say anything that is inappropriate.’
‘“Duryodhana said, ‘Bhishma was our commander. He was senior and valiant. He was well-endowed with learning, possessed knowledge of weapons and had all the qualities. O Karna! He obtained great fame by slaying large
numbers of the enemy. The great-souled one fought well for ten days and protected us. He performed extremely
difﬁcult deeds and is ascending to heaven. Who do you think should be our commander after him? Without a
leader, the army cannot last for an instant in battle, like a boat in the water without a boatman. Just as a boatman
steers a boat, a charioteer controls a chariot, a commander ensures that an army is not led astray. You are the best
in battle. Look at all the great-souled ones among us and ﬁnd a commander who can succeed Shantanu’s son. O
venerable one! Whoever you mention will be accepted by all us as our commander in this battle.’
‘“Karna replied, ‘All these supreme among men are great-souled. But we should not examine details about who
should be our commander. All of them have been born in noble lineages. All of them know how to withstand onslaught. All of them possess strength, valour and intelligence. They are grateful and modest and do not retreat from
battle. However, all of them cannot be the leader at the same time. There must be only one, who possesses special
qualities. All these rival one another. If one is specially honoured, the others will be dispirited. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! It is clear that they will not ﬁght. Among all us warriors, the preceptor is aged and is our senior.
Drona, supreme among those who wield all weapons, should be made the commander. He is supreme among those
who know the brahman. He is unassailable. If Drona is made the commander, who can stand against that? He is the
equal of Shukra and Angiras in his learning.24 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Drona advances into

battle, there is not a single warrior among all these kings who will not follow him. He is foremost among all the
leaders of soldiers and among those who wield weapons. He is foremost in intelligence. O king! He is also your
preceptor. O Duryodhana! Quickly make the preceptor the commander, just as, wishing to defeat the asuras in battle, the immortals chose Kartikeya.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “Drona was standing in the midst of the army. On hearing Karna’s words, King Duryodhana
spoke these words to him. ‘Because of the superiority of your varna, the lineage in which you have been born, your
learning, your age, your intelligence, your valour, your capacity, your invincibility, your knowledge of artha and
law, your austerities, your gratitude and your superiority in all the qualities, I do not think there is anyone among
all the kings who is your equal as a protector. Protect us, like Vasava among all the gods. O supreme among brahmanas! With you as our leader, we wish to vanquish the enemy. You are like Kapali among the Rudras, Pavaka
among the Vasus, Kubera among the yakshas, Vasava among the Maruts, Vasishtha among the brahmanas, the sun
among those with energy, Dharma among the ancestors, the king of the waters among the Adityas, the moon
among stellar bodies and Ushanas among the sons of Diti.25 You are the foremost among leaders of soldiers.
Therefore, be our commander. O unblemished one! Let these eleven akshouhinis follow your instructions. Create a
counter-vyuha against the enemy and kill them, like Indra against the danavas. Advance in front of us, like Pavaka’s son ahead of the gods.26 We will follow you, like a herd of bulls following their leader. You are terrible in
wielding the bow. You are a great archer. On seeing you stationed at our forefront, stretching your divine bow, Arjuna will not strike. O tiger among men! If you become our commander, it is certain that I will defeat Yudhishthira
in battle, together with his followers and relatives.’ After he had spoken in this way, all the kings exclaimed, ‘Victory to Drona.’ They roared mightily like lions and delighted your son. The soldiers were ﬁlled with joy and
wished for the prosperity of that supreme among brahmanas. With Duryodhana at their head, they desired great
fame.
‘“Drona said, ‘I know the Vedas and the six angas.27 I know about artha. I am conversant with human knowledge. I am acquainted with the weapons of Tryambaka and with many other kinds of weapons. You have described
my qualities and I will try to exhibit them, wishing to bring about your victory. I tell you truthfully that I will ﬁght
with the Pandavas.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “O king! Having thus obtained Drona’s permission, your son instated him as the commander, in
accordance with the prescribed rites. Drona was consecrated as the commander by the kings, with Duryodhana
leading the way, just as in ancient times Skanda was instated by the gods, with Shakra at the forefront. The men
created a mighty sound, mixed with the noise of musical instruments. Amidst this noise and joy, Drona became the
commander. There were sounds like those on auspicious occasions and the pronouncement of benedictions. Minstrels, bards and raconteurs chanted praise, to the sound of singing. The foremost among brahmanas uttered benedictions for great fortune and victory. They honoured Drona according to the rites and thought that the Pandavas
had already been defeated.”’
CHAPTER 983(6)

‘Sanjaya said, “Bharadvaja’s maharatha son became the commander. He arranged the soldiers in the form of a
vyuha and set out to do battle, together with your sons. Saindhava, Kalinga and your son, Vikarna, were armoured
and stationed themselves on the right ﬂank. Shakuni supported them, with the best of horse-riders, and advanced
with the warriors from Gandhara, wielding polished lances. Kripa, Kritavarma, Chitrasena and Vivimshati, with
Duhshasana at the forefront, advanced and protected the left ﬂank. They were supported by the Kambojas, with
Sudakshina leading the way. They advanced on extremely swift horses, together with the Shakas and the Yavanas.
The Madras, the Trigartas, the Ambashthas, the residents of the west and the north, the Shibis, the Shurasenas, the
Shudras, the Maladas, the Souviras, the Kitavas and all those from the east and the south placed your son at the
head, with the son of the suta at the rear. They delighted all the soldiers and added force to the army. Vaikartana
Karna advanced at the head of all the archers. His blazing standard was giant in size and delighted his own army.
That giant standard was resplendent with the sign of a healthy elephant and dazzled like the sun. On seeing Karna,
no one thought about the calamity consequent to Bhishma’s downfall. All the kings, together with the Kurus, were

freed from their grief. In joy, the large number of warriors began to converse with one another. ‘On seeing Karna
in battle, the Pandavas will not be able to remain on the ﬁeld of battle. Karna is capable of vanquishing the gods,
together with Vasava, in battle. The sons of Pandu are inferior in bravery and valour. How can they remain in battle? The strong-armed Bhishma saved the Parthas in the battle. But there is no doubt that Karna will destroy them
with his sharp arrows.’ O lord of the earth! In delight, they spoke to each other in this way. They honoured and
praised Radheya and advanced.
‘“Drona instructed that our vyuha should be in the form of a cart.28 O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The vyuha of the enemy was in the form of a curlew.29 Cheerfully, the great-souled Dharmaraja instructed
this. Those bulls among men, Vishvaksena30 and Dhananjaya, with the monkey on the standard, were at the front
of their vyuha. This was the hump31 of all the soldiers and the objective of all the archers. The inﬁnitely energetic
Partha’s standard ﬂuttered in the path of the sun. It illuminated the army of the great-souled Pandava, like the blazing sun on the earth at the end of a yuga. Arjuna is foremost among archers, Gandiva is supreme among bows, Vasudeva is supreme among beings and Sudarshana is supreme among chakras. These four kinds of energy32 were
borne by the chariot with white horses and it stationed itself in front of the hostile army, like the upraised wheel of
time. Thus did the great-souled ones stand in front of those powerful armies—Karna before yours and Dhananjaya
before that of the enemy. There was enmity between them and they wished to kill each other. In that battle, Karna
and Pandava glanced towards each other.
‘“Bharadvaja’s maharatha son powerfully advanced. There was dreadful lamentation and the earth began to
tremble. The wind raised a violent and terrible dust that was as tawny as silk. This covered the sky and the sun.
Though there were no clouds in the sky, a shower of ﬂesh, bones and blood fell down. O king! Thousands of vultures, hawks, wild crows, herons and crows repeatedly swooped down on the soldiers.33 Jackals howled hideously
and many fearful creatures swooped down on the left side of your army, desiring to eat the ﬂesh and drink the
blood.34 Flaming and blazing meteors were seen to descend, covering the ﬁeld of battle in every direction with
their tails. They roared and caused a trembling. O king! When the commander of the army35 advanced, the gigantic solar disc thundered and seemed to emit lightning. There were many other fearful portents, inauspicious for the
warring heroes and signifying a destruction of lives. Thus the battle between the Kuru and Pandava soldiers commenced, each side wishing to kill the other. The entire earth was full of that noise. The Pandavas and the Kouravas
were extremely enraged. They grasped weapons and sought to kill each other with sharp arrows. The immensely
radiant and great archer36 rushed towards the Pandava soldiers with great force, showering hundreds of sharp arrows. O king! On seeing Drona advance, the Pandavas and the Srinjayas countered him, separately showering arrows. That great army was agitated and shattered by Drona. The Panchalas were destroyed, like a mountain by a
storm. In a short instant, Drona unleashed many kinds of divine weapons in that battle and oppressed the Pandavas
and the Srinjayas. With Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, the Panchalas were slaughtered by Drona and trembled,
like the danavas before Vasava. The brave maharatha, Yajnasena’s son,37 skilled in the use of divine weapons,
used showers of arrows to penetrate Drona’s army in many places. He repulsed Drona’s shower of arrows with
several showers of arrows. The powerful one killed the Kuru soldiers. In the battle, the mighty-armed Drona restrained his own soldiers and attacked Parshata. He released a great shower of arrows towards Parshata, like the
angry Maghavan forcefully attacking the danavas. Drona’s arrows made the Pandavas and the Srinjayas tremble.
They were repeatedly routed, like deer by a lion. O king! The powerful Drona travelled through that army of the
Pandvas like a circle of ﬁre38 and it was wonderful. His chariot was like a city in the sky, constructed by one conversant with sacred texts. The harnessed horses were controlled well. The standard ﬂuttered in the wind. The pole
of the standard was as bright as crystal and he tormented the enemy with his arrows. He was astride that supreme
chariot and slaughtered the soldiers of the enemy.”’
CHAPTER 984(7)

‘Sanjaya said, “On seeing Drona slaughter the horses, charioteers, rathas and elephants, the Pandavas were distressed and surrounded him. King Yudhishthira spoke to Dhrishtadyumna and Dhananjaya. ‘Make endeavours to

counter the one who was born from a pot and surround him.’39 Arjuna and Parshata, with their followers, surrounded him, together with all the maharathas—the Kekayas, Bhimasena, Subhadra’s son, Ghatotkacha, Yudhishthira, the twins, Matsya, Drupada’s son, Droupadi’s cheerful sons, Dhrishtaketu, Satyaki, the enraged Chekitana and maharatha Yuyutsu. O king! There were many other kings who followed the Pandavas. In accordance
with their lineage and their valour, they performed many deeds. On seeing that the army of the Pandavas was thus
protected in battle, Bharadvaja’s son glanced at them, with anger in his eyes. He was stationed on his chariot, invincible in battle, and was overcome by terrible rage. He pierced the Pandava army, like the wind scattering
clouds. He attacked the chariots, horses, men and elephants in every direction. Though he was old, Drona roamed
around, like a mad young man. His horses were crimson in colour and were as ﬂeet as the wind. They were covered in blood. O king! Those horses thus assumed a beautiful appearance. On seeing that angry one, rigid in his
vows, descend like death, the Pandava warriors ﬂed in every direction. Some ﬂed in fright. Others returned. Some
glanced at him and an extremely dreadful noise arose, causing delight among brave ones and leading to fright
among those who were cowards. This completely ﬁlled the space between the sky and the earth. Yet again, Drona
announced his name in the battle. He shot hundreds of arrows at the enemy and assumed a dreadful form. Though
he was aged, the powerful Drona acted like one who was young. The intelligent one was like death amidst the Pandava soldiers. The ﬁerce one sliced off the heads and the arms with their ornaments. The maharatha rendered the
chariots empty and roared. O lord! Because of his roars of delight and because of the force of his arrows, the warriors trembled in the ﬁeld of battle, like cattle because of the winter. As a result of the roar of Drona’s chariot, the
stretching of his bowstring and the sound of his bow, a great sound arose in the sky. Many thousands of arrows
were released by him. They covered all the directions and descended on the elephants, the horses and the chariots.
His extremely forceful bow was like the ﬁre, with arrows as its ﬂames. The Panchalas and the Pandavas attacked
Drona. But he dispatched the rathas, elephants and horses to Yama’s abode. In a short while, Drona covered the
earth with the mud of blood. He showered supreme weapons and arrows in every direction. Drona covered the directions with his net of arrows and nothing could be seen. Foot soldiers, chariots, horses and elephants were
shrouded and his standard could be seen, roaming around, like a cloud tinged with lightning.
‘“With the bow and arrows in his hand, Drona used arrows to penetrate the ﬁve brave ones from Kekaya and the
king of Panchala and then attacked Yudhishthira’s army. Bhimasena, Dhananjaya, Shini’s grandson, Drupada’s
son, Shibi’s son, the lord of Kashi and Shibi were delighted. They roared and covered him with a large number of
arrows. They were assailed by arrows released from Drona’s bow. These were colourful and gold-tufted. They
pierced the bodies of elephants and young horses and penetrated the ground, the tufts covered with blood. The
earth was strewn with large numbers of warriors, chariots, elephants and horses, mangled by the arrows. They fell
down on the ground and looked like dark clouds in the sky. Desiring the prosperity of your sons, Drona crushed
the armies of Shinis’s descendant, Bhima, Arjuna, Shibi, Abhimanyu, the king of Kashi and many other brave ones
in that battle. O Indra among Kouravas! The great-souled one performed this, and many other deeds, in the battle.
O king! Having scorched the world, like the sun at the time of destruction, Drona went to heaven. On his golden
chariot, the brave one killed hundreds and thousands of Pandava warriors in the battle and was brought down by
Parshata. He killed more than two akshouhinis of brave ones who never retreated. After that, the wise one attained
the supreme objective. O king! The one on the golden chariot performed extremely difﬁcult deeds and was then
killed by the Pandavas and the Panchalas, the performers of inauspicious and cruel deeds. O king! When the preceptor was killed in the battle, there was a roar among the beings in the ﬁrmament and also among the soldiers.
This resounded in heaven, the earth, the sky, the directions and the sub-directions. A great sound of ‘shame’ was
heard among all the beings. The gods, the ancestors and all those who were his relatives saw that Bharadvaja’s maharatha son was slain. Having obtained victory, the Pandavas roared like lions. The earth trembled because of that
loud roar.”’
CHAPTER 985(8)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “How could the Pandavas and the Srinjayas kill Drona in battle? Among those who wielded
all weapons, he was extremely skilled. Did his chariot break? When he was striking, did his bow shatter? Was
Drona distracted and was that the reason for his death? O son!40 How could Parshata slay him? He was incapable

of being oppressed by enemies. He showered large numbers of gold-tufted arrows. The foremost among brahmanas possessed dexterity of hand. He was accomplished and colourful in ﬁghting. He could shoot from a great
distance. He had self-control. He was skilled in war. The maharatha was undecaying and supreme. He was careful
and performed terrible deeds in battle. It must be destiny that Panchala’s son killed him. It is my view that it is
manifest that destiny is superior to human endeavour. The brave Drona has been killed by the great-souled Parshata. The four types of weapons were established in the brave one.41 The preceptor Drona knew supreme weapons
and has been slain. He used to be on a golden chariot, covered with the skins of tigers and decorated with pure
gold. On hearing that he has been killed, I am now overcome with sorrow. O Sanjaya! No one dies because of the
hardship that someone else faces. On hearing that Drona has been slain, I am dead, though I am alive. My heart is
made out of hard stone. Despite learning that Drona has been killed, it has not shattered into a hundred parts. He
was worshipped by brahmanas and princes who desired the qualities of knowledge of the brahman, the Vedas and
weapons. How could he have been taken away by death? This is like the ocean drying up, Mount Meru moving, or
the sun falling down. I cannot tolerate Drona’s downfall. He restrained the proud and protected those who followed
dharma. The scorcher of enemies was prepared to give up his life to attain the objective of my wicked and evil
sons. Their victory depended on his valour. He was the equal of Brihaspati and Ushanas in his intelligence. How
could he have been killed? His large Saindhava horses were crimson. They were garlanded in gold. They were ﬂeet
as the wind and were yoked to his chariot. They were beyond the reach of all sounds of battle. They were powerful
and neighed in joy. Those Saindhavas were controlled and were trained in bearing.42 They were ﬁrm in the midst
of battle and never suffered from distress or exhaustion. They withstood the trumpeting of elephants in battle and
the sound of conch shells and drums. They tolerated the twanging of bowstrings and the shower of arrows and
weapons. They had conquered their breathing and had conquered pain and they assured victory over the enemy.
Those ﬂeet horses quickly bore the chariot of Bharadvaja’s son. How could they be overpowered? They were
yoked to the golden chariot and controlled by the foremost of men. O son! How could they not cross that Pandava
army? He was mounted on a supreme chariot, decorated with pure gold. What feats did Bharadvaja’s brave son not
accomplish in war? He made warriors weep. All the archers in the world depended on his knowledge. Drona was
devoted to the truth. He was powerful. What did he accomplish in battle? He was foremost among all the great
ones who wielded the bow, like Shakra in heaven. He was the performer of terrible deeds. Which rathas countered
him in battle? On seeing the one on the golden chariot, did the Pandavas run away? Unleashing divine weapons,
did he destroy that inexhaustible army? Or did Dharmaraja, together with his younger brothers and with Panchala
as the harness, surround Drona from every direction with all the soldiers? Did Partha restrain the rathas with his
arrows? Parshata, the performer of evil deeds, must have assailed Drona then. With the exception of Dhrishtadyumna, protected by the terrible Kiriti, I do not see anyone capable of killing the vigorous one. When the
Kekayas, the Chedis, the Karushas and the other kings surrounded and agitated the brave preceptor, while he was
performing a difﬁcult deed, like ants against a serpent, the wicked Panchala must have killed him then. That is my
view. He studied the four Vedas and the ﬁfth one about the accounts.43 He was the refuge of the brahmanas, like
the ocean is of the rivers. How could that aged and powerful brahmana have been killed through a weapon? He
was intolerant and proud, though he often suffered on my account. Though he did not deserve it, he reaped the
fruits of his action through Kounteya. All the wielders of the bow on earth depended on his deeds for their livelihood. He was devoted to the truth. He performed good deeds. How could he have been killed by those who desire
prosperity? He was foremost. He was great-spirited and extremely strong, like Shakra in heaven. How could he
have been killed by the Parthas, like a whale by smaller ﬁsh? He was dexterous in the use of his hands. He was
powerful. He was ﬁrm in wielding the bow. He was the destroyer of enemies. No one, wishing to remain alive,
faced him on the ﬁeld and remained alive. As long as he was alive, two sounds never left him—the sound of the
brahman by those who desired the Vedas and the sound of the bowstring by those who wielded the bow. I cannot
tolerate Drona being killed in battle. He was like the lion and the elephant in his valour. O Sanjaya! He was invincible. The fame of his strength was never assailed. Who protected the great-souled one on the right ﬂank and on
the left? When he fought in the battle, which brave one was in front of him? Who were the brave ones who confronted him and gave up their lives, traversing the path of death? Who were the brave ones who faced Drona in
battle and attained the supreme objective? O Sanjaya! Even if one faces a great hardship, one must do one’s duty,

in accordance with one’s valour and one’s capacity. All of this was established in him. My mind is distracted. O
son! Let us stop for some time. O Sanjaya! I will ask you again, after I have regained my senses.”’
CHAPTER 986(9)

Vaishampayana said, ‘Having asked the son of the suta in this way, he was afﬂicted by terrible sorrow. Dhritarashtra lost all hope about his sons being victorious and fell down on the ground. On seeing that he had lost his senses
and had fallen down, the attendants sprinkled him with water. The water was extremely cold and was perfumed.
They fanned him. O great king! On seeing that he had fallen down, the women of the Bharata lineage surrounded
him from every direction and gently rubbed him with their hands. They gently raised the king up from the ground.
With tears choking their throats, the beautiful women placed him on his seat. Having attained his seat, the king was
still not conscious. He was immobile. They stood around him and fanned him. Having slowly regained his senses,
the king trembled. He once again began to ask the suta, Gavalgana’s son, about what exactly had happened.
‘“He is like the rising sun.44 He can dispel darkness through his own light. When Ajatashatru advanced, how
did Drona counter him? He is like an elephant with shattered temples. He is angry and swift. He is resplendent and
single-minded in purpose. He is incapable of being repulsed by a rival. When he advanced for victory, like one
who desires intercourse with a female,45 which brave warriors fought with that supreme of men in the ﬁeld of battle? That mighty-armed one is capable of consuming Duryodhana’s entire army with his terrible glance. He has intelligence and is devoted to the truth. The supreme archer can destroy with his sight, even if he is not protected,
and he is ﬁxed on victory. He is self-controlled and is revered by the entire world. Which brave ones surrounded
him? That undecaying king is supreme among archers and is difﬁcult to resist. When Kounteya, tiger among men,
swiftly advanced and attacked Drona, who on my side countered him? Which brave ones surrounded the advancing Bhimasena? Bibhatsu is extremely valorous. He rides on a chariot that is like a dense cloud. He creates a tumultuous shower, like thunder. He showers arrows, like Maghavan showering rain. The one with the monkey on
his banner envelopes the sky with his mass of arrows. All the directions resound with the clapping of his palms and
the roar of his chariot wheels. The sound of his arrows makes him difﬁcult to cross. His anger can thwart the
clouds. His arrows are as swift as thought. His ﬁerce arrows penetrate the inner organs. He ﬂoods the entire earth
with blood, so that men ﬁnd it difﬁcult to traverse. In that battle, Duryodhana made endeavours and raised his terrible club. What did he do when Vijaya, the wielder of Gandiva, used arrows sharpened on stone and tufted with the
feathers of vultures? When the intelligent one did this and destroyed the army with the sound of Gandiva, what
was his46 state of mind then? Arjuna performed terrible deeds and advanced ﬁercely. When Dhananjaya used his
arrows to attack Drona, what did he do? He was like the wind scattering clouds, or like a tempest destroying reeds.
Which man can stand against the wielder of Gandiva in battle? Soldiers trembled and brave ones were touched by
fear. Who were those who did not forsake Drona and who were the inferior ones who ran away? Who were the
ones who gave up their lives and advanced towards death? Dhananjaya had vanquished superhuman combatants.
Those on my side are incapable of withstanding the force of his white horses. Gandiva’s noise is like the roll of
thunder. Vishvaksena is the charioteer and the warrior is Dhananjaya. It is my view that this chariot cannot be vanquished, even by the gods and the asuras. The brave Pandava is delicate, young, brave and handsome. He is intelligent and skilled. He is wise in war and truth is his valour. When Nakula emitted a loud roar, what did all the
Kouravas do? When the intelligent one advanced, which brave ones surrounded him? Sahadeva is like an angry
snake with virulent poison. He is invincible in battle. When he advanced against the enemy, who countered him?
He is noble in his vows. He cannot be assailed. He is modest and unvanquished. When he advanced against Drona,
which brave ones surrounded him? He47 crushed the large army of the Souvira kingdom. He obtained as his queen
the desirable princess of Bhoja, who was beautiful in all her limbs. Truthfulness, fortitude, valour and brahmacharya are always completely vested in him. Yuyudhana is a bull among men. He is strong. He is truthful in his
deeds. He is never distressed. He is unvanquished. He is Vasudeva’s equal in battle and is regarded as second to
Vasudeva. Instructed by Dhananjaya, he has become as brave as his preceptor in deeds. He is Partha’s equal in use
of weapons. Who restrained him when he advanced against Drona? He is supremely brave among the Vrishnis. He
is valiant among all archers. He is Rama’s48 equal in weapons, fame and valour. He is supreme in truthfulness,

fortitude, self-control, valour and brahmacharya. All these are in Satvata,49 just as the three worlds are in Keshava. Vested with all these qualities, he is incapable of being resisted by the gods. When that great archer advanced,
which brave ones surrounded him? The best of the Panchalas is loved by all those who have been born from noble
lineages. Uttamouja always performs supreme deeds in battle. He is always engaged in Dhananjaya’s welfare and
in supreme injury towards me. He is the equal of Yama, Vaishravana, Aditya, the great Indra and Varuna. He is famous as a maharatha and fought against Drona in the battle. He was prepared to give up his life in that tumult?
Which brave ones surrounded him? Dhrishtaketu was the only one among the Chedis who went to the Pandavas.
When he advanced against Drona, who opposed him? The brave Ketuman slew Prince Sudarshana at the other end
of the gate to the mountains.50 When he advanced against Drona, who countered him? The tiger among men was a
woman earlier and is conversant with his own good and bad qualities. Yajnasena’s son, Shikhandi, is never distressed in battle. He was the reason behind the death of the great-souled Devavrata in battle. When he advanced
towards Drona, which brave ones surrounded him? In all the qualities, the brave one surpasses Dhananjaya. His
weapons are always truth and brahmacharya. He is Vasudeva’s equal in valour and Dhananjaya’s equal in strength.
He is like the sun in his energy and like Brihaspati in his intelligence. The great-souled Abhimanyu is like death
with a gaping mouth. When he advanced towards Drona, which brave ones surrounded him? Subhadra’s son is the
destroyer of enemy heroes. He is young, but is as celebrated as the ocean. When he advanced against Drona, what
was the state of your mind then?51 Droupadi’s sons are tigers among men. They rushed towards Drona in that battle, like rivers towards the sea. Which brave ones repulsed them? Those children gave up all play for twelve years.
They observed supreme vows and for the sake of weapons, served Bhishma. They were Kshatranjaya, Kshatradeva, Kshatradharma and Manina, the brave sons of Dhrishtadyumna. When they advanced against Drona, who opposed them? The Vrishnis look upon him as the equal of one hundred armoured ones in battle. When the great
archer Chekitana advanced against Drona, who countered him? Anadhrishti was the son of Vriddhakshema and
was never distressed in his soul. He once abducted the princess of Kalinga in a battle. Who restrained him when he
advanced against Drona? The ﬁve brothers from Kekaya are devoted to dharma and truth is their valour. Their
complexion is like ﬁreﬂies. Their armour, weapons and standards are red. Those brave ones are the sons of the
Pandavas’s mother’s sister and desire their victory.52 When they attacked so as to kill Drona, which brave ones
surrounded them? The angry kings fought against him for six months in Varanavata, wishing to kill him, but could
not defeat him. He is the lord of battles. He is supreme among archers and is brave. He is extremely strong and is
unwavering in his aim. When that tiger among men attacked Drona, who countered Yuyutsu? In Varanasi, wishing
to obtain a wife, the maharatha used a broad-headed arrow in battle to bring down the son of the king of Kashi
from his chariot.53 Dhrishtadyumna, the great archer, is the counsellor of the Parthas. He was created for Drona’s
death and is engaged in causing injury to Duryodhana. In the battle, he consumed the warriors and shattered the
ranks. When he advanced towards Drona, which brave ones restrained him? Shikhandi’s son, Kshatradeva, was
reared in Drupada’s lap and is skilled in use of weapons. Who restrained his advance against Drona? Ushinara’s
maharatha son54 covered the entire earth with the pole of his chariot, as if girding it with the hide of a calf. He is
foremost among those who kill the enemy. He performed ten horse sacriﬁces, a substitute for all sacriﬁces, and
provided an abundance of food, drink and dakshina. He protected his subjects as if they were his own sons. The
brave one gave away as many cattle as dakshina as there are grains of sand in the waters of the Ganga. No man has
accomplished such a deed earlier, nor will any man perform this feat in the future. The gods themselves exclaimed,
‘This is an extremely difﬁcult deed. In the three worlds, with their mobile and immobile objects, we do not see a
second person like Ushinara’s son, who has been born, or will be born.’ Shaibya is brave. After death, he will go to
places that are not attainable by men of this world. Who repulsed the grandson Shaibya, when he advanced towards Drona, like death with a gaping mouth? Virata of Matsya has an army of chariots and is the killer of enemies. When he advanced against Drona in battle, which brave ones surrounded him? Vrikodara’s son grew up in a
single day.55 He is immensely strong and powerful. He is a terrible rakshasa and knows the use of maya. He causes great terror among those on my side. He desires the victory of the Parthas and is a thorn for my sons. Who restrained the mighty-armed Ghatotkacha’s advance towards Drona? O Sanjaya! There are many others who have
their objective in mind. They are prepared to give up their lives in battle. Who can they not vanquish? Their refuge

is the tiger among men, the wielder of the Sharnga bow. He desires the welfare of the Parthas. How can they be defeated? He is inﬁnite. He is the preceptor of the worlds. He is the eternal protector of the worlds. The divine
Narayana is the protector in all battles. He is the lord with the celestial soul. The learned ones speak about his divine deeds. I will recount his deeds with devotion and thus obtain calmness in my own self.”’
CHAPTER 987(10)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! Hear about Vasudeva’s divine deeds. Govinda performed them and no other man
can ever replicate them. O Sanjaya! When the great-souled one was brought up as a child in a family of cowherds,
he made the strength of his arms known to the three worlds. When he dwelt in the forests along the Yamuna, he
killed the king of horses,56 who was like the wind in speed and Uchchaishrava’s equal in strength. There was a
terrible danava in the form of a bull.57 He arose among the cows, like death. Though still a child, he killed him
with his arms. The one with lotus eyes also killed great asuras like Pralamba, Naraka, Jamba, Pitha and Muru, who
was like a mountain. The immensely energetic Kamsa was protected by Jarasandha. But with his valour alone,58
Krishna killed him and his followers in battle. The brave Sunama, the king of Shurasena, was the leader of an entire akshouhini. The valiant one was the second brother of Kamsa, the king of Bhoja. With Baladeva as his second,
Krishna, the slayer of enemies, spiritedly consumed him in a battle, with all his soldiers. The brahmana rishi Durvasa was extremely prone to rage. He worshipped him with his wife and obtained a boon from him.59 The lotuseyed and brave one vanquished many kings at the svayamvara of the daughter of the king of Gandhara.60 As if
they were born horses, the intolerant kings were yoked to the wedding chariot and lacerated with whips. The
mighty-armed Jarasandha was the leader of an entire akshouhini. Janardana thought of a way so that he might be
killed by someone else.61 The brave and powerful king of Chedi was the leader of kings. In the dispute over the
arghya, he was killed like an animal.62 Soubha, the city of the daityas, was established in the sky. It was protected
by Shalva and was invincible. Through his valour, Madhava brought it down into the ocean.63 He defeated in battle Anga, Vanga, Kalinga, Magadha, Andhaka, Kasi, Kosala, Vatsa, Garga, Karusha and Pundra. O Sanjaya! Avanti, the south, the mountains, Dasheraka, Kashmiraka, Ourasaka, Pishacha, Samandara, Kamboja, Vatadhana, Chola,
Pandya, Trigarta, Malava and Darada were difﬁcult to conquer. Ashvas, Shakas and Yavanas and their followers
arrived from different directions. But Pundarikaksha vanquished them. In earlier times, he penetrated the abode of
makaras, inhabited by aquatic creatures. In the midst of the waters, he vanquished Varuna in battle.64 Hrishikesha
slew Panchajana, who resided in the nether regions of patala and obtained the divine conch shell Panchajanya.65
Together with Partha, the immensely strong one satisﬁed Agni in Khandava and obtained the invincible agneya
weapon, the chakra.66 He rode on Vinata’s son and caused terror in Amaravati.67 The brave one brought parijata
from the great Indra’s residence. Knowing his valour, Shakra tolerated this. We have not heard of any king who
has not been vanquished by Krishna. O Sanjaya! Pundarikaksha performed an extremely wonderful deed in my assembly hall.68 Who else can do this? Because of that, I have sought refuge with him in devotion. I look upon
Krishna as the lord. I know everything about it, having witnessed it myself. There is no end to his valour, or to his
intelligence. O Sanjaya! Nor can anyone reach the limit of Hrishikesha’s deeds.
‘“Gada, Samba, Pradyumna, Viduratha, Agavaha, Aniruddha, Charudeshna, Sarana, Ulmuka, Nishatha, Jhalli,
the valiant Babhru, Prithu, Viprithu, Samika, Arimejaya—these and other powerful Vrishni heroes are skilled in
striking. They will station themselves in battle, in the ranks of the Pandava army. They will be summoned by the
great-souled hero among the Vrishnis, Keshava. It is my view that everything will then confront a great danger.
Where Janardana is, the brave Rama will be there.69 He wields the plough and wears a garland of wild ﬂowers.
His strength is like that of ten thousand elephants. He is like the summit of Kailasa. The brahmanas describe Vasudeva as the father of everything. O Sanjaya! Will he ﬁght for the cause of the sons of Pandu? O son!70 If Keshava dons his armour for the sake of the Pandavas, there is no one in our army who can withstand him. If all the Kurus manage to defeat all the Pandavas, for their sake, Varshneya will take up his supreme weapons. That mightyarmed tiger among men will kill all the kings and the Kouravas in battle and give the earth to the sons of Kunti.

Hrishikesha is the charioteer and Dhananjaya is the warrior in that chariot. Where is the ratha in our army who will
confront them in battle? There is no means whereby the Kurus can be seen to obtain victory. Tell me everything
about how the battle continued. Arjuna is Keshava’s soul and Krishna is Kiriti’s soul. Arjuna is always victorious
and Krishna’s deeds are eternal. All the qualities are vested in Keshava, beyond measure. Because of his delusion,
Duryodhana does not know Krishna Madhava. Because of his delusion and because he is driven by destiny, the
noose of death is in front of him and he does not know Dasharha Krishna and Pandava Arjuna. Earlier, those greatsouled ones were the gods Nara and Narayana. They were a single soul and are seen by men on earth as divided
into two. They are famous and invincible. If they wish, they can destroy the army with their minds. But because
they are humans, they do not wish that.71 The destruction of the yuga is near and the people are deluded. O son!
That is the reason for the death of Bhishma and the great-souled Drona. Death can never be prevented through
brahmacharya, the study of the Vedas, rites or weapons. Those brave ones were revered by the worlds. They were
skilled in the use of weapons and were invincible in battle. O Sanjaya! On hearing that Bhishma and Drona have
been slain, why should I remain alive? After learning about the death of Bhishma and Drona, we will now have to
seek refuge with Yudhishthira, about whose prosperity we used to be jealous earlier. This destruction of the Kurus
has come about because of my deeds. O suta! When one is ripe for slaughter, even a blade of grass is like the vajra.
Yudhishthira will obtain unmatched prosperity in this world. It is because of his anger that the great archers, Bhishma and Drona, have been brought down. Dharma is naturally on his side, though humans typically have adharma.
Destiny is cruel and it is time for everything to be destroyed. O son! Even learned men cannot think of means to
counteract it. Everything progresses because of destiny. That is my view. Therefore, tell me everything, exactly as
it happened, about that supreme hardship, without discarding anything. It cannot be crossed and leads to grievous
reﬂection.”’
CHAPTER 988(11)

‘Sanjaya said, “I will describe everything to you, exactly as I saw it, about how Drona was made to sit down and
was brought down by the Pandus and the Srinjayas. Having been appointed the commander, in the midst of all the
soldiers, Bharadvaja’s maharatha son spoke these words to your son. ‘O king! You have shown me great honour by
appointing me the commander today, after that bull among the Kouravas, the son of the one who goes to the ocean.
O king! You will obtain fruits that are commensurate with your action. What desire of yours can I satisfy today?
Tell me what you desire.’ At this, Duryodhana thought and consulted Karna, Duhshasana and the others. He told
the invincible preceptor, foremost among victorious ones, ‘If you wish, grant me the boon that you will capture
Yudhishthira, foremost among charioteers, alive and bring him before me.’ On hearing your son’s words, the preceptor of the Kurus, spoke these words, bringing delight to all the soldiers. ‘The king, Kunti’s son, whom you wish
to be captured, is fortunate. O extremely invincible one! You have only asked for the boon that he should be captured, not that he should be killed. O tiger among men! Why did you not desire that he should be killed? O Duryodhana! There is no doubt that you know about what should be done. It is wonderful that Dharma’s son should not
have an enmity like that towards you. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! If you wish to remain alive and protect your own lineage, then after vanquishing the Pandavas in battle, give them a share of the kingdom and act according to fraternal relations. The king who is Kunti’s son is fortunate. The intelligent one has been born auspiciously. He is truly Ajatashatru.72 Even you are affectionate towards him.’ O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Thus addressed by Drona, your son suddenly displayed the sentiments that always course through him. Even
someone like Brihaspati is incapable of controlling his countenance. O king! Therefore, your son joyfully spoke
these words. ‘O preceptor! If Kunti’s son is killed by you, I will not be able to obtain victory. If Yudhishthira is
slain, there is no doubt that the Parthas will slaughter all of us. They are incapable of being killed in battle, even by
all the immortals. The one among them who is left, will destroy us. But he73 is truthful in his pledges. When he is
brought here, we will defeat him again in a gambling match. The Kounteyas will follow him again to the forest.
Thus my victory will manifest itself for a long time to come. That is the reason I do not desire Dharmaraja’s
death.’ Drona was intelligent and was knowledgeable about artha. Having ascertained his crooked intention, he
thought about this for some time and then granted him the boon.

‘“Drona replied, ‘If Yudhishthira is not protected by the brave Arjuna in battle, you can think that the eldest Pandava has already been brought under your control. O son!74 But Partha is incapable of being repulsed in battle,
even by Indra and the gods and the asuras. That is the reason I cannot advance against him. In the knowledge of
weapons, there is no doubt that he has been my disciple earlier. He is young and has accomplished many deeds. He
is single-minded in purpose. He has obtained many weapons from Indra and Rudra. O king! You have also incensed him and I cannot advance against him. Let Partha be removed from the ﬁeld of battle, by whatever means
that are possible, and Dharmaraja will be vanquished. O bull among men! Once he has been captured, you think
that victory will be yours. Think of means, so that his capture is beyond doubt. I will capture the king, who is devoted to truth and dharma. O king! There is no doubt that I will bring him under your control today, as long as he
is stationed in the battle before me, even for an instant. But let Dhananjaya, Kunti’s son and tiger among men, be
removed. With Phalguna present, Partha Yudhishthira is incapable of being captured in battle, even by Indra and
the gods and the asuras.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “After Drona promised the king’s capture, your extremely foolish sons thought that he had been
already captured. Your son knew that Drona was partial towards the Pandavas. Therefore, to make him stick to the
pledge, he made the counsel generally known. O destroyer of enemies! Duryodhana proclaimed among all the soldiers that Pandava would be captured.”’
CHAPTER 989(12)

‘Sanjaya said, “The soldiers heard that Yudhishthira would be captured. They roared like lions and this mingled
with the sounds of their arrows and their conch shells. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dharmaraja got to
know everything about this through his spies, and about what Bharadvaja’s son desired to do. He summoned all his
brothers and all the soldiers. Dharmaraja spoke these words to Dhananjaya. ‘O tiger among men! You have heard
about what Drona wishes to do today. Let all appropriate measures be taken accordingly. O destroyer of enemies!
It is true that Drona has taken a pledge. But it is not infallible and everything depends on you. O mighty-armed
one! Therefore, ﬁght near me today, so that Duryodhana cannot obtain what he desires from Drona.’
‘“Arjuna replied, ‘O king! Just as I can never act so as to bring about the preceptor’s death, I will never forsake
you. O Pandava! I would rather give up my life than ﬁght against my preceptor and kill him. O king! Dhritarashtra’s son wishes to capture you in the battle. He will never accomplish his desire in the world of the living. As long
as I am alive, Drona will never be able to capture you. Even if the wielder of the vajra himself, together with the
gods and the daityas, were to try to capture you in battle, they will fail. O Indra among kings! As long as I am
alive, you should not be frightened. Drona is foremost among wielders of weapons and among those who wield all
weapons. I do not remember having ever uttered a falsehood. I do not remember ever having been vanquished. I do
not remember having not fulﬁlled a pledge I have made, even partially.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “O great king! Conch shells, drums, cymbals and tambourines were then sounded in the residence
of the Pandavas. The great-souled Pandavas roared like lions. The fearful twang of bowstrings and the slapping of
palms rose up into heaven. On hearing the conch shells sounded by the great-souled Pandavas, your army also
caused musical instruments to be played. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The arrays and divisions, on your
side and theirs, slowly advanced towards each other, wishing to ﬁght in the battle. A tumultuous battle commenced
between the Pandavas and the Kurus and Drona and the Panchalas, and it made the body hair stand up. O king!
Though they made every endeavour, the Srinjayas were unable to drive back Drona’s army, because it was protected by Drona himself. The armed and mighty rathas of your son were unable to drive back the Pandava soldiers, because they were protected by Kiriti. Protected thus, the respective soldiers seemed to be subdued, like blossoms
that are asleep in the forests in the night. O king! He75 was on a golden chariot, as radiant as the sun. He shattered
the divisions and roamed around, amidst the ranks. He was on a single chariot. But he acted so quickly in that battle, that the terriﬁed Pandus and Srinjayas thought there were several of him. He released terrible arrows that travelled in every direction. O great king! There was fright in the army of the Pandaveyas. He seemed to be like the
sun when it has attained midday, radiating a hundred rays and quickly drawing out sweat. That is what Drona
looked like then. O venerable one! The Pandaveyas were incapable of glancing towards him in that battle, like the
danavas towards the great Indra, when enraged. Bharadvaja’s powerful son confounded the soldiers. He swiftly

pierced Dhrishtadyumna’s army with his sharp arrows. He seemed to cover and obstruct all the directions and the
sky with his arrows. He crushed the army of the Pandus, even where Parshata was.”’
CHAPTER 990(13)

‘Sanjaya said, “There was great confusion in the army of the Pandavas. Drona roamed amidst the Pandavas, like a
ﬁre consuming deadwood. He burnt those soldiers, as if Agni himself had arisen. On seeing him on the golden
chariot in that battle, the Srinjayas trembled. He was swift in continuously stretching the bow. The twang of his
bow could be heard, like the clap of thunder. Rathas, riders, elephants, horses and foot soldiers were mangled
through the terrible arrows released by his hands. His arrows were like roaring clouds at the end of the summer,
assisted by the wind. They were like a hailstorm and created terror among the enemy. O king! The lord roamed
amidst the soldiers, agitating and terrifying them. He increased the fear that humans have for the foe. His bow, decorated with gold, was like clouds tinged with lightning. It was repeatedly seen, as he roamed around on a chariot
that was like dense clouds. The brave one was truthful, wise, always devoted to dharma and extremely terrible. He
was like the controller at the end of a yuga, creating a terrible river. Its currents resulted from the power of his intolerance. It was full of large numbers of predators and overﬂowed with masses of soldiers. The heroes were trees
along the banks, which were being eaten away. The blood was the water. The chariots were eddies. Elephants and
horses were the banks. Armour constituted rafts, the ﬂesh was the mud. The foam was formed out of fat, marrow,
bones and excellent headdresses. The battle seemed to be completely covered by a cloud. It was infested with ﬁsh
in the form of javelins. Men, elephants and horses ﬂowed along, driven by the force of the arrows. The bodies
were like the tops of trees, the arms were like snakes. The heads were like tender fruit. The swords were like ﬁsh.
The chariots and elephants were like lakes and it was decorated with many ornaments. The maharathas were hundreds of whirlpools. The dust of the earth was like garlands. In that battle, it was possible for the greatly valiant
ones to cross it. But cowards found it difﬁcult to cross. Brave ones were strewn around like snakes. The ones who
were alive were like aquatic birds. Torn umbrellas were like gigantic swans. The crowns were like smaller birds.
The chakras were tortoises, the clubs were crocodiles, the arrows were smaller ﬁsh. It was populated by large numbers of terrible wild crows, vultures and jackals. In that battle, the powerful Drona killed beings with his arrows. O
supreme among kings! Hundreds of them were conveyed to the world of the ancestors. Hundreds of bodies caused
obstructions. The hair constituted moss and weeds. O king! Such was the terrible river that began to ﬂow there and
it increased one’s fear. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus was their army defeated by those on your side.
‘“With Yudhishthira at the forefront, all of them attacked Drona from every direction. On seeing them advance,
the brave ones on your side wielded ﬁrm bows and attacked them back on every side. The battle that commenced
made the body hair stand up. Shakuni was conversant with a hundred different kinds of maya and attacked Sahadeva, piercing his charioteer, standard and chariot with sharp arrows. However, Madri’s son wasn’t greatly enraged.
He pierced his standard, bow, charioteer and horses with arrows and then pierced his maternal uncle with sixty. At
this, Soubala grasped a club and jumped down from his supreme chariot. O king! With that club, he brought down
his76 charioteer from his chariot. O king! Thus bereft of his chariot, the immensely strong one grasped a club in
his hands. The brave ones began to sport in that battle, like two mountains with peaks. Drona pierced the king of
Panchala with ten arrows, was himself pierced back in turn by many arrows and pierced back again with more than
a hundred arrows. Bhimasena pierced Vivimshati with twenty sharp arrows. Though he was pierced, the brave one
did not tremble and it was extraordinary. O great king! Vivimshati suddenly deprived Bhima of his horses, standard, bow and arrows and all the soldiers honoured this feat. But the brave one77 could not tolerate the victory of
the enemy in battle. With his club, he brought down his charioteer and all his horses. The brave Shalya seemed to
be smiling. As if to anger him, he pierced Nakula, the beloved son of his sister, with arrows. In the battle, the powerful Nakula brought down his horses, umbrella, standard, charioteer and bow and blew on his conch shell. Dhrishtaketu severed the many kinds of arrows Kripa released towards him. He then pierced Kripa with seventy arrows
and then used three more to bring down the sign on his standard. Kripa countered him with a great shower of arrows. In this fashion, in that battle, the brahmana78 countered Dhrishtaketu and fought with him. Satyaki pierced
Kritavarma between the breasts with an iron arrow. Having pierced him, he smiled and pierced him with seventy

arrows, piercing him again with others. But Bhoja79 pierced him with seventy-seven sharp arrows. However, Shini’s descendant did not waver, like a mountain before a swift wind. Senapati quickly struck Susharma in his inner
organs and he80 struck him back in the shoulder joint with a lance. With the immensely valiant Matsyas, Virata
attacked Vaikartana in the battle and it was extraordinary. This was terrible manliness on the part of the son of the
suta. He countered the soldiers with his straight-tufted arrows. Drupada himself confronted King Bhagadatta. O
great king! The battle between the two, skilled in the use of weapons, was wonderful and created terror among beings. O king! In the battle, the valiant Bhurishrava enveloped Yajnasena’s maharatha son81 with a shower of arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O lord of the earth! Shikhandi was enraged at this and pierced Somadatta’s son with ninety arrows, making him tremble. The rakshasas, Hidimba’s son and Alambusa, fought an extraordinary battle against each other, wishing to kill each other. They proudly created a hundred different kinds of
maya and used maya against each other. They disappeared as they wandered around, giving rise to great wonder.
Chekitana fought a terrible battle with Anuvinda, like that between Bala and the immensely strong Shakra, when
the gods and the asuras fought. O king! Lakshmana fought ﬁercely with Kshatradeva, like Vishnu in ancient times,
when he fought against Hiranyaksha.82
‘“Pourava was on swift horses and his chariot was stocked with every implement. O king! He roared and attacked Subhadra’s son. The immensely strong one swiftly attacked, desiring to ﬁght. Abhimanyu, the destroyer of
enemies, fought a great battle with him. Pourava enveloped Subhadra’s son with a storm of arrows. Arjuna’s son
brought down his standard, umbrella and bow on the ground. Subhadra’s son pierced Pourava with seven swift arrows. He then pierced his horses and charioteer with ﬁve arrows. The soldiers were delighted at this and he roared
repeatedly like a lion. Arjuna’s son then quickly afﬁxed an arrow that was certain to kill Pourava. But Hardikya83
used two arrows to slice down his bow and arrow. Subhadra’s son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, cast aside that
shattered bow. He grasped a sharp sword and a shield. He exhibited his own valour and whirled it, as he moved
around. He whirled it in front of him and brandished it in the air. He leapt up and shook it. O king! No difference
could be distinguished between the sword and the shield. He leapt onto the shaft of Pourava’s chariot and suddenly
roared. Having ascended onto Pourava’s chariot, he grasped him by the side of the hair. He killed the charioteer
with a kick and sliced down the standard with his sword. He raised him up, like Tarkshya84 agitating the water of
the ocean and raising up a snake from it. All the kings saw him with his disheveled hair. He looked like an unconscious bull, when it has been brought down by a lion. Jayadratha could not tolerate the sight of Pourava having
been brought down, afﬂicted and without a protector, and in the control of Arjuna’s son. He grasped a shield
marked with the giant wings of a peacock and decorated with a hundred bells, and a sword. He roared and jumped
down from his chariot. On seeing Saindhava, Krishna’s son85 let go of Pourava. He swiftly leapt down from the
chariot, like a hawk alighting. Spears, lances and swords were hurled towards him by the enemy. But Krishna’s son
sliced them down with his sword or countered them with his shield. He displayed the strength of his own arms to
the soldiers. The strong one again raised his giant sword and shield. The brave one advanced against Vriddhakshatra’s heir,86 who was a sworn enemy of his father’s. It was like a tiger advancing against an elephant. They cheerfully advanced and attacked each other, using swords as weapons, like a tiger and a lion using teeth and claws to
ﬁght. No one could distinguish any difference between those lions among men and the motions of the sword and
the shield.87 When they whirled their swords and brought them down, or when they fended off each other’s blows,
no special difference could be seen between the weapons. They roamed around in excellent motions, advancing
and retreating. The great-souled ones looked like mountains with wings. As he extended his sword to strike,
Jayadratha struck the shield of Subhadra’s illustrious son. The sword stuck in the radiant shield, which had plates
made out of gold and the great sword snapped when the king of Sindhu tried to extract it forcefully. On seeing that
the sword had been shattered, Jayadratha was instantly seen to retreat six steps and climb onto his chariot again. In
the battle, Krishna’s son resorted to his supreme chariot and all the kings surrounded him from every direction.
Arjuna’s immensely strong heir raised his shield and sword and roared, glancing towards Jayadratha. Subhadra’s
son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, then abandoned the king of Sindhu and tormented the soldiers, like the sun on
the earth. In the encounter, Shalya hurled a terrible javelin at him. It was made completely out of iron and was dec-

orated with gold. It was as radiant as the ﬂames of a ﬁre. As it descended, Krishna’s son leapt up and caught it, like
Vinata’s son grasping a supreme serpent that has fallen from above. He then unsheathed his sword. On witnessing
the dexterity and spirit of that inﬁnitely energetic one, all the kings roared like lions. Subhadra’s son, the destroyer
of enemy heroes, then used the valour of his arms to hurl the javelin, radiant with lapis lazuli, back at Shalya. It
was like a snake that had just cast off its skin. It reached Shalya’s chariot and slew his charioteer and brought him
down from the chariot. Virata, Drupada, Dhrishtaketu, Yudhishthira, Satyaki, the Kekayas, Bhima, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, the twins and Droupadi’s sons uttered sounds of acclamation. There were many different kinds of
sounds from arrows and diverse roars like lions. They arose and delighted Subhadra’s son, who had not retreated.
But your sons could not tolerate those signs of victory on the part of the enemy. O great king! They suddenly surrounded him and enveloped him with sharp arrows, like clouds pouring down on a mountain. Artayani,88 the slayer of enemies, wished to do what would bring pleasure to your sons and was enraged because of the overthrow of
his charioteer. He attacked Subhadra’s son.”’
CHAPTER 991(14)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! You have described to me many wonderful duels. On hearing what you have said,
I envy those who possess eyes. Men in the world will speak of this as wonderful, the ﬁght between the Kurus and
the Pandavas, like that between the gods and the asuras. I am never satisﬁed on hearing about this supreme battle.
Therefore, tell me about the encounter between Artayani and Subhadra’s son.”
‘Sanjaya said, “On seeing that his charioteer had been sent to the regulator,89 Shalya grasped a club that was
completely made out of iron. He leapt down from his supreme chariot and roared in anger. He looked like the ﬂaming ﬁre of destruction, or Death with a staff in his hand. Bhima grasped a mighty club and quickly rushed towards
him. Subhadra’s son also grasped a gigantic club that was like the vajra and summoned Shalya to a ﬁght. But Bhima made efforts and restrained Subhadra’s son. The powerful Bhimasena approached Shalya in that battle and
stood immobile, like a mountain. The king of Madra saw the immensely strong Bhima and forcefully advanced towards him, like a tiger towards an elephant. Thousands of trumpets and conch shells were sounded. There were
roars like those of lions and the mighty sounds of drums. On seeing those two, equal in spirit, rush towards each
other, there were sounds of applause among hundreds of Pandavas and Kurus. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Among all the kings, there is no one other than the lord of Madra who can withstand Bhimasena’s force in
battle. There is no warrior in this world, other than Vrikodara, who can withstand the force of the club of the greatsouled lord of Madra. Bhima’s mighty club was tied in hemp and decorated with gold. It caused great delight
among the people. When wielded, it seemed to blaze. Shalya’s beautiful club was also like a giant ﬂash of lightning, when he roamed and whirled it around. They wandered around in circles and lowered their clubs. They
roared like bulls, as if with horns lowered. They wielded their clubs and executed circular motions. In the encounter, there was no difference between those lions among men. Struck by Bhimasena, Shalya’s gigantic club
emitted extremely terrible sparks of ﬁre and the club was shattered. In similar fashion, when struck by the enemy,
Bhimasena’s club was as resplendent as a tree covered with ﬁreﬂies during the evening of the monsoon. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The king of Madra hurled a club in that battle.90 It blazed through the sky and created
many ﬁres. Similarly, Bhimasena hurled a club at the enemy and tormented his soldiers, like a giant meteor that
was falling down. The best of clubs struck each other. They sighed like the maidens of serpents and created ﬁre.
They were like giant tigers using claws, or giant elephants using tusks. They roamed around, striking each other
with clubs. In a short while, struck by clubs, they were covered with blood and the great-souled ones looked like
ﬂowering kimshukas. The sounds of the clubs wielded by those lions among men could be heard in all the directions, like that of Shakra’s vajra. The club of the king of Madra struck Bhima on the left and the right. But he did
not waver, like a mountain that has been struck. Similarly, the immensely strong Bhima’s club struck the lord of
Madra. But he bore it with patience, like a mountain struck by the vajra. They raised their giant clubs and attacked
each other with great force. They repeatedly roamed around, executing circular motions. They approached each
other by eight steps and suddenly attacked each other like elephants wishing to kill each other, with clubs like iron
rods. They were severely wounded from the force of each other’s clubs. The brave ones simultaneously fell down,

like shattered poles of Indra. Shalya was deprived of his senses, having been struck by the club, and sighed repeatedly. O great king! On seeing this, maharatha Kritavarma quickly approached him, as he was unconscious and immobile like a serpent, having been struck by the club. Maharatha Kritavarma swiftly lifted the lord of Madra up
onto his own chariot and carried him away from the ﬁeld of battle. The brave Bhima was unconscious, like someone who is drunk. However, the mighty-armed one raised himself in an instant and could be seen, with the club in
his hand. Your sons saw that the lord of Madra had retreated. O venerable one! They trembled, with their elephants, chariots, infantry and horses. Those on your side were routed by the Pandavas, who desired victory. They
were frightened and ﬂed in different directions, like clouds scattered by the wind. The maharatha Pandaveyas defeated the sons of Dhritarashtra. O king! The illustrious ones were radiant and roamed around on the ﬁeld of battle.
They roared ﬁercely like lions and blew on their conch shells in delight. Drums were sounded, together with kettledrums and tambourines.”’
CHAPTER 992(15)

‘Sanjaya said, “Your great army was shattered in that battle by the Pandus. On seeing this, Vrishasena exhibited the
power of his weapons and began to protect it single-handed. O venerable one! Vrishasena released arrows in the
ten directions. He roamed around and pierced men, horses, chariots and elephants. The mighty-armed one released
thousands of mighty and ﬂaming arrows. They were like the rays of the sun during the summer. O great king!
Rathas and riders were oppressed by them and suddenly fell down on the ground, like trees broken by the wind. O
king! In that battle, masses of horses, masses of chariots and masses of elephants were brought down in every direction in hundreds and thousands. On seeing him fearlessly roam around in that battle alone, all the kings91 surrounded him and attacked him together. Nakula’s son, Shatanika, attacked Vrishasena and pierced him with ten
iron arrows that penetrated the inner organs. At this, Karna’s son severed his bow and brought down his standard.
Wishing to protect their brother, Droupadi’s other sons rushed towards him. They made Karna’s son disappear because of the shower of their arrows. Rathas, with Drona’s son at the forefront, advanced towards them. O great
king! They quickly enveloped Droupadi’s maharatha sons with many types of arrows, like clouds on a mountain.
Out of affection towards their sons, the Pandavas quickly countered them, together with warriors from the Panchalas, Kekayas, Matsyas and Srinjayas. The battle that raged between those on your side and the sons of Pandu was
fearful and tumultuous and made the body hair stand up, like that between the gods and the danavas. The Kurus
and the Pandavas fought well, excited by anger. They glanced towards each other, having earlier engendered the
animosity towards each other. Because of that wrath, those inﬁnitely energetic ones seemed to be like the supreme
of birds92 and the serpents, battling in the sky. With Bhima, Karna, Kripa, Drona, Drona’s son, Parshata and
Satyaki, the ﬁeld of battle was resplendent, as if the sun of destruction had arisen. The immensely strong ones
ﬁercely fought in that battle, seeking to kill each other, like Bali of the danavas against the gods. Yudhishthira’s
army let out a mighty roar and began to slaughter your soldiers, driving the maharathas away.
‘“On seeing that the army was routed and sorely oppressed by the enemy, Drona said, ‘O brave ones! Do not run
away.’ Drona possessed red horses. He was angry. He was like an elephant with four tusks. He penetrated the Pandava army and attacked Yudhishthira. Yudhishthira pierced him with sharp arrows tufted with heron feathers. But
Drona severed his bow and quickly rushed against him. The illustrious Kumara from the Panchalas was protecting
his93 wheels and countered the advancing Drona, like the shoreline against the lord of the rivers. On seeing Drona,
bull among the brahmanas, thus repulsed by Kumara, delighted leonine roars and sounds of applause were heard.
In that great battle, Kumara angrily pierced Drona in the chest with an arrow and repeatedly roared, like a lion. But
in that encounter, the immensely strong Drona repulsed Kumara. Having overcome all fatigue, he displayed the
dexterity of his hands and released many thousands of arrows. The brave one, supreme among brahmanas, devoted
to the conduct of aryas and well-versed in the use of weapons, slew Kumara, the protector of the chariot wheels.
He penetrated the midst of the army and roamed around in all the directions. Bharadvaja’s son, bull among rathas,
was the protector of your soldiers. He pierced Shikhandi with twelve arrows, Uttamouja with twenty, Nakula with
ﬁve, Sahadeva with seven, Yudhishthira with twelve, each of Droupadi’s sons with three, Satyaki with ﬁve and
Matsya with ten. In that battle, he agitated the warriors and rushed against them. With a desire to capture him, he

advanced towards Yudhishthira, Kunti’s son. O king! Maharatha Yugandhara repulsed Bharadvaja’s son, who was
enraged, like the ocean agitated by a storm. Having pierced Yudhishthira with straight-tufted arrows, he94 brought
Yugandhara down from the chariot with a broad-headed arrow. Virata, Drupada, the Kekayas, Satyaki, Shibi,
Vyaghradatta from Panchala, the valiant Simhasena and many others sought to protect Yudhishthira. They showered many arrows and obstructed his path. O king! Vyaghradatta from Panchala pierced Drona with ﬁfty sharp arrows and the soldiers roared. Maharatha Simhasena swiftly pierced Drona, rigid in his vows, and suddenly laughed
out in delight. Drona dilated his eyes and rubbed the string of his bow. He slapped his palms loudly and attacked.
The powerful one used broad-headed arrows to sever the heads, adorned with earrings, of Simhasena and Vyaghradatta from their bodies. He used a shower of arrows to torment the maharatha Pandavas and approached Yudhishthira, like death, the destroyer. O king! A loud sound arose in Yudhishthira’s army, among all the warriors,
when the one who was rigid in his vows approached him. On witnessing Drona’s valour, this is what the soldiers
said. ‘The king has been slain. The king who is Dhritarashtra’s son will be successful today. In this battle, he will
return to us and to Dhritarashtra’s son.’95 While your soldiers were thus conversing, maharatha Kounteya swiftly
arrived.
‘“His chariot roared. He had created a terrible river. The water was blood and the chariots were eddies. It was
full of the bodies and bones of brave ones and it conveyed beings to the world of the dead. Masses of arrows were
the giant foam and it was infested with ﬁsh in the form of javelins. Having routed the Kurus, Pandava quickly
crossed that river. Kiriti suddenly attacked Drona’s army and shrouded and confounded it with a giant net of arrows. The illustrious Kounteya quickly afﬁxed arrows and shot them incessantly, so that no one could distinguish a
gap between these.96 O great king! The directions, the sky, the ﬁrmament and the earth disappeared, covered by
the arrows. O king! Nothing could be seen in the ﬁeld of battle then. The wielder of Gandiva created a great darkness with his arrows. With the sun about to set, dust covered everything. Enemy could no longer be distinguished
from well-wisher. Drona, Duryodhana and the others announced a withdrawal. Knowing that the enemy was extremely terriﬁed and no longer had its mind on the ﬁght, Bibhatsu slowly withdrew his own soldiers. The Pandus,
Srinjayas and Panchalas praised Partha with pleasant words, like rishis praising the sun. Having vanquished the
enemy, Dhananjaya returned to his own camp, behind all the other soldiers. He was happy and was with Keshava.
Pandu’s son was radiant on his colourful chariot, which was decorated with excellent and expensive emeralds,
crystals, gold, diamonds and quartz. He was as radiant as the moon in the sky, adorned with stars.”’

Section Sixty-Six
Samshaptaka Vadha Parva
This parva has 717 shlokas and sixteen chapters.
Chapter 993(16): 49 shlokas
Chapter 994(17): 31 shlokas
Chapter 995(18): 39 shlokas
Chapter 996(19): 64 shlokas
Chapter 997(20): 53 shlokas
Chapter 998(21): 29 shlokas
Chapter 999(22): 63 shlokas
Chapter 1000(23): 19 shlokas
Chapter 1001(24): 61 shlokas
Chapter 1002(25): 59 shlokas
Chapter 1003(26): 29 shlokas
Chapter 1004(27): 30 shlokas
Chapter 1005(28): 44 shlokas
Chapter 1006(29): 41 shlokas
Chapter 1007(30): 29 shlokas
Chapter 1008(31): 77 shlokas
Samshaptakas are warriors who have taken an oath and these warriors (primarily the Trigartas) take an oath to die or kill Arjuna. This section is named after that oath. With Arjuna out of the way, the idea is that Drona will capture Yudhishthira. On the twelfth day of the battle,
Arjuna kills several of the samshaptaka warriors. Drona kills many of the Panchalas, Matsyas and Kekayas. Bhima kills the king of Anga.
Bhagadatta kills the king of Dasharna and Ruchiparva and unleashes the vaishnava weapon on Arjuna, which is countered by Krishna. Arjuna kills Bhagadatta. Arjuna kills Vrishaka and Achala, Shakuni’s brothers. Ashvatthama kills Nila of Mahishmati. Arjuna kills three of Karna’s brothers.
CHAPTER 993(16)

‘Sanjaya said, “O lord of the earth! The soldiers returned to their own camps and retired, according to their respective ranks, arrays and divisions. Having asked the soldiers to withdraw, Drona was supremely distressed. He
glanced towards Duryodhana, and in shame, spoke these words. ‘I had told you earlier that if Dhananjaya is
present, even the gods are incapable of capturing Yudhishthira in the battle. All of you endeavoured against Partha,
but you were repulsed. Do not doubt my words that Krishna and Pandava are invincible. O king! But if the one
with the white horses can be taken away, then Yudhishthira will come under your control today.1 In the battle, let
someone challenge him in a different part of the ﬁeld and I will not return without vanquishing Kounteya.2 O
king! While Dhrishtadyumna looks on, I will use the void, while Arjuna is absent from the battle, to penetrate the
army and capture Dharmaraja. Know that you will see me ﬁnd ways to seize him. O king! If Pandava Yudhishthira,
Dharma’s son, stays before me even for an instant in the battle, there is no doubt that I will forcibly seize him today, with all his men and soldiers. This will be superior to an overall victory in the battle.’ O king! On hearing
Drona’s words, the lord of Trigarta, together with his brothers, spoke these words. ‘O king! The wielder of Gandiva has always treated us badly. O bull among the Bharata lineage! We have not caused him injury, but he has injured us. We remember those many instances of injury and are consumed by the ﬁre of wrath. We can never sleep
at night. The one with the divine weapons is now before our eyes. We will do everything that your heart desires
and brings you pleasure and also brings us fame. We will draw him away from the ﬁeld of battle and kill him. Let
the earth be without Arjuna today, or without the Trigartas. We swear this before you and this pledge will not be
falsiﬁed.’ O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O great king! Satyaratha, Satyadharma, Satyavarma, Satyeshu and

Satyakarma—these ﬁve brothers arrived,3 with ten thousand chariots, and spoke in this way. They took the pledge
in that battle. The Malavas and the Tundirekas came with thirty thousand chariots. Susharma of Trigarta, tiger
among men and the lord of Prasthala,4 came with the Machellakas, Lalitthas and Madrakas, with ten thousand
chariots and his brothers and took the oath. There were another ten thousand from many different countries. They
arrived specially, for purposes of taking the oath.
‘“They brought kindling so that each one could separately light a ﬁre. They brought garments of kusha grass and
colourful armour. They donned the armour, smeared themselves with clariﬁed butter and clad themselves in the
garments of kusha grass. The brave ones used bowstrings as girdles. They had given away hundreds and thousands
of dakshina and had performed many sacriﬁces. They had sons. They had performed deeds to obtain worlds.5 Having performed the deeds, they were ready to lay down their lives. They had devoted their souls to fame and victory.
Through an excellent ﬁght, they quickly aspired to obtain worlds that can be got through sacriﬁces at which a lot of
dakshina is offered and rites, of which, brahmacharya and the study of the sacred texts are the foremost. Each of
them separately satisﬁed the brahmanas by giving them gold coins, cows and garments. Then they addressed each
other affectionately. They lit ﬁres with black trails and took an oath for the battle. In front of the ﬁres, ﬁrm in their
resolution, they took the pledges. They took that oath for slaying Dhananjaya and loudly spoke these words, in the
hearing of all beings. ‘There are worlds for those who lie, those who kill brahmanas, drunkards, worlds for those
who have intercourse with the preceptor’s wife, those who rob the property of brahmanas, those who steal a king’s
grant,6 those who forsake someone who seeks refuge, those who kill someone who seeks a favour, those who are
arsonists, those who kill cows, those who are wicked, worlds for those who hate brahmanas, those who are overtaken by folly and do not have intercourse with their wives when it is the right season or have intercourse on the
day of a shraddha, those who injure their own souls, those who misappropriate something left in trust, those who
destroy learning, those who ﬁght out of anger, those who follow inferior ones, worlds for those who are atheists,
those who abandon their ﬁres and their ancestors and there are worlds for those who are evil in conduct. If we return from the battle without killing Dhananjaya, or if we retreat because we are afﬂicted by his weapons, those7
will be ours. If in this battle, we accomplish feats that are difﬁcult to perform in this world, there is no doubt that
we will obtain desirable worlds.’ O king! Having spoken in this way, they advanced to do battle. The brave ones
challenged Arjuna in the southern direction.8
‘“Partha, tiger among men and the destroyer of enemy cities, was thus challenged and quickly spoke these
words to Dharmaraja. ‘I have a vow that I will not retreat if I am challenged. O king! The samshaptakas are repeatedly challenging me. Susharma, together with his brothers, is challenging me to a battle. You should give me permission to kill him, together with his followers. O bull among men! I am incapable of tolerating this challenge.
Know that these enemies have already been killed in battle. I tell you this truthfully.’ Yudhishthira replied, ‘O
son!9 You have heard what Drona desires to do. Act so that his intentions become false. Drona is brave and powerful. He is skilled in the use of weapons and has conquered fatigue. O maharatha! He has sworn to capture me.’ Arjuna said, ‘O king! This Satyajit will protect you in battle today. As long as this Panchala is alive, the preceptor’s
desire will not be fulﬁlled. If this lord Satyajit, tiger among men, is killed in the battle, you should never remain
here, even if you are surrounded by everyone on our side.’ At this, the king gave Phalguna the permission and embraced him. He glanced at him affectionately and pronounced many benedictions on him. Having made these
arrangements, the powerful Partha advanced against the Trigartas. He was like a hungry lion, hunting a herd of
deer to satisfy his hunger. Duryodhana’s soldiers were ﬁlled with great delight. With Arjuna gone, they were extremely wrathful at the prospect of capturing Dharmaraja. With great energy, the soldiers rushed towards each other, like the powerful Ganga and Sarayu at the time of the monsoon, when they are overﬂowing with water.”’
CHAPTER 994(17)

‘Sanjaya said, “O king! The samshaptakas were delighted. They stationed themselves and their chariots on level
ground, arrayed in a vyuha in the shape of a half-moon. O venerable one! On seeing that Kiriti was advancing towards them, those tigers among men were delighted. They roared loudly. That noise resounded in the directions
and the sub-directions and covered the sky. Because the ground was covered with only a few men, there were no

echoes. On seeing that they were extremely delighted, Dhananjaya smiled a little and addressed these words to
Krishna. ‘O one who has Devaki as a mother! Behold. At a time when they should be weeping, the Trigarta brothers are delighted. They are about to be killed in the battle. Or perhaps, this is certainly a time for the Trigartas to
rejoice. They will obtain excellent worlds that cannot be obtained by those who are cowards.’ Having spoken these
words to the mighty-armed Hrishikesha in the battle, Arjuna encountered the army of the Trigartas, arranged in a
battle formation. Phalguna grasped the conch shell Devadatta, embellished with gold and blew it with great force,
ﬁlling all the directions. The samshaptaka chariots were terriﬁed at the sound. In that battle, they were motionless,
as if they were made out of stone. Their mounts dilated their eyes, with the ears, heads and lips paralysed. Their
feet did not move. They excreted urine and vomited blood.
‘“When they regained consciousness, the army was arrayed again and simultaneously released arrows tufted
with heron feathers towards Pandu’s son. However, Arjuna used ﬁfteen swift arrows to counter thousands of those.
The valiant one was swift and severed the arrows before they could reach him. Each of them then pierced Arjuna
with ten sharp arrows. But Partha pierced them back with three arrows each. O king! Each of them then pierced
Partha with ﬁve arrows. But the valorous one pierced each of them back with two arrows. They became extremely
angry and enveloped Arjuna and Keshava with sharp arrows, like rain showering down on a lake. Hundreds and
thousands of arrows were released towards Arjuna, like hordes of bees descending on ﬂowering trees in a forest.
Subahu pierced and penetrated Savyasachi’s diadem with thirty arrows that were as hard as rock. Those gold-tufted
arrows stuck to Kiriti’s diadem and he looked like a sacriﬁcial post decorated with gold. In the encounter, Pandava
used a broad-headed arrow to sever Subahu’s arm-guard and enveloped him with a shower of arrows. Susharma,
Suratha, Sudharma, Sudhanu and Subahu pierced Kiriti with ten arrows each. But the one with the monkey on his
banner countered each of them separately with arrows. He pierced them back and severed their golden standards
with broad-headed arrows. Having sliced down Sudhanu’s bow, he killed his horses with arrows. Then he severed
his helmeted head from his body. When that brave one was brought down, his followers were terriﬁed. In fear, they
ﬂed towards Duryodhana’s army. Vasava’s son was extremely angry and slaughtered that large army with his net of
arrows, like the sun’s rays dispelling darkness. The army was shattered and ﬂed in different directions. Savyasachi
was overcome with great rage and the Trigartas were overcome with fear. They were slaughtered by Partha’s
straight-tufted arrows. They remained there, bereft of their senses, like a frightened herd of deer. The angry king of
the Trigartas10 spoke to the maharathas. ‘O brave ones! Do not run away. You should not be overcome by fear.
You pledged and took a terrible oath before all the soldiers. Having gone there, what will you tell the foremost
ones among Duryodhana’s soldiers? For this deed of ours in this battle, will we not be ridiculed in this world? All
of us should unite and return to our respective divisions.’ O king! Having been thus addressed, those brave ones
repeatedly blew on their conch shells and gladdened each other. The masses of samshaptakas returned again, like
the Narayana cowherds11 that have returned to their death.”’
CHAPTER 995(18)

‘Sanjaya said, “On seeing the samshaptaka army return again, Arjuna spoke to the great-souled Vasudeva. ‘O
Hrishikesha! Drive the horses towards the army of the samshaptakas. They will not return alive from the battle.
That is my view. Today, you will witness the terrible strength of my weapons and my arms. I will bring them
down, like an angry Rudra against animals.’ Hearing this, Krishna smiled and addressed him with auspicious
words. The invincible one conveyed Arjuna to the spot where he desired to go. They were radiant on a chariot
drawn by white horses and because of this, seemed to cause a loss of the senses, like a vimana that has risen in the
sky. The chariot performed circular motions, it moved forwards and back. O king! It was like Shakra’s chariot, in
the battle between the gods and the asuras in ancient times. The angry Narayanas raised different kinds of weapons
in their hands. They surrounded Dhananjaya and enveloped him with a storm of arrows. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! In that battle, they made Dhananjaya, Kunti’s son, invisible, together with Krishna. In that encounter,
Phalguna became wrathful and showed double his valour. In that battle, he grasped the Gandiva and touched its
string. There were frowns on his forehead, a sign of rage. Pandava blew on the great conch shell Devadatta. Arjuna
resorted to the weapon known as tvastra, which was capable of destroying large numbers of the enemy at the same

time. Many thousand of separate forms appeared.12 Confused by these many different forms, they began to kill
each other. Thinking each other to be Arjuna, they began to kill each other. ‘This is Arjuna. This is Govinda. These
are Yadava and Pandava.’ They were confused and speaking in this way, they killed each other in that battle. They
were confused by that supreme weapon and destroyed each other in this way. In that battle, the warriors were as
beautiful as ﬂowering kimshukas. The thousands of arrows released by those brave ones were reduced by that
weapon to ashes and it conveyed them to Yama’s abode.
‘“Bibhatsu laughed and used his arrows to shatter the Lallittha, Malava, Machellaka and Trigarta warriors.
Those brave kshatriyas were propelled by destiny. They were slaughtered and released many different showers of
arrows towards Partha. Shrouded by that terrible shower of arrows, Arjuna, Keshava or the chariot could no longer
be seen there. On seeing that the arrows had found their mark, they told each other in delight. ‘Krishna and Arjuna
have been killed.’ They waved their garments in the air. The brave ones sounded thousands of drums, tambourines
and conch shells. O venerable one! They emitted terrible roars, like lions. Krishna was covered in sweat and was
exhausted. He told Arjuna, ‘O Partha! Where are you? I cannot see you. O slayer of enemies! Are you alive?’ He
who knows all sentiments, thus adopted human sentiments. On discerning this, Pandava swiftly used the vayavya
weapon and dispelled that shower of arrows. The illustrious Vayu13 created a storm that blew away the samshaptakas, with their horses, elephants, chariots and weapons, as if they were heaps of dry leaves. O king! As they were
borne away by the wind, they looked beautiful. O venerable one! They were like birds, ﬂying away from trees at
the right time.14 Having afﬂicted them in this way, Dhananjaya swiftly killed hundreds and thousands of them
with his sharp arrows. He used broad-headed arrows to sever their heads and their arms, still grasping weapons. He
used his arrows to bring down thighs that were like the trunks of elephants. Some were wounded on their backs.
Others lost their legs, or their heads, eyes and ﬁngers. Dhananjaya deprived their bodies of many limbs. Their
many chariots looked like the cities of gandharvas. He shattered them, and the horses, chariots and elephants, with
his arrows. With the standards brought down, some of those groups of chariots looked like forests of palm trees,
with the heads lopped off. There were elephants with excellent weapons, standards, goads and warriors. They were
brought down, like wooden mountains struck with Shakra’s vajra. There were horses with tails like whisks and armoured riders. Wounded by Partha’s arrows, they fell down on the ground, with their entrails and eyes plucked out.
Foot soldiers held swords that looked like nails. But these dropped from their hand and their armour was shattered.
Their inner organs were mangled. They were killed and whirled around. They fell and were falling down. Because
of this, the ﬁeld of battle looked terrible. A great cloud of dust had arisen and was now paciﬁed by the shower of
blood. Strewn with many headless torsos, the ground became difﬁcult to cross. In that battle, Bibhatsu’s chariot
was ﬁerce and radiant. He sported around like Rudra, slaughtering animals at the time of destruction. Killed by
Partha, the horses, chariots and elephants became anxious. But they continued to rush at him, like guests visiting
Shakra.15 O foremost among the Bharata lineage! The ground was strewn with many slain maharathas. With all of
them lying there, it looked like the world of dead spirits. While Savyasachi was thus furiously engaged, Drona and
his battle formations attacked Yudhishthira. There were many armed ones in arrays and they swiftly attacked, so as
to capture Yudhishthira. There was a great and tumultuous encounter.”’
CHAPTER 996(19)

‘Sanjaya said, “O king! When the night had passed, Bharadvaja’s maharatha son spoke to King Suyodhana. ‘I have
made arrangements for the masses of samshaptakas to be engaged with Partha.’ When Partha had left to battle with
the samshaptakas and kill them, Drona and his battle formation advanced against the great army of the Pandavas.
O best of the Bharata lineage! He advanced, wishing to capture Dharmaraja. On seeing that Bharadvaja’s son had
arranged his vyuha in the form of a Garuda,16 Yudhishthira created a counter-vyuha that was in the form of a halfcircle. Bharadvaja’s maharatha son was himself stationed in the mouth of the Suparna. King Duryodhana was at
the head, with his brothers and followers. Kritavarma and the supremely radiant Goutama17 were the eyes.
Bhutavarma, Kshemasharma, the valiant Karakarsha, Kalingas, Simhalas, those from the east, brave Abhiras,
Dasherakas, Shakas, Yavanas, Kambojas, Hamsapadas, Shurasenas, Daradas, Madras and Kekayas, with hundreds
and thousands of elephants, horses, chariots and infantry, were stationed at the neck. Bhurishrava, Shala, Shalya,

Somadatta and Bahlika—these brave ones were surrounded by one akshouhini and resorted to the right ﬂank. Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti and Sudakshina from Kamboja were stationed on the left ﬂank, with Drona’s son
stationed at the forefront. Kalingas,18 Ambashthas, Magadhas, Poundras, Madrakas, Gandharas, Shakunis, those
from the eastern regions,19 those from the mountainous regions and the Vastayas were at the rear. Vaikartana Karna, with his sons, kin and relatives, was at the tail, surrounded by a large army that raised many different kinds of
standards. Jayadratha, Bhimaratha, Samyati, Triksabha, Jaya, Bhuminjaya, Vrisha, Kratha and the immensely
strong Naishadha were surrounded by a large army and placed the world of Brahma as the objective.20 O king!
They were skilled in war and placed themselves in the centre of the vyuha. The vyuha constructed by Drona had
foot soldiers, horses, chariots and elephants. It was seen to be as turbulent as an ocean lashed by a storm. Those
wishing to do battle emerged from its ﬂanks and its sides. They were like clouds tinged with lightning, emerging in
all the directions during summer. O king! Pragjyotisha21 was resplendent in the midst, astride an elephant that had
been properly prepared. He looked like the rising sun. The king was adorned with garlands and a white umbrella
was above his head. He looked like the full moon, in conjunction with Krittika.22 The elephant was blind with
madness and was like a gigantic mountain, on which giant clouds were showering down. It looked like a mass of
collyrium. He23 was surrounded by many brave kings from the mountainous regions, adorned with diverse
weapons, and was like Shakra, surrounded by masses of gods.
‘“Yudhishthira saw that superhuman vyuha, incapable of being vanquished by enemies in battle. He spoke these
words to Parshata. ‘O lord! Your horses have the complexion of pigeons.24 Determine a policy so that I am not
captured today by the brahmana.’ Dhrishtadyumna replied, ‘O one who is excellent in vows! No matter how hard
Drona tries, he will not be able to bring you under his control. I will check Drona today, together with his followers. O Kouravya! As long as I am alive, you should not be anxious. Drona will never be able to defeat me in
battle.’ Having said this, Drupada’s powerful son, with horses that had the hue of pigeons, released arrows and
himself attacked Drona. On seeing the evil omen of Dhrishtadyumna stationed before him,25 Drona instantly became distressed. On seeing this, your son Durmukha, the destroyer of enemies, wished to do that which would
bring pleasure to Drona and countered Dhrishtadyumna. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A terrible battle
raged between the brave Parshata and Durmukha and they were each other’s equal. Parshata swiftly enveloped
Durmukha with a net of arrows and countered Bharadvaja’s son with a great shower of arrows. On seeing that
Drona had been sorely countered, your son confounded Parshata with a shower of many different kinds of arrows.
While the one from Panchala and the foremost among the Kurus were thus engaged in battle, Drona killed many of
Yudhishthira’s soldiers with arrows. They were routed in diverse directions, like clouds by the wind. Partha’s soldiers were thus scattered.
‘“For a short while, the encounter seemed to be pleasant. O king! But it then became violent and no consideration was shown to anyone. O king! As they fought each other, they could not distinguish friend from foe. The battle raged on, on the basis of guessing and signs. The rays of the sun reﬂected on the gems on headdresses, necklaces, ornaments, swords and shields and they assumed the complexion of the sun. The chariots, elephants and
horses streamed banners and seemed to assume the form of clouds, with ﬂocks of cranes in them. Men killed men.
Horses ﬁercely killed horses. Charioteers killed charioteers and elephants killed supreme elephants. In a short instant, there was a terrible and ﬁerce encounter between elephants and other supreme elephants, all bedecked with
pennants. As they rubbed their bodies against each other and clashed against each other with their tusks, ﬂames
tinged with smoke arose from the friction. Because of the ﬁre generated from the tusks, the standards were brought
down. They looked like masses of resplendent clouds in the sky, tinged with lightning. The earth was strewn with
elephants that roared as they were brought down, like clouds shrouding the autumn sky. The elephants were
slaughtered with showers of arrows and javelins and roared, like clouds during a deluge. Some supreme elephants
were struck with arrows and javelins and were terriﬁed. Others shrieked and ﬂed, frightening all beings. Some elephants were wounded by the tusks of other elephants. They roared in tones of woe, like clouds at the time of a terrible calamity. Some elephants were driven back by other supreme elephants. But urged by excellent goads, they
returned to the battle. Elephant-riders struck elephant-riders with arrows and javelins. With weapons and goads
dislodged, they fell down from the backs of elephants to the ground. Many elephants were bereft of their riders and

wandered in different directions. They fell down when they encountered each other, like scattered clouds. They
bore slain drivers and the best of warriors. Those giant elephants wandered in all the directions, as if they were
solitary.26 Some elephants were attacked. Others were attacked with javelins, swords and battleaxes. They uttered
roars of distress and fell down. Bodies that were like mountains fell down suddenly. The earth was suddenly struck
and quaked, and seemed to be shrieking. The earth was strewn in every direction with warriors, elephant-riders,
pennants and elephants and was beautiful, as if it was covered with hills. In that battle, elephant-riders on elephants
were pierced in their hearts. Charioteers were brought down with broad-headed arrows and lances and goads were
strewn around. Other elephants were wounded with iron arrows and shrieked like cranes. They ﬂed in the ten directions, crushing foes and friends. O king! The earth was covered with masses of elephants, horses, charioteers
and their bodies and the slush of ﬂesh and blood. Chariots, with wheels and without wheels, and with the maharathas, were uprooted by elephants with the tips of their tusks. Chariots were bereft of charioteers and elephants
were bereft of riders. With their riders slain, horses and elephants ﬂed in different directions, afﬂicted by the arrows. The father killed the son and the son killed the father. In that tumultuous battle, nothing could be distinguished. In that slush of blood, men sank down, up to their ankles. They were as dazzling as giant trees in a conﬂagration. The garments, armour, umbrellas and standards were all seen to be drenched red in blood. Masses of horses, masses of chariots and masses of men were brought down. They were again crushed into many pieces by the
wheels of chariots. The soldiers were like an ocean. The masses of elephants were the mighty currents. The slain
men were the moss. The masses of chariots were eddies. Desiring victory and prosperity, warriors immersed themselves in that ocean, using their mounts as large boats, and sought to confound the others.27 Each of those warriors
was covered with a shower of arrows, but did not deviate from the objective. Though they lost their signs,28 they
did not lose heart. In that terrible and fearful battle, Drona confounded the enemy and rushed towards Yudhishthira.”’
CHAPTER 997(20)

‘Sanjaya said, “On seeing that Drona was near him, Yudhishthira was not frightened, but received him with a
mighty shower of arrows. Sounds of applause arose in Yudhishthira’s army, like that made by a herd of elephants
when its leader is attacked by a lion. On seeing that Drona was advancing to capture Yudhishthira, the brave Satyajit, with truth as his valour, attacked the preceptor. The preceptor and Panchala fought against each other. They agitated each other’s soldiers, like Indra and Virochana’s son.29 The preceptor swiftly pierced Satyajit with ten sharp
arrows that penetrated the inner organs and severed his bow and arrows. The powerful one quickly grasped another
bow and struck Drona with twenty arrows shafted with the feathers of herons. On learning that Satyajit had been
grasped by Drona in the battle, Vrika from Panchala oppressed Drona with hundreds of sharp arrows. O king! On
seeing that Drona was enveloped by the maharatha in the battle, the Pandavas roared and waved their garments
around. O king! Extremely enraged, the powerful Vrika pierced Drona between the breasts with sixty arrows and it
was extraordinary. Maharatha Drona dilated his eyes in rage. Using great force, he powerfully shrouded them with
showers of arrows. Having severed the bows of Satyajit and Vrika, Drona killed Vrika, his charioteer and his horses with six arrows. Satyajit took up another bow that was more powerful and pierced Drona, his horses, his charioteer and his standard with arrows. Drona could not tolerate this oppression by Panchala in that battle. He released
arrows, so as to quickly destroy him. Drona shot thousands of showers of arrows to envelope his horses, his standards, the handle of his bow and his parshni charioteers. Despite his bow being repeatedly severed, Panchala, who
knew about supreme weapons, continued to ﬁght the one with the red horses.30 On witnessing Satyajit’s increasing energy in that great battle, the great-souled one sliced off his head with an arrow that was in the shape of a
crescent. When the mighty warrior, the Panchala who was a bull among rathas, was slain, Yudhishthira became
frightened of Drona and ﬂed on swift horses.
‘“On seeing Drona, the Panchalas, Kekayas, Matsyas, Chedis, Karushas and Kosalas wished to protect Yudhishthira and cheerfully attacked. The preceptor, the destroyer of large numbers of the enemy, wished to capture
Yudhishthira. He slew those soldiers, like a ﬁre consuming large masses of cotton. On witnessing that Drona was
repeatedly consuming the soldiers, Shatanika, the younger brother of Matsya, attacked him. He severely pierced

Drona, his charioteer and his horses with six arrows that were like the rays of the sun and had been polished by artisans, and roared. While he was thus roaring, Drona swiftly sliced off his head, adorned with earrings, from his
body with a kshurapra. At this, the Matsyas ﬂed. Having defeated the Matsyas, Bharadvaja’s son repeatedly vanquished the Chedis, Karushas, Kekayas, Panchalas, Srinjayas and Pandus. On beholding the angry one on the golden chariot, consuming the soldiers in his rage, like a ﬁre in a forest, the Srinjayas trembled. The one who was swift
in his deeds drew his bowstring and the excellent sound of the twang was heard in all the directions, as he slaughtered the enemy. The terrible arrows released from his hands mangled elephants, horses, infantry, charioteers and
elephant-riders. He was like a roaring cloud at the end of winter, mingled with the wind, pouring down a shower of
hailstones and the enemy was frightened. The great archer, powerful and brave, the one who protected his enemies
from fear, roamed around in all the directions, causing agitation and fright. The inﬁnitely energetic Drona’s bow
was decorated with gold and looked like lightning ﬂashing in the clouds. It was seen in all the directions. Drona
caused great carnage among the Pandava soldiers, like that caused by Vishnu, revered by gods and asuras, among
the masses of daityas. He was brave and truthful in speech. He was wise and powerful. Truth was his valour. He
was noble-minded. He created a terrible river, like the one at the time of destruction, terrifying to cowards. Armour
was the waves. Standards were eddies. It ﬂowed and carried away the mortals. Elephants and horses were the giant
crocodiles. The swords were ﬁsh and it31 was difﬁcult to cross. The bones of brave ones were its terrible stones.
Drums and tambourines were the turtles. Shields and armour were the terrible boats. The hair was moss and weeds.
Masses of arrows and bows were the current. It was full of serpents in the form of arms.32 It ﬂowed ﬁercely
through the ﬁeld of battle and bore along the soldiers of the Kurus and the Srinjayas. The heads of men were the
boulders. Javelins were the ﬁsh and clubs were rafts. The headdresses were the foam on the surface. The disemboweled entrails were the reptiles. It was ﬁerce and bore brave ones away. The ﬂesh and the blood was the mud.
The elephants were the crocodiles. The standards were the trees.33 Kshatriyas were submerged in it. It was terrible
and congested with bodies. The riders were the sharks and it was difﬁcult to cross. Drona created a river there and
it ﬂowed to the world of the dead. It was full of large numbers of carrion-eaters and had tens of thousands of dogs
and jackals. In every direction, it was frequented by extremely ﬁerce ﬂesh-eaters.
‘“On seeing that the great ratha was consuming the soldiers, like Death, they attacked Drona from all sides, with
Kunti’s son at the forefront. Those on your side, the kings and the princes, raised their weapons and surrounded the
brave and great archer. Drona never deviated in his aim and was like an elephant with a shattered temple. He overcame that mass of chariots and brought down Dridhasena. He approached King Kshema, who was ﬁghting fearlessly, and piercing him with nine arrows, slew and felled him from his chariot. He penetrated the midst of the soldiers and roaming around, repulsed them in every direction. He protected all the others. But he himself had no
need for protection. He pierced Shikhandi with twelve and Uttamouja with twenty arrows. With a broad-headed
arrow, he sent Vasudana to Yama’s abode. He struck Kshatravarma with eighty arrows and Sudakshina with twenty-six. With a broad-headed arrow, he brought Kshatradeva down from the seat of his chariot. He pierced Yudhamanyu with sixty-four arrows and Satyaki with thirty. The one on the golden chariot then quickly approached
Yudhishthira. The deceitful34 Yudhishthira, supreme among kings, swiftly ﬂed on fast horses. Panchala35 attacked
him. But Drona struck him, his bow, his horses and his charioteer. Slain, he fell down on the ground from his chariot, like a stellar body dropping down from the sky. When that illustrious prince of Panchala was killed, there was
a great and tumultuous sound of ‘Kill Drona! Kill Drona!’ The Panchalas, Matsyas and Kekayas were ﬁlled with
great rage. However, the powerful Drona crushed the Srinjayas and the Pandavas. Satyaki, Chekitana, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Vardhakshemi, Chitrasena, Senabindu, Suvarchas—these and many other kings from many
different countries were all vanquished in that battle by Drona, who was surrounded by the Kurus. O great king!
Those on your side obtained victory in that great battle. As the Pandavas ﬂed in all directions, they were slaughtered in that battle, like the danavas being slaughtered by the great-souled Indra. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Panchalas, Kekayas and Matsyas trembled.”’
CHAPTER 998(21)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “When the Pandavas were routed by Bharadvaja’s son in that great battle, did anyone among
all the Panchalas advance against him? Was there no noble one who wished to earn fame, as beﬁts a kshatriya, and
set his mind on ﬁghting? He should not have been served by cowards. He should have been served by bulls among
men. It must have been a brave man and charioteer who returned from that rout. On seeing that Drona was stationed, was there no such man? He was like a tiger with a yawning mouth. He was like an elephant with a shattered temple. He was prepared to give up his life in battle. He was armoured and was wonderful in ﬁghting. He
was a great archer. He was a tiger among men. He increased fear among his enemies. He was grateful and devoted
to the truth. He was engaged in Duryodhana’s welfare. O Sanjaya! On seeing that Bharadvaja’s brave son was stationed in that army, which brave ones advanced against him? Tell me.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “On seeing that the Panchalas, Pandavas, Matsyas, Srinjayas, Chedis and Kekayas were driven
away from the battle by Drona’s arrows, the Kouravas roared like lions and sounded many musical instruments.
Large numbers of arrows were swiftly released from Drona’s bow and they36 were like shattered boats tossed
around on the giant waves of the ocean. They surrounded the chariots, elephants and men from all directions.37
King Duryodhana was stationed in the midst of his soldiers, surrounded by his relatives. On seeing them, he
laughed and spoke these words of joy to Karna. ‘O Radheya! Behold! The Panchalas have been shattered by
Drona’s arrows. They have been terriﬁed by the wielder of the ﬁrm bow, like wild deer by a lion. It is my view that
they will never return to ﬁght again. They have been broken by Drona, like giant trees by a tempest. They have
been consumed by the gold-tufted arrows of the great-souled one. They are ﬂeeing through multiple routes and
seemed to be whirled around. They have been conﬁned by the Kouravas and the great-souled Drona. They are like
elephants huddled together, because of a ﬁre. Because of Drona’s sharp arrows, they are like a cluster of bees.
They are huddling together and are trying to run away. Bhima is ﬁrm in his anger. But he has been abandoned by
the Pandavas and the Srinjayas. O Karna! Surrounded by those on my side, he seeks to threaten us. The evil-minded one now sees the entire world as if it is full of Drona. Pandava has now lost all hope of remaining alive and of
regaining the kingdom.’
‘“Karna said, ‘As long as there is life left in him, this mighty-armed one will never give up the battle. O tiger
among men! Nor will he tolerate these roars like lions. It is my view that the Pandavas have not been defeated in
battle. They are brave and powerful. They are skilled in the use of weapons and are invincible in war. The Pandavas will remember the hardships from poisoning, arson, gambling and dwelling in the forest.38 It is my view
that they will not retreat from the battle. The mighty-armed and inﬁnitely energetic Vrikodara has already returned.
This Kounteya is supreme among the best and he will kill the best of our rathas. With a sword, bow, javelin, horses, elephants, men, chariots39 and an iron staff, he will slay large numbers. Other rathas, Satyaki and the others,
are also returning after him—the Panchalas, Kekayas and Matsyas, and particularly the Pandavas. Those maharathas are brave, powerful and valiant. They are enraged and are being specially urged by Bhima. The bulls
among the Kurus40 have surrounded Drona from all sides. Wishing to protect Vrikodara, they are like clouds
around the sun. They are united in their purpose and will oppress the one who is rigid in his vows and is unprotected. They are like insects on the point of death, around a lamp. There is no doubt that they are skilled in the use of
weapons and are capable of countering him. I think that the burden on Bharadvaja’s son will be too much to bear.
Let us quickly go to the spot where Drona is stationed. They are seeking to slay the one who is rigid in his vows,
like wolves around a mighty elephant.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “O king! On hearing Radheya’s words, King Duryodhana left towards Drona’s chariot, together
with his brothers. A great uproar was created there by the Pandavas who had returned, wishing to kill Drona. They
were on supreme horses with diverse hues.”’
CHAPTER 999(22)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! Tell me about the signs on the chariots of those who angrily attacked Drona, with
Bhima at the forefront.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “Vrikodara advanced into battle on horses that had the complexion of antelopes.41 On seeing
him, Shini’s brave descendant42 advanced on horses that were silvery. Nakula swiftly advanced against your army,

borne on handsome horses from Kamboja that were decorated with the feathers of parrots. Sahadeva was borne on
horses that were as dark as clouds. That tiger among men raised his weapons and advanced with great force, on
horses that were as ﬂeet as the wind. Yudhishthira advanced on horses that were as ﬂeet as the wind and were caparisoned with the best of gold. All the other soldiers followed him. King Drupada of Panchala advanced after the
king.43 A golden umbrella was held aloft his head and he protected all his soldiers. The great archer Shantabhi advanced in the midst of all the kings. He was yoked to beautiful horses that were capable of withstanding every kind
of noise in battle. Virata followed him, with all other brave maharathas. So did the Kekayas, Shikhandi and
Dhrishtaketu, surrounded by their respective soldiers. All of them followed the king of Matsya.44 Matsya, the
slayer of enemies, was resplendent as he was borne by supreme horses, with the complexion of patala ﬂowers.45
The king of Virata’s son46 was swiftly borne on swift horses that were yellow in complexion and were garlanded
with gold. The ﬁve brothers from Kekaya were on horses that had the hue of ﬁreﬂies. All of them dazzled like pure
gold and possessed red standards. All those brave ones had golden garlands and were skilled in ﬁghting. They
were seen to be armoured and showered47 like clouds. Shikhandi, the inﬁnitely energetic one from Panchala was
yoked to controlled steeds that were coppery red, like unbaked earthen vessels. Of the twelve thousand maharathas
from Panchala, six thousand followed Shikhandi. O venerable one! Shishupala’s son, Dhrishtaketu, was a lion
among men. He was borne on playful horses that had the complexion of deer. That bull among the Chedis was
powerful. He was invincible and he advanced on horses from Kamboja that were dappled. Vrihatkshatra from
Kekaya was borne on excellent and delicate horses that were swift and from Sindhu. They had the hue of smoking
straw. Shikhandi’s son, the brave Kshatradeva, was borne on horses that had eyes like jasmines. They had the complexion of lotuses, were adorned and were born in Bahlika. The young and delicate son of the king of Kashi was a
maharatha. He was borne into battle on supreme horses that had the complexion of cranes. O king! The prince Prativindhya was borne on white horses with black necks that were as swift as thought and were obedient to the driver.48 Partha obtained his son Sutasoma through Dhoumya.49 Horses that had the complexion of masha ﬂowers
bore him into battle.50 He possessed the radiance of one thousand moons. He was born in the city of the Kurus
named Udayendu. Having been born thus, in the midst of those of the lunar lineage, he came to be known as Sutasoma.51 Nakula’s son, Shatanika, was borne on horses that had the complexion of shala ﬂowers. He was worthy of
praise and was like the rising sun in his radiance. Droupadi’s son, Shrutakarma, tiger among men, was borne on
horses that had complexions like the necks of peacocks and were caparisoned in gold. Droupadi’s son, Shrutakirti,
was an ocean of learning.52 He was the equal of Partha in battle53 and was on supreme horses. These horses possessed hues like those on the feathers of blue jays. Horses with a tawny hue bore the young Abhimanyu into battle.
In his qualities of ﬁghting, he was regarded as one-and-a-half times superior to Krishna and Partha. There was only
a single one among the sons of Dhritarashtra who had sided with the Pandavas in battle and large and gigantic
horses bore Yuyutsu into battle. The swift Vardhakhemi was carried into that dreadful battle on cheerful horses that
were adorned and had the complexion of strands of straw. There were horses with black feet, armoured with golden plates and obedient to the driver. These bore the youthful Souchitti into battle. There were controlled horses
with the complexion of red silk. Their backs were covered with golden plates and they were in golden harnesses.
These bore Shrenimana. The praiseworthy and brave king of Kashi was borne on the best of horses. These possessed golden harnesses and the complexion of gold and were ornamented. Satyadhriti was skilled in weapons, the
knowledge of ﬁghting and in knowledge about the brahman. He was borne on red steeds. Dhrishtadyumna, the
commander of the Panchalas, had been given Drona as his share.54 He was borne on horses that had the complexion of pigeons. Satyadhriti and the invincible Souchitti followed him into battle and so did Shrenimana, Vasudana
and Vibhu, the sons of the king of Kashi. They were yoked to supreme and swift horses from Kamboja, with golden harnesses. Each was equal to Yama or Vaishravana and could strike terror into enemy soldiers.55 There were
six thousand Prabhadrakas from Panchala, with raised weapons. They were on the best of horses, with many hues,
and possessed golden and colourful standards on their chariots. They stretched their bows and released showers of
arrows that confused the enemy. They were determined to die together and followed Dhrishtadyumna. There were
supreme horses that were resplendent with a complexion like that of silk and possessed excellent golden harnesses.

They cheerfully bore Chekitana. Savyasachi’s maternal uncle, Purujit Kuntibhoja, was on excellent and obedient
horses.56 They possessed the complexion of Indra’s weapon.57 King Rochamana was borne into that battle on
horses that had the colour of the ﬁrmament, decorated with stars. Jarasandha’s son, Sahadeva, was borne on the
best of horses, with speckled complexions and black feet. They were adorned in nets of gold. Sudama was borne
on swift horses that were coloured like hawks and had complexions like those of lotus stalks. Simhasena from Panchala, the son of Gopati, was borne on horses that had the complexion of red antelopes, with white streaks on their
bodies. The tiger among the Panchalas was known by the name of Janamejaya.58 He was on supreme horses that
had the colour of mustard ﬂowers. There were large and swift horses that possessed the colour of straw. They had
golden harnesses. Their backs were like curd and their mouths were like the moon. These bore Panchala.59 There
were brave and gentle steeds that had the hue of reeds. These were as dazzling as the ﬁlaments of lotuses and they
bore Dandadhara. There were horses that were resplendent in golden harnesses, with stomachs with the complexion of chakravaka birds. These bore Sukshatra, the son of the king of Kosala. There were giant, speckled and controlled horses, caparisoned in gold. These bore Satyadhriti, who was skilled in ﬁghting. Shukla advanced, with
everything of the same white colour—standard, armour, horses and bow. Samudrasena’s son, Chandrasena, was
terrible in his energy. He was borne on horses that were like the moon and had been bred along the coast of the
ocean. Shaibya was wonderful in battle. He was borne on horses that possessed the complexion of blue lotuses.
They were ornamented in gold and had colourful garlands. Rathasena was invincible in battle. He was borne on the
best of horses, with a complexion like that of groundnut ﬂowers, with white and red streaks on their bodies. The
king who slew the Patacharas is known as the bravest among all men. He was borne on horses with the colour of
parrots. Chitrayudha was adorned in colourful garlands. He possessed colourful armour, weapons and standards.
He was borne on the best of horses, with a complexion like that of kimshuka ﬂowers. King Nila advanced, with
everything in an identical blue colour—standard, armour, bow, chariot and horses. Chitra advanced, adorned with
gems and with colourful guards for his chariot, standard and bow. His horses, standards and pennants were colourful. Hemavarna, Rochamana’s son, was on the best of horses, with complexions like that of lotus leaves. Dandaketu was borne on gentle horses that were controlled by staffs that were like the stalks of reeds. They possessed the
complexion of the white eggs of hens. Horses with the complexion of atarusha60 ﬂowers bore one hundred and
forty thousand foremost rathas who followed Pandya. The brave Ghatotkacha was borne by horses with many different colours and forms. Their mouths were of different types and he had the wheel of a chariot on his standard.
‘“Yudhishthira was knowledgeable about dharma and the best of horses surrounded that best of kings from
every direction and followed him at the rear. They possessed golden complexions. There were Prabhadrakas on
well-trained and divine horses, with many different kinds of colours. They possessed golden standards and made
endeavours, together with Bhimasena. O Indra among kings! He was seen to be like Indra, with the residents of
heaven. Dhrishtadyumna was delighted that all of them were advancing together. But Bharadvaja’s son surpassed
all those soldiers.”’
CHAPTER 1000(23)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “Those rathas who returned to the battle, with Vrikodara at the forefront, were capable of afﬂicting even the soldiers of the gods. A man is certainly driven by destiny. That is the reason why different outcomes result from all action. That is the reason Yudhishthira had to spend a long time in the forest, wearing matted
hair and antelope skin, and also had to remain undetected to people. He has now assembled a mighty army in this
battle. What can befall my sons, other than what is determined by destiny? It is certain that a man’s fortune is determined by destiny. He is compelled to do what he does not himself desire. Yudhishthira suffered hardship because of his addiction to gambling. It is again because of fortune that he has now obtained allies. ‘I have obtained
half of the Kekayas,61 the Kashis and the Kosalas. The Chedis, the Vangas and others have sought refuge with me.
O father! The entire earth is on my side and not on that of the Parthas.’ This is what my evil-minded son, Duryodhana, told me then. Drona was protected well, in the midst of the soldiers. If he has been killed by Parshata’s son,
what can this be other than destiny? The mighty-armed one was in the midst of the kings and has always delighted
in battle. He was skilled in the use of all weapons. How could death have approached Drona? I am confronting dis-

tress and have been overcome by supreme senselessness. On hearing that Bhishma and Drona have been slain, I
have no interest in remaining alive any more. O son!62 On beholding my affection for my son, Kshatta63 had spoken to me. O suta! Duryodhana and I are now confronted with all of that. Had I abandoned Duryodhana, it would
have been supremely cruel. But my remaining sons would not have faced hardship and death. If a man gives up
dharma and is addicted to artha, he confronts decay in this world and falls prey to inferior sentiments. O Sanjaya!
With the bow and hump64 of this kingdom destroyed, it has lost all enterprise. I see that nothing will be left. Those
two forgiving bulls among men were always our refuge. When they have been destroyed, how can anything be
left? Tell me details about how that battle raged. Who were the ones who fought? Who were the ones who attacked? Which inferior ones ﬂed out of fear? Tell me what Dhananjaya, bull among rathas, did. We are scared of
him and especially of his brother.65 O Sanjaya! When the Pandavas returned, there must have been an extremely
terrible confrontation between them and my remaining soldiers. Which brave ones on my side countered them
there?”’
CHAPTER 1001(24)66

‘Sanjaya said, “The Pandus returned and we were immersed in great terror. Drona was enveloped, like the sun by
the clouds. They raised a terrible cloud of dust and covered your army. On seeing this and on our sight having been
obstructed, we thought that Drona had been slain. Those brave and great archers desired to commit a cruel deed.67
On seeing this, Duryodhana quickly urged all his soldiers. ‘O lords of men! Use the utmost of your strengths, the
utmost of your enterprise, the utmost of your spirits. Engage yourselves according to your tasks and restrain the
Pandava formations.’ Your son, Durmarshana, saw that Bhima was advancing. Wishing to save Drona’s life, he
covered him with a shower of arrows. Like death in that battle, he angrily assailed him with arrows. Bhima also
attacked him with arrows and a great and ﬁerce battle raged between them. Wise, brave and armed warriors were
instructed by their lords. Outwardly giving up all fear of death, they attacked the enemy. O lord of the earth! Wishing to save Drona, Kritavarma, the ornament of any assembly, repulsed Shini’s brave son.68 As Shini’s descendant
angrily advanced, he wrathfully showered him with arrows. Kritavarma acted against Shini’s descendant, like a
mad elephant against another crazy one. Saindhava, ﬁerce with the bow and a great archer, used a shower of arrows to fall upon Kshatradharma, when he endeavoured to attack Drona. Kshatradharma severed the standard and
bow of the lord of Sindhu. He angrily used many iron arrows to pierce him in all his inner organs. Saindhava displayed the dexterity of his hands and grasped another bow. In that battle, he pierced Kshatradharma with arrows
that were made completely out of iron. For the sake of the Pandavas, the brave maharatha Yuyutsu sought to attack
Drona, but was countered by his brother, Subahu. Yuyutsu used two sharp and yellow arrows that were as sharp as
razors to slice off the arms of his younger brother, Subahu. Those arms were like clubs and held a bow and
arrows.69 King Yudhishthira was the best of the Pandavas and had dharma in his soul. The king of Madra countered him, like the shoreline against a turbulent ocean. Dharmaraja pierced him with many arrows that could penetrate the inner organs and the lord of Madra severely wounded him with sixty-four arrows and roared. But while he
was still roaring, the best of the Pandavas sliced down his standard and bow with two razor-sharp arrows and all
the people shouted in applause. King Bahlika, with his army, used arrows to counter King Drupada, with his army.
Together with their soldiers, these two aged ones fought a terrible battle. This was like that between two gigantic
leaders of herds of elephants, with shattered temples. Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti countered Virata of Matsya, with his soldiers and his army, like Agni against Bali in ancient times.70 That disorderly encounter between
the Matsyas and the Kekayas was like that between the gods and the asuras. Horses, charioteers and elephants
fought fearlessly.
‘“In that battle, Bhutakarma, the lord of assemblies, used a net of arrows to prevent Nakula’s son, Shatanika,
from advancing against Drona. Nakula’s heir used three extremely sharp and broad-headed arrows and in that battle, deprived Bhutakarma of his two arms and his head. The valiant Sutasoma was advancing towards Drona. But
the brave Vivimshati repulsed him with a shower of arrows. However, Sutasoma was enraged and armoured. He
pierced Vivimshati, his own paternal uncle, with straight-tufted arrows. Bhimaratha used six swift arrows that were

completely made out of iron and dispatched Shalva, together with his horses and charioteer, to Yama’s abode.71 O
great king! As your grandson, Shrutakarma, advanced on horses that looked like peacocks, Chitrasena’s son countered him. Those two grandsons of yours were invincible and wished to kill each other to accomplish the objectives of their respective fathers and fought a supreme battle. On seeing that Prativindhya was stationed at the forefront of that battle, Drona’s son desired to show honour to his father and obstructed him with arrows. Prativindhya
was enraged at this and pierced the one who was stationed so as to protect his father, and bore the signs of a lion’s
tail on his standard,72 with sharp arrows. O bull among men! Droupadi’s son covered Drona’s son with a shower
of arrows, like seeds being scattered at the time of sowing. O king! Both the armies regarded the slayer of the Patacharas as the best among brave ones and Lakshmana restrained him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But
that radiant one blazed forth, showering a net of arrows on Lakshmana. Taking aim, he severed Lakshmana’s bow
and arrow. As Shikhandi, Yajnasena’s youthful son, advanced into battle, the young and immensely wise Vikarna
countered him. Yajnasena’s son enveloped him with a net of arrows. But your powerful son repulsed that net of arrows and looked resplendent. In that battle, as the brave Uttamouja advanced in Drona’s direction, Angada countered him with vatsadanta arrows. The encounter between those two lions among men was wonderful and it increased the delight of all the soldiers. As the brave Purujit Kuntibhoja advanced against Drona, the powerful and
great archer Durmukha countered him. He struck Durmukha in the midst of his eyebrows with an iron arrow and
his73 face looked as beautiful as a lotus with a stalk.
‘“The ﬁve brothers from Kekaya possessed red standards. As they advanced towards Drona, Karna countered
them with showers of arrows. Countered by that storm of arrows, they became extremely enraged and enveloped
him with arrows, becoming repeatedly shrouded by nets of arrows in return. Enveloped by those arrows, Karna
and the ﬁve brothers could not be seen. The respective arrows covered their horses, charioteers, standards and
chariots. Your sons, Durjaya, Jaya and Vijaya, countered Nila, Kashi and Jaya. Three were against three. The terrible encounter between them gladdened the spectators, like that between a lion, tiger and wolf on one side and a
buffalo and a bull on the other. As the warrior Satvata74 advanced against Drona, the brothers Kshemadhurti and
Brihanta countered him and wounded him with their sharp arrows. The battle between them was extraordinary, like
that between a lion and a foremost elephant, with shattered temples, in the forest. King Ambashtha found delight in
battle. As he advanced singly against Drona, the king of Chedi angrily restrained him with arrows. Ambashtha
pierced him with a stake that penetrated right up to the bones and he75 gave up his bow and arrows and fell down
from his chariot onto the ground. Sharadvata Kripa repulsed Varshneya Vardhakshemi with kshudraka arrows, as
he angrily attacked Drona with arrows. Those who saw Kripa and Varshneya ﬁght in that wonderful fashion became so engrossed in that encounter that they forgot about doing anything else. Somadatta’s son wished to increase
Drona’s glory. As King Manimana vigilantly advanced, he countered him. Somadatta’s son swiftly sliced down the
string of his bow, the standard, the pennant, the charioteer and umbrella and made him fall down from his chariot.
The one with the sacriﬁcial stake on his standard, the destroyer of enemies,76 then quickly descended from his
chariot. He grasped a supreme sword and cut him down, together with his horses, charioteer, standard and
chariot.77 O king! He then climbed onto his own chariot again and grasping another bow and steering his horses
himself,78 began to slaughter the Pandava soldiers. Ghatotkacha wished to get at Drona and created terror among
the soldiers. He used clubs, maces, chakras, catapults, battleaxes, dust, wind, ﬁre, water, ashes, stones, grass and
trees to strike and ﬁght, showering these down and causing a rout. However, the rakshasa Alambusa became enraged and countered the other rakshasa with many different kinds of weapons and many diverse implements of
war. The battle between the two foremost among the rakshasas was like that in ancient times, between Shambara
and the king of the immortals.79 O fortunate one! In this fashion, in that melee, there were hundreds of duels between rathas, elephants, horses and infantry, between those on your side and those of the enemy. A battle like this
has not been witnessed earlier, nor heard of, like that between those who wished to assault Drona and those who
sought to protect him. O lord! In different parts of the ﬁeld, many such encounters were seen—terrible, wonderful
and ﬁerce.”’

CHAPTER 1002(25)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “When they80 had returned and engaged in different divisions, how did the spirited ones on
the side of the Parthas, and on mine, ﬁght? How did Arjuna act towards the army of the samshaptakas? O Sanjaya!
What did the samshaptakas do to Arjuna?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “When they had returned and engaged themselves in different divisions, your son himself attacked Bhima with an army of elephants. It was like an elephant encountering an elephant, or a bull encountering a
bull. He81 was himself summoned and attacked by the king with that army of elephants. Partha was skilled in
ﬁghting and possessed the strength of his arms. O venerable one! He swiftly shattered that army of elephants.
Those elephants were like mountains and exuded musth everywhere. They were mangled and forced to retreat by
Bhimasena’s iron arrows. It was like winds driving away a mass of clouds in every direction. That maddened army
was thus slaughtered by Pavana’s son. Bhima released arrows at those elephants and was as radiant as the rising
sun in the sky, striking everything in the world with his rays. Hundreds of Bhima’s arrows wounded the elephants
and they were as beautiful as masses of clouds in the sky, streaked with the rays of the sun.82 The son of the wind
thus afﬂicted the elephants. Duryodhana was enraged at this and pierced him with sharp arrows. Bhima’s eyes became red with rage and he wished to destroy the king in a short instant. So he pierced him with arrows. With arrows wounding all his limbs, he became angry and smilingly, pierced Pandava Bhimasena back with iron arrows
that were as bright as the sun’s rays. The sign of a bejewelled elephant was on his83 standard, embellished with
gems. Pandava used broad-headed arrows to swiftly sever this, together with his bow. O venerable one! On seeing
that Duryodhana was thus afﬂicted by Bhima, the lord of Anga arrived there on an elephant, wishing to attack him.
On seeing that the elephant was advancing, with a roar like the rumbling of the clouds, Bhimasena used iron arrows to severely strike it between its two frontal lobes. It passed through the body and penetrated the ground. The
elephant fell down, like a mountain struck by lightning. As the elephant fell, the lord of the mlecchas84 also began
to fall down. But the swift-acting Vrikodara sliced off his head with a broad-headed arrow. On seeing that the
brave one had been brought down, his army ﬂed. Horses, elephants and charioteers were terriﬁed and crushed infantry as they ﬂed.
‘“As that army was scattered and routed in every direction, Pragjyotisha attacked Bhima, astride an elephant. It
was like Maghavan astride an elephant, victorious against the daityas and the danavas. That supreme of elephants
suddenly descended on Bhima. Its ears were drawn back. Its forelegs and trunk were contracted. Its eyes were dilated in rage and it seemed about to consume Pandava. O venerable one! All the soldiers let out a great roar. ‘Alas!
Bhima has been killed by the elephant.’ O king! The Pandava soldiers were terriﬁed by this roar and quickly ran
away to the spot where Vrikodara was. King Yudhishthira thought that Vrikodara had been slain. With the Panchalas, he attacked and surrounded Bhagadatta. Having surrounded the best of rathas with chariots from every direction, he covered him with hundreds and thousands of sharp arrows. The lord of the mountains countered all these
arrows with his goad and slaughtered the Pandus and Panchalas with his elephant. O lord of the earth! In that battle, we witnessed the aged Bhagadatta’s extraordinary conduct, using his elephant. At this, the king of Dasharna
attacked Pragjyotisha on a swift elephant that advanced from the ﬂank. Both elephants were terrible in form and
the battle between them was like that between two winged mountains in ancient times, both covered with trees.85
Pragjyotisha’s elephant circled around and struck the elephant of the king of Dasharna on the side, bringing it
down. Bhagadatta used seven javelins that were as bright as the rays of the sun. As his enemy was dislodged from
his seat on the falling elephant, he slew him.
‘“Yudhishthira attacked King Bhagadatta and surrounded him from every direction with a great army of chariots. Astride his elephant and surrounded by all these rathas in every direction, he was resplendent, like a ﬂaming
ﬁre on a mountain, in the midst of the forest. He was astride his elephant, inside a circle formed in every direction
by ﬁerce rathas who were archers and showered arrows at him from every side. The king of Pragjyotisha urged his
bull among elephants and made it swiftly advance towards Yuyudhana’s chariot. The mighty elephant grasped the
chariot of Shini’s grandson and used great force to ﬂing it away. However, Yuyudhana escaped. The charioteer
abandoned the large Saindhava horses that were yoked to the chariot and hurried to the spot where Satyaki was.
The elephant swiftly emerged from that circle of chariots. Having emerged, it began to ﬂing away all those kings.

Those bulls among men were frightened at its speed. In that battle, the kings thought that a single elephant had
multiplied into hundreds. At that time, Bhagadatta on his elephant crushed the Pandavas, like the king of the gods
on Airavata, acting against the danavas. There was a terrible roar as the Panchalas ﬂed. A great noise was made by
the elephants and the horses. In that battle, Bhagadatta was like death before the Pandus. Bhima became angry and
attacked Pragjyotisha again. The elephant sprinkled water from its trunk and frightened his horses, which then bore
Partha away from the ﬁeld. Kriti’s son, Ruchiparva, swiftly attacked then. Stationed on his chariot, he showered
arrows, like death personiﬁed. The lord of the mountains used a well-crafted arrow with drooping tufts to dispatch
Ruchiparva to Vaivasvata’s eternal abode. When that brave one fell, Subhadra’s son, Droupadi’s sons, Chekitana,
Dhrishtaketu and Yuyutsu attacked the elephant. They wished to kill it. Roaring, they showered down arrows on it.
The skilled rider urged the elephant with heels, toes and goad. It swiftly advanced, with its trunk extended and its
eyes and ears immobile. It killed Yuyutsu’s horses and charioteer with its feet. At this time, your son angrily
rushed against the chariot of Subhadra’s son. Astride his elephant, the king86 showered arrows on his enemies. He
was as dazzling as a sun that has arisen, scattering rays on the world. Arjuna’s son pierced him with twelve arrows
and Yuyutsu with ten. Each of Droupadi’s sons pierced him with three arrows and so did Dhrishtaketu. Those wellreleased arrows stuck to the body and the elephant looked resplendent, like a large cloud streaked with the rays of
the sun. It was afﬂicted by arrows released by the enemy.
‘“But the elephant was controlled by the skill and enterprise of the rider. It began to ﬂing away enemies, to the
left and to the right. Like a herd of animals controlled in the forest by a cowherd with a staff, the soldiers were repeatedly afﬂicted by Bhagadatta. A grievous sound of lamentation arose among the ﬂeeing Pandaveyas, like the
cawing of crows when they are quickly attacked by a hawk. O king! When goaded by the hook, the king of elephants looked like a winged mountain in ancient times. It afﬂicted the enemy with great fear, like a group of
traders at the sight of a turbulent ocean. As they ran away in fright, the elephants, charioteers, horses and kings
made a terrible noise. O king! In that battle, it ﬁlled the earth, the directions and the sub-directions. The king was
astride that supreme of elephants and severely oppressed the army of the enemy. This was like Virochana against
the army of the gods in ancient times, when it was well-protected in battle by the gods. The friend of the ﬁre87 began to blow violently and created dust. This covered the sky and the soldiers in a short instant. The people thought
that a single elephant had become hundreds of elephants and began to run away in every direction.”’
CHAPTER 1003(26)

‘Sanjaya said, “You have asked me about the deeds performed by Partha in that battle. O great king! Listen to what
Partha accomplished in that battle. On seeing that a dust had arisen and on hearing the roar of the elephant, when
Bhagadatta caused subjugation, Kounteya spoke to Krishna. ‘O Madhusudana! It is certain that this tumult has
been caused by the elephant of the king of Pragjyotisha, when he has swiftly attacked. He is not inferior to Indra in
battle. He is skilled in steering an elephant. In my view, on this earth, he is the ﬁrst or the second.88 He possesses
the best of elephants and there is no elephant which can withstand it in battle. It can tolerate all the sounds of battle. It is accomplished in deeds and has conquered exhaustion. O unblemished one! It can tolerate the downpour of
all weapons and can even bear the touch of ﬁre. It is evident that it will destroy the Pandava army today. With the
exception of the two of us, there is no one who is capable of countering it. Therefore, swiftly go to the spot where
the lord of Pragjyotisha is. He is Shakra’s friend.89 He is strong because of the elephant. He should be marvelled
at, despite his age. I will dispatch him today, as a beloved guest, to the destroyer of Bala.’ As soon as Savyasachi
spoke these words, Krishna left and went to the spot where Bhagadatta was mauling the Pandava army. As he was
going there, fourteen thousand maharatha samshaptakas summoned him from the back. O lord of men! Ten thousand of those were Trigartas and another four thousand were followers of Vasudeva.90 O venerable one! On seeing
that Bhagadatta was shattering the army and on also being challenged, he91 was caught in two minds and thought,
‘What is the best course of action for me? Should I return here, or should I go to Yudhishthira?’ O extender of the
Kuru lineage! Thus did Arjuna reﬂect in his mind and decided that he should kill the samshaptakas. The one with
the foremost of monkeys on his banner suddenly returned. Vasava’s son wished to single-handedly kill thousands
of rathas in battle. This is what Duryodhana and Karna had also plotted, when the two of them had thought about

means of killing Arjuna. That is the reason they had arranged for this divided feeling in Pandava’s mind. But he
foiled them by deciding to take on those foremost of rathas on his chariot.
‘“O king! The maharatha samshaptakas shot hundreds and thousands of arrows with drooping tufts towards Arjuna. O king! Enveloped by those arrows, Partha, Kunti’s son, Krishna Janardana, the horses and the chariot could
not be seen. Janardana was deprived on his senses and began to sweat. At this, Partha used the vajra weapon and
killed most of them. Hundreds of arms, still holding bowstrings and bows, were severed. Standards, horses, charioteers and rathas fell down on the ground. Slain by Partha’s arrows and bereft of their riders, elephants fell down on
the ground. They were like mountain summits with trees and looked like well-crafted rain clouds. Their seats and
harnesses were shredded. Their temples were shattered and they were destroyed. Wounded by Partha’s arrows,
horses fell down, together with their riders. With their arms severed, but still holding on to swords, shields, scimitars like nails, clubs and battleaxes, men were brought down by Kiriti’s broad-headed arrows. O venerable one!
There were youthful and dazzling heads, as beautiful as the morning sun, the lotus, or the moon. These were severed by Arjuna’s arrows. The enemy soldiers who were slaughtered by the enraged Phalguna, with arrows that fed
on lives, seemed to blaze in many different forms. The soldiers were agitated, like lotuses by an elephant. Masses
of beings applauded and worshipped Dhananjaya. On witnessing Partha’s deeds there, like those of Vasava himself, Madhava was overcome by great wonder and applauded him with his hands. Having killed most of the
samshaptakas who were stationed there, Partha urged Krishna to take him to Bhagadatta.”’
CHAPTER 1004(27)

‘Sanjaya said, “According to Partha’s wishes, Krishna urged the horses, which were as swift as thought, white and
caparisoned in gold, and drove them towards Drona’s army. While that best of the Kurus departed to save those on
his side who were tormented by Drona, Susharma and his brothers followed him from the rear, wishing to do battle. The unvanquished Jaya, possessor of the white horses, spoke to Krishna. ‘O Achyuta! Susharma and his brothers are challenging me. O destroyer of enemies! Our soldiers are being shattered towards the north. Because of the
samshaptakas, I am again caught in two minds now. Should I kill the samshaptakas or should I protect our soldiers
who are afﬂicted by the enemy? Know that this is what I am thinking of. What is more beneﬁcial for me?’ Having
been thus addressed, Dasharha reversed the chariot and took Pandava to the spot where the lord of Trigarta was
challenging him. Arjuna pierced Susharma with seven swift arrows and brought down his standard and bow with a
razor-sharp arrow. Partha then used six iron arrows to swiftly send the brother of the lord of Trigarta, his horses
and his charioteer to Yama’s abode. At this, Susharma grasped an iron javelin that was like a serpent and hurled
this towards him, also throwing a spear at Vasudeva. Arjuna used three arrows to shatter the javelin and another
three to fragment the spear. He then confounded Susharma with his storm of arrows and forced him to retreat. O
king! Like Vasava pouring down rain, he showered down many ﬁerce arrows on your soldiers and there was no
one who could oppose him. Dhananjaya advanced, slaying all the maharatha Kouravas with his arrows, like a ﬁre
consuming dry wood. Like beings who cannot bear the touch of ﬁre, no one was capable of withstanding the force
of Kunti’s intelligent son.
‘“O king! Pandava showered down arrows on the assembled army, and like Suparna92 swooping down, approached Pragjyotisha. Jishnu held the bow which was like the granter of boons to virtuous Bharatas and was the
bringer of tears to enemies in battle. O king! Because of your son’s deceit in gambling with the dice, Arjuna
grasped the bow that would destroy kshatriyas. O great king! Thus it was that your army was agitated by Partha,
like a boat that is shattered when it strikes a mountain. Ten thousand archers advanced. Those angry and brave
ones had made up their minds to do battle, regardless of victory or defeat. Their hearts were devoid of fear. Headed
towards calamity, they obstructed the ratha’s path. Partha was capable of handling a grave burden and could withstand all burdens in battle. He was like an enraged elephant with rent temples that is sixty years of age and is let
loose on a forest of lotuses, destroying it. In that fashion, Partha shattered your army. When the soldiers were thus
being crushed, King Bhagadatta suddenly attacked Dhananjaya on that elephant. The tiger among men remained
on his chariot and received him. A tumultuous encounter commenced between the chariot and the elephant, when
the two brave ones, Bhagadatta and Dhananjaya, fought each other. The elephant was like a cloud and Lord Bhagadatta, who was like Indra, showered down arrows on Dhananjaya. Vasava’s son repulsed that shower of arrows re-

leased by the valiant Bhagadatta with his own shower of arrows and sliced them down before they could reach
him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! King Pragjyotisha also repulsed that shower of arrows and tried to kill
the mighty-armed Partha and Krishna with his arrows. Those two were enveloped with a giant shower of arrows
and he urged the elephant on, to kill Achyuta and Partha. On seeing that the elephant was descending, like angry
Death, Janardana quickly wheeled the chariot, so that it93 remained on the left. Dhananjaya thus got an opportunity to slay the mighty elephant and its rider. But remembering his dharma, he did not do this.94 O venerable one!
That elephant descended on elephants, chariots and horses and dispatched them to the world of the dead. At this,
Dhananjaya was enraged.”’
CHAPTER 1005(28)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “Having been enraged, how did Pandava act against Bhagadatta? What did Pragjyotisha do to
Partha? Tell me everything as it happened.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “When Dasharha and Pandava were thus engaged with Pragjyotisha, all the beings thought that
they had reached the jaws of death. O lord! Stationed on the neck of the elephant, Bhagadatta incessantly showered
down arrows on the two Krishnas,95 as they were stationed on the chariot. He stretched his bow back to its full extent and pierced Devaki’s son with black arrows that were completely made out of iron, gold-tufted and sharpened
on stone. Released by Bhagadatta, they were sharp and their touch was like that of the ﬁre. Those arrows pierced
Devaki’s son and penetrated the ground. At this, Partha severed his bow and his quiver and began to ﬁght with
King Bhagadatta, as if he was sporting with him. He96 hurled fourteen javelins at Savyasachi. They were sharp
and were as bright as the rays of the sun. But he sliced each of them down into three fragments. Then the son of
Paka’s destroyer97 penetrated the elephant’s armour with his net of arrows and it looked like a king of mountains,
covered with clouds. Pragjyotisha hurled a javelin towards Vasudeva. It had a golden handle and was made completely out of iron. Arjuna severed it into two fragments. Arjuna used his arrows to slice down the king’s umbrella
and standard. He then smiled and swiftly pierced the lord of the mountains with ten arrows. He was thus pierced
by Arjuna’s arrows, which had excellent tufts and the feathers of herons. Bhagadatta became angry at the greatsouled Pandava. He hurled javelins towards his head and roared. In that battle, these dislodged Arjuna’s diadem.
Phalguna adjusted the diadem back and spoke these words to the king. ‘Look upon this world with delight.’98
Having been thus addressed, he grasped a radiant bow and angrily showered down arrows on Pandava and Govinda. Partha severed his bow and destroyed his quiver and quickly struck him with seventy-two arrows that afﬂicted
all his inner organs.
‘“Having been thus pierced and pained, he angrily resorted to the vaishnava weapon. He invoked the mantra on
his goad and hurled it towards Pandava’s chest.99 That weapon was capable of slaying everything and was released by Bhagadatta. Covering Partha, Keshava received it on his own chest. On Keshava’s chest, that weapon
became the vaijayanti garland.100 Distressed in his mind, Arjuna spoke to Keshava. ‘O Janardana! You are not
supposed to ﬁght. You are only supposed to steer my horses. O Pundarikaksha! This is what you said. But you did
not keep your promise. If I am in distress, or if I am incapable of countering, it is only then that you should act in
this way. You should not act in this way if I am standing. With my arrows and with my bow, I am capable of conquering all the worlds, with the gods, the asuras and humans. This is known to you.’ Having been thus addressed
by Arjuna, Vasudeva replied in these words. ‘O Partha! O unblemished one! Listen to this ancient and secret account. I am engaged in saving the worlds and have four forms. For the sake of the welfare of the worlds, I divide
myself into different parts. One of my forms is based on earth and is engaged in austerities. Another form beholds
the virtuous and evil deeds in the universe. Another form resorts to the world of men and performs deeds. The
fourth and ﬁnal form lies down and sleeps for a thousand years. This form of mine awakes at the end of a thousand
years and at that time, grants the best of boons to those who are deserving of boons. On one such occasion, the
earth got to know and, for the sake of Naraka,101 asked a boon from me. Listen to this. “Having obtained the
vaishnava weapon, let it be such that my son cannot be killed by gods and asuras. Grant me this boon.” In ancient
times, having heard of this boon, I gave the invincible vaishnava weapon to the earth’s son and said, “O earth! Let

this weapon be infallible in protecting Naraka. No one will be able to kill him. Protected by this weapon, your son
will be able to crush the armies of all enemies. He will always be invincible in all the worlds.” Having been thus
addressed, the intelligent goddess departed, her wishes having been fulﬁlled. That is how Naraka, the scorcher of
enemies, became invincible. O Partha! It was from him that Pragjyotisha obtained this weapon of mine.102 O venerable one! There is no one in the worlds, not even Indra and Rudra, who cannot be killed by it. It is for your sake
that I repulsed the weapon and violated my pledge. O Partha! The great asura has now lost his supreme weapon.
Kill him, as I killed Naraka earlier, for the sake of welfare. The invincible Bhagadatta is your enemy in battle. He
is an enemy of the gods.’103 Thus addressed by the great-souled Keshava, Partha suddenly shrouded Bhagadatta
with sharp arrows. Without any fear, the mighty-armed and high-minded Partha struck the elephant between its
frontal lobes with an iron arrow. That arrow struck the elephant, like the vajra against a mountain. It penetrated
right up to its tufts, like a snake entering a termite hill. With its limbs paralysed, it fell down and struck the ground
with its tusks. The giant elephant roared in woe and gave up its life. Partha then used an arrow with a drooping
tuft, with a head that was in the shape of the half-moon, and pierced King Bhagadatta in the heart with this. With
his heart thus pierced by Kiriti, King Bhagadatta let go of his bow and arrows and lost his life. His head fell down
and so did the beautiful goad, like a petal falling off a lotus, when the stalk of the lotus has been destroyed. Garlanded in gold, he fell down from the golden housing on the elephant that was like a mountain. He was like a blossoming karnikara,104 dislodged from the summit of a mountain by the violent force of the wind. The king was like
Indra in his valour. He was Indra’s friend and was killed by Indra’s son in the battle. Desiring victory, the men then
began to shatter the ones on your side, like the strength of the wind unleashed on trees.”’
CHAPTER 1006(29)

‘Sanjaya said, “The inﬁnitely energetic Pragjyotisha was Indra’s beloved friend. Having killed him, Arjuna circumambulated him. The two sons of the king of Gandhara, the brothers Vrishaka and Achala, the conquerors of
enemy cities, began to afﬂict Arjuna in the battle. Those two brave archers united and pierced Arjuna severely
from the front and the back, using extremely swift and sharp arrows. In an instant, Partha used sharp arrows to
pierce the horses, charioteer, bow, umbrella, chariot and standard of Vrishaka, Subala’s son. Arjuna again used a
storm of arrows and many other weapons. He oppressed the Gandhara soldiers, with Subala’s son at the forefront.
There were ﬁve hundred brave Gandhara warriors, with their weapons raised. The enraged Dhananjaya used arrows to send them to the world of the dead. With his horses slain, the mighty-armed one105 quickly descended
from his chariot and ascending onto his brother’s chariot, grasped another bow. Those two brothers, Vrishaka and
Achala, were stationed on the same chariot. They repeatedly pierced Bibhatsu with a shower of arrows. Those two
great-souled kings, Vrishaka and Achala, your brothers-in-law, severely wounded Partha, like Indra against Vritra
and Bala. Those two from Gandhara were themselves not injured, but successful in striking the target, again struck
Pandava. It was like the months of summer and monsoon, afﬂicting the world with sweat and rain.106 Those two
kings, tigers among men, Vrishaka and Achala, were stationed on the same chariot. O king! They were stationed
next to each other and Arjuna slew them with a single arrow. They were like lions, giant-armed and with red eyes.
They were brothers and possessed similar features. Those two brave ones lost their lives and fell down from the
chariot. Their bodies, loved by their relatives, fell down from the chariot onto the ground. They lay there, spreading their sacred fame in the ten directions. O lord of the earth! On seeing that their maternal uncles, who never retreated, had been slain in the battle, your sons ﬁercely showered down weapons.
‘“Shakuni was skilled in a hundred different kinds of maya. On seeing that his brothers had been killed, he confused the two Krishnas with his maya. Sticks, iron balls, shataghnis, javelins, clubs, maces, swords, spears, bludgeons, spikes, kampanas, scimitars, nails, mallets, battleaxes, razors, kshurapras, hollow arrows,107 vatsadantas,
weapons with joints, chakras, tufted arrows, darts and many other weapons showered down on Arjuna from all the
directions. Asses, camels, buffaloes, lions, tigers, small deer,108 kites, bears, wolves, vultures, monkeys, reptiles
and many other kinds of ﬂesh-eaters109 hungrily dashed towards Arjuna. Many diverse kinds of crows angrily
rushed towards him. Kunti’s son, the brave Dhananjaya, was skilled in the use of divine weapons. He suddenly un-

leashed a net of arrows and attacked them. The arrows released by the brave one were ﬁrm and excellent and they
were slain by these. They let out a giant wail, as all of them were slain and destroyed. Darkness then appeared and
enveloped Arjuna’s chariot.110 From within that darkness, a cruel voice censured Arjuna. But Arjuna destroyed
this with the mighty weapon known as jyotisha.111 When that was destroyed, a terrible ﬂood of water appeared.
For destroying this, Arjuna used the weapon named aditya. Thanks to this weapon, the water was almost completely dried up. Subala’s son repeatedly resorted to many different kinds of maya. But Arjuna laughed and used the
strength of his weapons to destroy them all. When his maya was destroyed, Shakuni was injured by Arjuna’s arrows. He ﬂed on his swift horses, like an ordinary man.
‘“Arjuna was the best among those who were skilled in the use of weapons and he showed his nature to the enemy. He showered down a ﬂood of arrows on the Kourava army. The army of your son was slaughtered by Partha.
O great king! It became divided into two, like the Ganga when it confronts a mountain. O king! Some maharathas
sought shelter with Drona. Others were afﬂicted by Kiriti and went to Duryodhana. Since they were covered by
darkness, we could not see the soldiers or him then. I heard the twang of Gandiva on my south.112 There was the
sound of conch shells and drums and the noise of musical instruments. Gandiva’s roar could be heard above all of
these. A ﬁght then again commenced towards the south, between wonderful warriors and Arjuna. However, I followed Drona. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At that time, the many different divisions in your son’s army
were slaughtered by Arjuna, like the wind scattering clouds in the sky. Like Vasava raining down copiously, the
great archer and tiger among men showered down a ﬂood of arrows and no one could counter the ﬁerce one. Those
on your side were killed by Partha and were severely afﬂicted. As they ﬂed hither and thither, they killed many on
their own side. The arrows shot by Arjuna were tufted with the feathers of herons and were capable of penetrating
the body. They descended like locusts that covered the ten directions. O venerable one! Horses, charioteers, elephants were pierced and the arrows then penetrated the ground, like snakes into a termite hill. He did not shoot a
second arrow at any elephant, horse or man. Shot by a single arrow, they fell down, losing their lives. Men and
horses were slain everywhere. Elephants were struck by arrows and brought down. At that time, dogs, jackals and
wild crows howled and the ﬁeld of battle looked wonderful. Oppressed by arrows, father abandoned son, wellwisher abandoned well-wisher and son abandoned father. Everyone sought to protect himself. Oppressed by
Partha, they abandoned their mounts.”’
CHAPTER 1007(30)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O Sanjaya! When those divisions were shattered by Pandu’s son and ﬂed quickly, what was
the state of your mind then? When divisions are shattered and do not see a place where they can make a stand, it is
very difﬁcult to counter this. O Sanjaya! Tell me everything about this.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O lord of the earth! Despite this, there were those who wished to bring pleasure to your son.
To preserve their fame in this world, those brave ones followed Drona. They raised their weapons and approached
Yudhishthira. They performed noble and terrible deeds and were truly fearless. O lord! They detected a weakness
in the inﬁnitely energetic Bhimasena, the brave Satyaki and Dhrishtadyumna. The Panchalas cruelly urged,
‘Drona! Drona!’ However, your sons urged all the Kurus, ‘Not Drona!’ One side said, ‘Drona! Drona!’ The other
side said, ‘Not Drona!’ The Kurus and the Pandavas seemed to be gambling over Drona. Wherever Drona sought
to attack the chariots of the Panchalas, Panchala Dhrishtadyumna stationed himself at those spots. There was a terrible battle where one did not follow the respective divisions. Brave ones clashed against brave ones and roared
against the enemy. The enemy was incapable of making the Pandavas tremble there. But because they remembered
their own hardships, they made the enemy divisions waver. Though they were modest, they were overcome by
anger and driven by their spirit. They were prepared to give up their lives and sought to kill Drona in that great battle. There was a tumultuous battle, in which, those inﬁnitely energetic ones offered their lives as stake. It was as if
iron was clashing against rock. Even the aged could not remember a battle like this. O great king! Such had not
been witnessed earlier, nor heard of. When those brave ones were slaughtered, the earth trembled, oppressed by the
great burden of those two oceans of soldiers. As the armies whirled around, the ﬁrmament seemed to roar and
stand still. Ajatashatru angrily advanced against your son. Drona roamed around in that battle. He approached the

Pandu army and shattered it with thousands of sharp arrows. They were routed by Drona’s extraordinary deeds.
Then the commander113 himself engaged with Drona and there was an extraordinary battle between Drona and
Panchala. It is my view that there has never been anything that is equal to this.
‘“Like a ﬁre, Nila burnt down the Kuru army. The arrows were the sparks and he was like a ﬁre burning down
dry wood. When he was burning down the soldiers, Drona’s powerful son, who had wished to have an encounter
with him from earlier times,114 smilingly addressed him. ‘O Nila! What will you gain by burning down these warriors with the rays of your arrows? Fight with me and angrily strike me with your swift arrows.’ Nila’s eyes were
like the petals of lotuses. He pierced the one whose face was as beautiful as a blooming lotus and whose body was
like a collection of lotuses.115 On being thus suddenly pierced, Drona’s son used three sharp and broad-headed
arrows to slice down the bow, standard and umbrella of the enemy. Nila swiftly jumped down from his chariot and
grasped a shield and a supreme sword, wishing to sever, like a bird,116 the head of Drona’s son from his body. O
unblemished one! But Drona’s son smiled. He used a broad-headed arrow to sever his head, with a beautiful nose
and with earrings, from his body. The face was as radiant as the full moon. The eyes were like the petals of lotuses.
The shoulders were elevated and he117 was tall. He was slain and fell down on the ground. At this, the Pandava
soldiers were distressed and became extremely anxious. Blazing in his energy, Nila was killed by the son of the
preceptor. O venerable one! All the Pandava maharathas began to think, ‘How will Vasava’s son be able to save us
from the enemy? The brave one is engaged in ﬁghting with the soldiers in the southern direction, with the remaining soldiers in the samshaptaka and narayana army.’”’
CHAPTER 1008 (31)

‘Sanjaya said, “Vrikodara could not tolerate the slaughter of the soldiers. He struck Bahlika with sixty and Karna
with ten arrows. Drona wished to kill him and used sharp and iron arrows that were whetted at the tip and penetrated the inner organs to swiftly strike him, wishing to take away his life. Karna pierced him with twelve arrows,
Ashvatthama with seven and King Duryodhana with six. But the immensely strong Bhimasena pierced all of them
back in return. He struck Drona with ﬁfty arrows, Karna with ten arrows, Duryodhana with twelve and Drona’s son
with eight swift arrows. Having engaged in that battle, he let out a loud roar. They fought, prepared to give up their
lives, and death was easily achieved. Ajatashatru sent many warriors, instructing them to save Bhima. Those inﬁnitely energetic ones approached near Bhimasena. There were Yuyudhana and the others and the two Pandavas
who were Madri’s sons. Those bulls among men were angry and united. They advanced, wishing to shatter
Drona’s army, which was protected by the supreme among great archers. Those immensely valorous ones, Bhima
and the other rathas, advanced and were ﬁercely received by Drona and the best of rathas. Those brave and immensely strong atirathas were the ornaments of any battle. Outwardly giving up all fear of death, those on your
side fought with the Pandavas. Riders killed riders and rathas killed rathas. The battle commenced, lances against
lances, and with swords and battleaxes. There was a terrible clash with swords and it led to a cruel carnage. Because of the clash of elephants, the battle became extremely dreadful. Some fell down from elephants. Others fell
down from horses, their heads hanging down. O venerable one! Other men fell down from chariots, pierced by arrows. Others were crushed in that encounter and fell down, shorn of their armour. Elephants attacked the chests
and crushed the heads. In other places, elephants crushed men who had fallen down. Elephants struck the ground
with their tusks and mangled many rathas. Other men were crushed by elephants that were pierced with weapons.
Hundreds of elephants roamed around and crushed hundreds of men. There were men with bronze armour on their
bodies and horses, chariots and elephants. They fell down and were crushed by elephants, as if they were thick
reeds. Kings lay down to sleep on beds made out of the feathers of vultures.118 They were modest. But having
been ripened by time, they lay down on beds of great distress. Advancing on a chariot, the father killed the son.
Out of confusion and disregarding all honour, the son killed the father. Wheels of chariots were shattered. Standards were torn. Umbrellas were shredded and brought down. Dragging broken yokes, horses ran away. Arms
wielding swords were brought down. Heads sporting earrings were severed. Powerful elephants threw down chariots and crushed them down on the ground. Charioteers struck elephants with iron arrows and brought them down.
Severely wounded by elephants, riders fell down from horses. A cruel and great battle raged and it was extremely

terrible. ‘Alas, father! Alas, son! Friend, where are you? Stay! Where are you going? Strike! Capture! Kill!’ These
and other words mixed with the roars and sounds of laughter and many other kinds of noise were spoken and
heard. The blood of men, horses and elephants mingled together. The dust that arose from the ground was
paciﬁed.119 Those who were cowards became distressed. They dragged each other by the hair. There were terrible
ﬁghts with ﬁsts. Brave ones fought with nails and teeth, wishing to ﬁnd refuge where no refuge could be found.
Heroes raised swords in their arms, but those were severed. So were others holding bows, arrows or goads. Someone loudly challenged another. Someone else ﬂed, running away. Others confronted others and severed the head
from the body. Some attacked others with loud roars. Others were severely frightened at the sounds and ﬂed. Some
killed the enemy, or those on one’s own side, with sharp arrows. Elephants that were like the peaks of mountains
were brought down by iron arrows. They lay down, like islands in a river during the summer. There were elephants
that exuded musth like mountainous streams. They crushed chariots down on the ground with their feet, together
with the horses and the charioteers. There were brave ones who were skilled in the use of weapons. On seeing that
they were covered with blood, but were still striking each other, those who were cowards and weak in heart lost
their senses. Everyone was distressed and nothing could be distinguished. Despite the dust raised by the soldiers,
the cruel battle raged on.
‘“The commander120 said, ‘Make haste. This is the time.’ He swiftly led the Pandavas, who were always full of
enterprise. Having been thus instructed, the illustrious Pandaveyas advanced towards Drona’s chariot, wishing to
kill him, like swans descending on a lake. ‘Seize! Do not ﬂee! Do not be scared! Cut him down!’ These and other
sounds were heard in the vicinity of the invincible one’s chariot. Drona, Kripa, Karna, Drona’s son, King
Jayadratha, Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti and Shalya repulsed them. The Panchalas and the Pandavas were noble in their dharma. They were angry. They were difﬁcult to counter and difﬁcult to resist. Though oppressed by
arrows, they did not withdraw from Drona. Drona became extremely enraged and released hundreds of arrows,
causing a great carnage among the Chedis, Panchalas and Pandavas. O venerable one! The twang of his bowstring
and the slapping of his palms were heard in all the directions. They were like the sound of thunder and caused
fright among many of the Pandavas.
‘“At this time, having slain the powerful samshaptakas, Jishnu arrived at the spot where Drona was crushing the
Pandus. He had crossed many whirlpools made out of arrows and giant lakes made out of blood. Having crossed
them and having killed the samshaptakas, Phalguna showed himself. He was the accomplisher of deeds. He was
like the sun in his energy. The one with the monkey on his banner was seen to be radiant in his energy. He had
dried up the ocean of the samshaptakas with the rays of his weapons. Pandava now scorched the Kurus, like the
sun at the destruction of a yuga. All the Kurus were burnt by the energy of Arjuna’s weapons, like a comet that has
arisen and destroys all beings at the end of a yuga.121 Elephants, horses, rathas and warriors were struck by the
thousands of arrows released by him and oppressed by these arrows, discarded their weapons and fell down on the
ground. Some wailed in lamentation. Still others roared. Slain by Partha’s arrows, some fell down, deprived of
their lives. Remembering the vow of warriors, Arjuna did not kill the warriors who had fallen down, or were falling down, or were retreating. Most of the Kurus were shattered and, devoid of their chariots, were in retreat. They
called upon Karna for protection. On discerning the lamentation and the cries for refuge, Adhiratha’s son assured
them that they need not be frightened and advanced in Arjuna’s direction. He was foremost among all the Bharata
rathas and was the one who brought delight to all the Bharatas. He was supreme among those who knew about
weapons and he invoked the agneya weapon. A mass of blazing arrows was released by the one who wielded a
blazing bow. But Dhananjaya repulsed that mass of arrows with his net of arrows. Weapon was countered by
weapon and these arrows preserved life.
‘“Dhrishtadyumna, Bhima and maharatha Satyaki approached Karna and each pierced him with three swift arrows. Radheya countered Arjuna’s weapon with his own shower of arrows. He then used three tufted arrows to
sever the bows of those three. With their weapons gone, those brave ones were like snakes without venom. They
hurled javelins from their chariots and roared like lions. Those javelins hurled from their arms were immensely
forceful. Those mighty javelins were like snakes and blazed. They descended towards the chariot of Adhiratha’s
son. But Karna severed them with three swift arrows and powerfully shooting arrows at Partha, roared. Arjuna
pierced Radheya with seven swift arrows. With three sharp arrows, he then killed Karna’s younger brother. Partha

killed Shatrunjaya with six arrows. As Vipatha stood on his chariot, he severed his head with a broad-headed arrow.122 While the sons of Dhritarashtra looked on, Kiriti single-handedly killed the three, who were foremost
among the brothers of the son of the suta. Bhima leapt down from his chariot, like Vinata’s son.123 With a
supreme sword, he killed the ﬁfteen who were guarding Karna’s ﬂank. He then again ascended his chariot and
grasped another bow. He pierced Karna with ten arrows and his charioteer and horses with ﬁve. Dhrishtadyumna
grasped a supreme sword and a lustrous shield. With these, he killed Chandravarma and Pourava Brihatkshatra.
Panchala then ascended his chariot and grasped another bow. In that battle, he pierced Karna with seventy-three
arrows and roared. Shini’s descendant grasped another bow that was like Indra’s weapon in its radiance. He
pierced the suta’s son with sixty-four arrows and roared like a lion. With two broad-headed arrows that were released well, he severed Karna’s bow. He again pierced Karna in the arms and the chest with three arrows. Radheya
was about to be submerged in the ocean that Satyaki represented. At this, Duryodhana, Drona and King Jayadratha
rescued him. Dhrishtadyumna, Bhima, Subhadra’s son, Arjuna himself, Nakula and Sahadeva began to protect
Satyaki in that battle.
‘“Thus the extremely terrible battle between those on your side and that of the enemy raged. It was destructive
of all archers. They were prepared to give up their lives. Infantry, chariots, elephants and horses fought with elephants, horses, chariots and infantry. Chariots fought with elephants and infantry, chariots fought with infantry and
chariots fought with elephants. Horses fought with horses, elephants with elephants and chariots with chariots. Infantry was seen to be engaged with infantry. Thus did that extremely ﬁerce battle continue and it caused delight to
ﬂesh-eating creatures. Those great warriors were without fear and this extended Yama’s kingdom. Many men,
rathas, horses and elephants were killed there by elephants, rathas, horses and infantry. Elephants were killed by
elephants, rathas by armed rathas, horses by horses and large numbers of infantry by infantry. Elephants were slain
by rathas, giant horses by the best of elephants, men by horses and horses by the supreme of rathas. Tongues were
lolling out. Teeth and eyes were gouged out. Armour and ornaments were shattered. Destroyed, they fell down on
the ground. There were many others who were struck down by the best of warriors. They fell down on the ground
with fearful visages. They were mangled and crushed by the feet of horses and elephants. They were severely hurt
and wounded by the wheels of chariots and hooves. It brought delight to carnivorous beasts, birds and ﬂesh-eaters.
There was a terrible carnage of people there. Those extremely strong ones were angry. Using the utmost of their
energy, they sought to kill each other. When the strength of both sides was severely diminished, they glanced towards each other, their bodies drenched with blood. The sun was stationed above the mountain on which it sets. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! The armies retreated to their respective camps.”’

Section Sixty-Seven
Abhimanyu-Vadha Parva
This parva has 643 shlokas and twenty chapters.
Chapter 1009(32): 26 shlokas
Chapter 1010(33): 20 shlokas
Chapter 1011(34): 29 shlokas
Chapter 1012(35): 44 shlokas
Chapter 1013(36): 36 shlokas
Chapter 1014(37): 23 shlokas
Chapter 1015(38): 30 shlokas
Chapter 1016(39): 31 shlokas
Chapter 1017(40): 24 shlokas
Chapter 1018(41): 20 shlokas
Chapter 1019(42): 19 shlokas
Chapter 1020(43): 21 shlokas
Chapter 1021(44): 30 shlokas
Chapter 1022(45): 26 shlokas
Chapter 1023(46): 24 shlokas
Chapter 1024(47): 40 shlokas
Chapter 1025(48): 53 shlokas
Chapter 1026(49): 21 shlokas
Chapter 1027(50): 83 shlokas
Chapter 1028(51): 43 shlokas
This section is about the killing of Abhimanyu, the son of Arjuna and Subhadra. These are incidents that occur on the thirteenth day of the
battle. Drona constructs the chakra vyuha1 and Abhimanyu alone knows how to penetrate it, Arjuna having been summoned away by the
samshaptakas.2 When Abhimanyu penetrates the vyuha, the others on the Pandava side are supposed to follow and protect him. However,
they are restrained by Jayadratha, who has obtained a boon from Shiva. Abhimanyu kills the younger brothers of Shalya and Karna,
Vasatiya, Shalya’s son (Rukmaratha), one hundred princes, Duryodhana’s son (Lakshmana), Kratha’s son, Vrindaraka, Brihadbala (the king
of Kosala), six of Karna’s advisers, Ashvaketu (from Magadha), Martikavata (from Bhoja), Shatrunjaya, Chandraketu, Mahavega, Suvarcha,
Suryabhasa, Kalakeya (Shakuni’s brother) and rathas3 from the Brahma-Vasatiyas and Kekayas. Abhimanyu is then killed by Duhshasana’s
son. On return, Arjuna takes an oath to kill Jayadratha on the next day.
CHAPTER 1009(32)

‘Sanjaya said, “We were ﬁrst shattered by the inﬁnitely energetic Arjuna. And because Yudhishthira was protected,
Drona’s pledge was not fulﬁlled. All the warriors on your side had their armour splintered and were regarded as
having been vanquished. They were covered with dust. They were terribly anxious and glanced in the ten directions. Having obtained the permission of Bharadvaja’s son,4 they retreated. They were distressed on account of the
enemy, which was successful in its objective. They were severely humiliated in that battle. As they proceeded, they
heard all the beings praise Phalguna’s5 qualities and Keshava’s6 affection towards the illustrious Arjuna. They
spent the night like those who had been cursed, reﬂecting on what had happened and resorting to silence.
‘“When it was morning, Duryodhana spoke to Drona. The words had affection and petulance in them, since the
evil-minded one was overcome by the prosperity of the enemy. In everyone’s hearing, the one who was eloquent
spoke these angry words. ‘O supreme among brahmanas! There is no doubt that you have singled us out as those
who should be killed. Therefore, despite having approached Yudhishthira, you did not seize him. If you so wish, an
enemy that you glance towards in battle is incapable of escaping, even if the Pandavas, together with the immortals, desire to protect him. You were pleased and granted me a boon. But later, you did not act in accordance with
that. Those who are noble7 never act so as to destroy the hopes of those who are devoted to them.’ Having been

addressed in this unpleasant way, Bharadvaja’s son spoke to the king. ‘Knowing that I always seek to do what
brings you pleasure, you should not regard me in this way. The worlds, with the gods, the asuras, the gandharvas,8
the yakshas,9 the serpents and the rakshasas, cannot defeat an army that is protected by Kiriti.10 O lord! Where
Govinda, the creator of the universe, and the commander Arjuna are stationed, other than Tryambaka,11 where is
the force that can overcome it? Today, I will bring down a supreme and brave maharatha.12 Today, I am telling
you truthfully that it cannot but be otherwise. Today, I will construct a vyuha that cannot be penetrated even by the
residents of heaven. O king! But devise some means to take Arjuna away. There is nothing that is unknown to him.
There is nothing that he cannot achieve in battle. He has obtained strength and knowledge about ﬁghting from different places.’ After Drona had spoken in this way, the masses of samshaptakas again challenged Arjuna to a battle
in the southern direction. The battle that took place between Arjuna and the enemy was one the like of which had
not been seen before, nor heard of ever. O king! And Drona created a resplendent vyuha that was incapable of being looked at. It was like the sun when it reaches midday in its course and scorches down on everything. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On the instruction of his father’s eldest brother, Abhimanyu penetrated the impenetrable chakra vyuha in many different ways. He performed an extremely difﬁcult deed and killed many thousands of
brave ones. Then, six heroes attacked him together and he was ﬁnally slain by Duhshasana’s son. All of us were
supremely delighted and the Pandavas were oppressed by grief. O king! After Subhadra’s son had been killed, our
troops retreated.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! He was the son of a lion among men. He had just become a youth. On hearing
that he has been slain in battle, my mind is severely shattered. The dharma of kshatriyas, as laid down by those
who have set the principles of dharma, is terrible. Desiring a kingdom, brave ones shower down their weapons on
a child. He was a child and was reared in happiness. But he roamed around fearlessly. O Gavalgana’s son!13 Tell
me how many, skilled in the use of weapons, slew him. O Sanjaya! Subhadra’s son was inﬁnitely energetic and
sported around amidst that mass of chariots, wishing to penetrate. Tell me everything.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O Indra among kings! You have asked me about the downfall of Subhadra’s son and I will tell
you everything in detail. O king! Listen attentively. The young one penetrated and sported around amidst that array. He was like a forest ﬁre amidst the enemy, burning down large numbers of creepers, grass and trees. Those on
your side were frightened of him, like the residents of a forest.”’
CHAPTER 1010(33)

‘Sanjaya said, “They are performers of terrible deeds in battle. Their deeds show they have conquered exhaustion.
Together with Krishna, the ﬁve Pandavas are difﬁcult to resist, even by the gods. There has never been, nor will
there be, a man who possesses Krishna’s qualities in righteousness, deeds, vigour, intelligence, nature, fame and
prosperity. King Yudhishthira has always obtained heaven because of his truthfulness, devotion to dharma, generosity, worship of brahmanas and other qualities. O king! It has been said that three are equal in the ﬁeld of battle
—the Destroyer himself at the end of a yuga,14 Jamadagni’s valiant son15 and Bhimasena. Partha, the wielder of
the Gandiva, is always skilled in performing all his pledges in battle and I do not see his parallel on earth. Devotion towards superiors, maintaining secrecy of counsel, humility, self-control, beauty and bravery—these six are
always present in Nakula. In knowledge of the sacred texts, gravity, sweetness, spirit, prowess and valour, the
brave Sahadeva is the equal of the gods who are the Ashvins. All the great qualities in Krishna and all the qualities
in the Pandavas, all those assembled qualities were to be seen in Abhimanyu. He was Yudhishthira’s equal in patience, Krishna’s in conduct, Bhimasena’s in deeds and his equal in terrible feats, Dhananjaya’s in beauty, valour
and learning, and Nakula and Sahadeva’s in humility.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “O suta!16 I wish to hear everything about how the invincible Abhimanyu, Subhadra’s son,
was killed on the ﬁeld of battle.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O great king! The preceptor created the chakra vyuha. All the kings, who were Shakra’s
equal, were assembled in it. There was an assembly of princes there. All of them had taken their pledges and their
standards were embellished with gold. All of them were attired in red garments and all of them had red ornaments.
All of them had red pennants and all of them wore golden garlands. There were ten thousand such, ﬁrm in wield-

ing the bow. Your handsome grandson Lakshmana17 was at the forefront. They shared each other’s misery and
were like each other in bravery. They sought to rival each other and were devoted to each other’s welfare. The
king18 was surrounded by maharatha Karna, Duhshasana and Kripa. With a white umbrella held aloft his head, he
was like the king of the gods in his beauty. He was fanned with whisks and was as radiant as the rising sun. The
leader, Drona, was stationed at the forefront of those soldiers. The king of Sindhu19 was stationed there, handsome, and like Mount Meru. O great king! On the ﬂank of the king of Sindhu were stationed thirty of your sons,
resembling the gods, and with Ashvatthama at the forefront. The maharathas—the gambler who was the king of
Gandhara,20 Shalya and Bhurishrava—were stationed on the ﬂank of the king of Sindhu.”’21
CHAPTER 1011(34)

‘Sanjaya said, “That invincible army was protected by Bharadvaja’s son. With Bhimaseana at the forefront, the
Parthas advanced against it. Satyaki, Chekitana, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna,22 the valiant Kuntibhoja, maharatha
Drupada, Arjuna’s son,23 Kshatradharma, the brave Brihatkshatra, Dhrishtaketu the king of Chedi, the sons of
Madri,24 Ghatotkacha, the brave Yudhamanyu, the unvanquished Shikhandi, the unassailable Uttamouja, maharatha Virata, Droupadi’s enraged sons, Shishupala’s brave son,25 the immensely valorous Kekayas, thousands of
Srinjayas and many others, skilled in use of weapons and irresistible in battle, suddenly advanced, together with
their followers, wishing to ﬁght against Bharadvaja’s son. However, Bharadvaja’s valiant son was not agitated. As
they approached, he repulsed all of them with a mighty shower of arrows. Like a large mass of water confronting
an impenetrable hill, or like the shoreline driving back the ocean, they were driven back by Drona. O Indra among
kings! They were oppressed by the arrows released from Drona’s bow. The Pandavas were incapable of standing
before Bharadvaja’s son. The strength of Drona’s arms was seen to be extraordinary, in that the Panchalas, together
with the Srinjayas, could not advance before him. On seeing that Drona was advancing wrathfully, Yudhishthira
thought about many ways whereby Drona could be countered. Having formed the view that Drona was incapable
of being resisted by anyone else, Yudhishthira imposed that heavy and unbearable burden on Subhadra’s son. He
was not inferior to Vasudeva. His energy was superior to that of Phalguna. And he26 spoke these words to Abhimanyu, the slayer of enemy heroes. ‘O son!27 Act so that Arjuna does not censure us on return.28 There is no one
amongst us who knows how to penetrate the chakra vyuha. O mighty-armed one! With the exception of you, Arjuna, Krishna and Pradyumna,29 there is no ﬁfth person who can penetrate the chakra vyuha. O Abhimanyu! O son!
I am asking this boon and you should grant it to me, for the sake of your fathers, your maternal uncles and all the
soldiers. O son! Otherwise, on returning from the ﬁght, Dhananjaya will censure us. Grasp your weapons and act
so as to strike Drona’s army.’
‘“Abhimanyu replied, ‘Desiring the victory of my fathers, I will soon enter and penetrate that ﬁrm and supreme
array of warriors, created by Drona. My father instructed me about entering and penetrating an array like this. But
if I confront a calamity there, I do not know how to emerge.’
‘“Yudhishthira said, ‘O foremost among warriors! O son! Penetrate the array and create an entry for us. All of us
will follow the path you traverse. O son! You are the equal of Dhananjaya in battle. On seeing you enter, we will
follow and protect you from all the directions.’
‘“Bhima said, ‘I will follow you and so will Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, the Panchalas, the Kekayas, the Matsyas
and all the Prabhadrakas. Once you have shattered the vyuha, we will repeatedly enter it and slaughter the best of
the warriors who are inside it.’
‘“Abhimanyu replied, ‘Like an angry insect entering a ﬂaming ﬁre, I will penetrate Drona’s unassailable array.
Today, I will do what is good for both the lineages.30 I will bring pleasure to my maternal uncle and my father. In
the battle, a single child will be like death to masses of enemy soldiers and all the beings will witness my deeds
today.’
‘“Yudhishthira said, ‘O Subhadra’s son! As you speak, may your strength increase. You are seeking to penetrate
Drona’s impenetrable array. These tigers among men, great archers who are skilled in striking, will protect you.

They are like the Sadhyas, the Rudras and the Maruts. They are like the Vasus, Agni and Aditya in valour.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “On hearing these words, he31 instructed his charioteer, Sumitra, and in that battle, asked him to
swiftly drive towards Drona’s array.”’
CHAPTER 1012(35)

‘Sanjaya said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having heard the words of the intelligent Dharmaraja, Subhadra’s son urged his charioteer towards Drona’s array. The charioteer was urged with the words, ‘Go! Go!’ O
king! He replied to Abhimanyu in these words. ‘O one with a long life! An extremely heavy burden has been imposed on you by the Pandavas. You should advance to the ﬁght only after you have thought over whether you have
the capacity to bear this. Drona, the preceptor, is skilled in the use of supreme weapons and has conquered exhaustion. You have been reared in extreme happiness and are not skilled in ﬁghting.’ On hearing these words, Abhimanyu laughed and spoke to his charioteer. ‘O charioteer! Who is Drona? Who are these assembled kshatriyas?
Even if Shakra on Airavata32 advances in the forefront of the battle, with the masses of immortals, I will engage.
Today, I am not bewildered at these kshatriyas. These enemy soldiers are not even a sixteenth part of me.33 O son
of a suta! Even if I were to confront my maternal uncle Vishnu,34 the conqueror of the universe, or my father in
battle, I would not be terriﬁed.’ Abhimanyu disregarded the words of the charioteer and instructed him to swiftly
drive towards Drona’s array. The charioteer was distressed in heart. But he urged the horses, which were three
years old and decorated with golden harnesses. Thus goaded by Sumitra, the horses advanced towards Drona’s array. O king! Without any fear and with great force and valour, they advanced against Drona himself.
‘“On seeing him attack, all the Kouravas, with Drona at the forefront, advanced to meet him and all the Pandavas followed him. His supreme standard bore the marks of a karnikara.35 He was clad in golden armour. Arjuna’s son was superior to Arjuna himself. He wished to ﬁght with the maharathas, with Drona at the forefront. He
was like a young lion attacking a herd of elephants. He sought to attack them and advanced twenty steps. In an instant, there was a melee, like when the whirl of the Ganga meets the ocean. The brave ones fought and killed each
other. O king! An extremely tumultuous and terrible battle commenced. While that fearful battle raged, in Drona’s
sight, Arjuna’s son shattered and penetrated the vyuha. The immensely strong one penetrated into the midst of the
enemy and began to slaughter the foes. Warriors on elephants, horses and chariots, armed with weapons, descended on him and surrounded him. There was the sound of musical instruments. There were sounds of the slapping of
arms and roars. There were roars like lions and shouts of ‘Stay! Stay!’ There were terrible and repeated exclamations of ‘Do not go! Wait! Come to me! I am here! That is the enemy!’ This mingled with the trumpeting of elephants, the tinkling of bells and ornaments, sounds of laughter and the sounds of hooves and chariot wheels. The
earth resounded with these noises.
‘“Those on your side descended before Arjuna’s son. But the brave one was swift and ﬁrm. He was quick in using weapons that penetrated the inner organs and knew about the inner organs. He killed them. They were slaughtered by many different kinds of sharp arrows. They were like helpless insects descending into a ﬁre. He swiftly
covered the earth with their bodies and limbs severed from their bodies, like a priest covering an altar with kusha
grass. There were arms with armguards and ﬁnger-guards, holding bows and arrows, swords and shields, goads,
reins, lances and battleaxes, balls with iron spikes, spears, scimitars, spikes, javelins, catapults, clubs, the best of
darts, kampanas,36 whips, giant conch shells, spears,37 kachagrahas,38 maces, slings, nooses, heavy maces and
stones. Those arms were decorated with armlets and bracelets and smeared with fragrances and unguents. Arjuna’s
son severed the arms of those on your side in thousands. O great king! Covered with blood, they were strewn
around on the ground and looked radiant. O venerable one! It was as if ﬁve-headed serpents had been slain by
Garuda. There were many heads with beautiful noses, faces and hair, without the marks of wounds and adorned
with beautiful earrings. Copious quantities of blood ﬂowed from these and the teeth gnashed the lips in anger.
They were adorned with beautiful garlands and headdresses, embellished with gems and jewels. They were like
lotuses severed from the stalks and possessed the radiance of the sun or the moon. Once upon a time, they could
speak many beneﬁcial and pleasant words and were smeared with sacred fragrances. Phalguna’s son covered the
earth with the heads of the enemy. There were many excellent chariots, with forms like the cities of the gandhar-

vas. They possessed shafts in the front and curved staffs made out of bamboo poles. Their shafts, yokes and wheels
were shattered. They were bereft of their axles and pins. They lost their wheels, standards and seats. The implements of war were scattered. The expensive cushions were also scattered and thousands of riders slain. Everything
that could be seen was mangled with his arrows. He used sharp arrows, honed at the tip, to slice down the enemy
riders on elephants, with their ﬂags, goads and pennants, quivers, armour, seats, reins and blankets, the bells on the
trunks and the tusks, and also those who guarded their steps from the rear. There were horses from Vanayu, Kamboja, Bahlika and the mountainous regions. They were well trained and swift and could keep their tails, ears and
eyes immobile. The warriors who rode on them were accomplished and wielded spears, swords and lances. They
were strewn around, deprived of cushions and whisks. Their tongues lolled out. The eyes were detached and the
entrails and livers were plucked out. Their harnesses were torn and their riders were killed. This delighted large
numbers of ﬂesh-eaters. The mail and armour was sliced away and they were covered in urine and excrement.
Thus bringing down the best of your horses, he was resplendent. He accomplished these difﬁcult deeds alone, like
the unfathomable Vishnu in earlier times. He crushed your giant army with the three kinds of forces.39 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He also killed your foot soldiers. Using sharp arrows, Subhadra’s son was seen to single-handedly destroy your soldiers, like Skanda40 against the asura army. Those on your side and your sons
glanced in the ten directions. Their mouths were dry. Their eyes were restless. They were covered with sweat and
their body hair stood up. They lost all interest in vanquishing the enemy and made up their minds to ﬂee. Wishing
to remain alive, they cried and called out to each other by name and lineage. They abandoned wounded sons, fathers, well-wishers, relatives and kin. They urged their horses and elephants, so that they could run away quickly.”’
CHAPTER 1013(36)

‘Sanjaya said, “On seeing that the army was routed by Subhadra’s inﬁnitely energetic son, Duryodhana was angered and himself advanced against Subhadra’s son. On seeing that the king had returned and was advancing in the
battle against Subhadra’s son, Drona spoke to all the warriors. ‘Protect the king. While we look on, the valiant Abhimanyu is killing everything that he is targeting. Do not be afraid. Swiftly attack and protect Kourava.’41 He42
possessed powerful and grateful well-wishers, desiring victory. Though they were terriﬁed, those brave ones surrounded your son—Drona, Drona’s son, Kripa, Karna, Kritavarma, Soubala,43 Brihadbala, the king of Madra,
Bhuri, Bhurishrava, Shala, Pourava and Vrishasena.44 They released sharp arrows and countered Subhadra’s son
with that great shower of arrows. They confounded him and freed Duryodhana. But Arjuna’s son could not tolerate
that something he had grasped should be taken away. With a great shower of arrows, he enveloped the horses and
the charioteers of those maharathas. Having repulsed them, Subhadra’s son roared like a lion. On hearing his roar,
which was like that of a lion in search of ﬂesh, the rathas, with Drona at the forefront, were extremely enraged.
They could not tolerate it. O venerable one! They encircled him from all sides with a mass of chariots. They released a mass of many different kinds of arrows at him. But your grandson used sharp arrows to sever them in the
sky and then pierced them back in turn. It was extraordinary. They were enraged by those arrows, which were like
the virulent poison of snakes. Wishing to kill him, they surrounded Subhadra’s son, who refused to run away. That
ocean of your soldiers was like a sea. But Abhimanyu held it back, like the shoreline against the abode of
makaras.45 Those brave ones fought, wishing to kill each other. There was Abhimanyu on one side and the enemy
on the other and no one wished to retreat. A terrible and fearful combat raged.
‘“Duhsaha pierced Abhimanyu with nine arrows, Duhshasana with twelve, Sharadvata Kripa with three and
Drona with seventeen arrows, each of which was like a venomous serpent. Vivimshati pierced him with twenty,
Kritavarma with seven, Brihadbala with eight, Ashvatthama with seven, Bhurishrava with three arrows and the
king of Madra with six arrows. Shakuni pierced him with two arrows and King Duryodhana with three. In turn, he
pierced each of them back with three arrows. O great king! With the bow in his hand, the powerful Abhimanyu
seemed to dance around. He was enraged because he was oppressed by your sons. He exhibited the great strength
he had acquired through learning and practice. He was borne on well-trained horses, with speeds like those of
Garuda or the wind. They bore him swiftly and he countered the heir of Ashmaka.46 Asking him to wait, Abhimanyu used ten arrows to cut down his charioteer, his horses, his standard, his arms, his bow and his head. Having

brought these down, he smiled. When the brave lord of Ashmaka was thus slain by Subhadra’s son, all his soldiers
wavered and began to run away. Karna, Kripa, Drona, Drona’s son, the king of Gandhara, Shala, Shalya, Bhurishrava, Kratha, Somadatta, Vivimshati, Vrishasena, Sushena, Kundabhedi, Pratardana, Vrindaraka, Lalittha,
Prabahu, Dirghalochana and the enraged Duryodhana showered down arrows on him. Those great archers pierced
him with their arrows and Abhimanyu became angry. He shot arrows at Karna that were capable of penetrating the
body. O king! They pierced his armour and his body and penetrated the earth, like a snake entering a termite hill.
Having been thus wounded by him, Karna was pained and swooned. In that battle, he was like a mountain trembling because of an earthquake. With three other sharp arrows, the angry and powerful one slew Sushena,
Dirghalochana and Kundabhedi. Having recovered, Karna pierced him with twenty-ﬁve iron arrows, Ashvatthama
with twenty and Kritavarma with seven. With arrows piercing all his limbs, the son of Shakra’s son47 was seen to
angrily roam around amidst the soldiers, like Yama with a noose in his hand. Shalya was near him and he repulsed
him with a shower of arrows. The mighty-armed one roared and terriﬁed your soldiers. O king! Pierced in his inner
organs by the one who was skilled in the use of weapons, Shalya lost his senses and sat down on the ﬂoor of his
chariot. While Bharadvaja’s son looked on, on seeing that he had been thus pierced by Subhadra’s illustrious son,
all the soldiers began to run away. They saw that the mighty-armed one48 was covered with gold-tufted arrows.
Those on your side began to ﬂee, like deer oppressed by a lion. He49 was thus praised for his ﬁghting and his fame
by the ancestors, the gods, the charanas,50 the siddhas51 and the masses of yakshas and also by the large number
of beings who were on earth. He was as resplendent as a ﬁre into which oblations had been poured.”’
CHAPTER 1014(37)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “When Arjuna’s son, the great archer, caused a rout with his straight-ﬂying arrows, who were
the ones on my side who sought to counter him?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! Listen to how that young one sported around in that great battle, when he shattered
the array of chariots protected by Bharadvaja’s son. On seeing that the lord of Madra was crushed in that battle by
the arrows of Subhadra’s son, Shalya’s younger brother angrily advanced and covered him with a shower of arrows. He pierced Arjuna’s son, his horses and his charioteer, with ten arrows and roared loudly, asking him52 to
wait. However, Arjuna’s son severed his head from his neck, his arms, his feet, his bow, his horses, his umbrella,
his standard, his charioteer, the three poles on the chariot, his seat, his wheels, his yoke, his quiver, the ﬂoor of the
chariot, his bows, his ﬂag, those who protected his wheels and all his other implements. He was so swift in piercing them that no one could see him. That inﬁnitely energetic one lost his life and fell down on the ground, pierced
through his ornaments and garments, like a giant tree53 shattered by the wind. His followers were terriﬁed and ﬂed
in all the directions. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On witnessing the deeds of Arjuna’s son, all the beings
roared in applause in every direction. After Shalya’s brother had been killed, many of his soldiers advanced against
Arjuna’s son, loudly proclaiming their lineages, their residences and their names. They angrily attacked him, with
many different kinds of weapons in their hands. Intoxicated in their strength, they were on chariots, horses and elephants. There were others on foot. The great sound of arrows mingled with the sounds of hooves. There were roars
and loud exclamations, sounds like that of roaring lions. Some slapped their palms and twanged their bowstrings,
trying to scare Arjuna’s son. They said, ‘As long as we are alive, you will not escape with your life today.’ On
hearing and seeing them, Subhadra’s son laughed. Having smiled, he used arrows to pierce those who had struck
him ﬁrst. He exhibited many wonderful weapons and his dexterity. In that encounter, Arjuna’s brave son fought
gently with them.54 He had obtained weapons from Vasudeva and Dhananjaya. Krishna’s son displayed them, just
like the two Krishnas.55 He strove again and again, ﬂinging away the heavy burden that he had taken on. No gap
could be seen between his taking up and shooting an arrow. The blazing circle of his outstretched bow could be
seen in all the directions, like the ﬂaming circle of the sun destroying all darkness. The twanging of his bowstring
and the terrible slapping of his palms could be heard. It was like the roaring of the clouds when a great thunderclap
is disgorged. Though he was intolerant, Subhadra’s son was modest. The handsome one showed due reverence.
Showing respect to the heroes, he fought with arrows and other weapons. O great king! He started gently and be-

came ﬁerce later, like the illustrious sun during the autumn, after the monsoon is over. His great shower of arrows
was colourful. The arrows were gold-tufted and sharpened on stone. He angrily released hundreds of them, like the
rays of the sun in the sky. While Bharadvaja’s son looked on, the immensely illustrious one shot kshurapras, vatsadantas, vipathas, narachas, half-narachas, bhallas and anjalikas56 and covered that array of chariots. Oppressed
by those arrows, those soldiers retreated.”’
CHAPTER 1015(38)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! My mind is divided into two kinds of feelings, satisfaction and shame, on learning
that Subhadra’s son routed the soldiers of my son.57 O son of Gavalgana! Tell me everything again in detail, about
how the young one sported, like Skanda against the asuras.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “I will tell you about that extremely terrible encounter that took place between one and many.
It was a tumultuous battle. Mounted on his chariot, Abhimanyu exerted himself. All the rathas58 on your side
were the scorchers of enemies and happily exerted themselves. There were Drona, Karna, Kripa, Shalya, Drona’s
son, Bhoja,59 Brihadbala, Duryodhana, Somadatta’s son,60 the immensely strong Shakuni, many kings, many
princes and many other soldiers. He roamed around like a circle of ﬁre and pierced all of them with arrows. Subhadra’s powerful son was the destroyer of enemies and skilled in supreme weapons. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! He exhibited his energy in all the directions. On witnessing the conduct of Subhadra’s inﬁnitely energetic
son, your soldiers trembled repeatedly. Bharadvaja’s powerful and immensely wise son dilated his eyes in delight.
O venerable one! He quickly approached Kripa and addressed him, as if penetrating the inner organs of your
son.61 ‘Abhimanyu, skilled in ﬁghting, can be seen in the battle. Subhadra’s youthful son has come here, ahead of
all the Parthas. He has caused delight to his well-wishers, all the kings, Yudhishthira, Nakula, Sahadeva, Pandava
Bhimasena, his relatives, his kin and all the other well-wishers who are neutral. I do not think there is any archer
who is equal to him in battle. If he so wishes, he can kill all these soldiers. But for some reason, he does not desire
that.’ On hearing Drona’s affectionate words, your son glanced smilingly at Drona. But he was enraged with Arjuna’s son.’
‘“Duryodhana spoke to Karna, Bahlika, Kripa, Duhshasana, the king of Madra and all the other maharathas.
‘The preceptor, knowledgeable about the brahman, is at the forefront of all of us. But because of affection and
delusion, he does not wish to slay Arjuna’s son. In a battle, no assailant can escape from him, even if it were to be
Death himself, not to speak of other mortals. I tell you this truthfully. He is protecting Arjuna’s son, as if he is his
own student. Sons, students and the sons of students are always loved by those who follow dharma. Protected by
Drona, he thinks himself to be brave. Though he is proud of himself, he is stupid. Let us swiftly crush him.’ Thus
addressed by the king, while Bharadvaja’s son looked on, they rushed against Satvati’s son.62 They were angry
and wished to kill him. On hearing Duryodhana’s words, Duhshasana, tiger among the Kuru lineage, replied to
Duryodhana in these words. ‘O great king! I tell you that I am going to kill him, while the sons of Pandu and the
Panchalas look on. I will devour Subhadra’s son, like Rahu grasping the sun.’63 He once again addressed the king
of the Kurus in these loud words. ‘There is no doubt that, on hearing that Subhadra’s son has been devoured by
me, the two Krishnas, who are extremely proud, will depart from the world of the living to the world of the dead.
On hearing that they have died, the sons who have been born in Pandu’s ﬁeld,64 together with all their well-wishers, will become impotent and will give up their lives on a single day. Therefore, if this one is killed, all your enemies, who wish you ill, will be destroyed. O king! Wish me well and I will slay this enemy of yours.’ O king! Having spoken these words, your son, Duhshasana, was enraged and roared. He enveloped Subhadra’s son with a
shower of arrows. Your son, the scorcher of enemies, descended on him. However, Abhimanyu pierced him with
twenty-six sharp arrows. Duhshasana became wrathful, like an elephant with shattered temples. He fought with
Abhimanyu, Subhadra’s son, in that battle. The chariots circled in wonderful ways, to the left and to the right.
Those two warriors, skilled in the art of ﬁghting with chariots, roamed around. Cymbals, drums, battle drums,
krikaras,65 tambourines, kettledrums and jharjharas66 were sounded. This loud noise mingled with the roar of the
men. It was like the roar of lions, mingling with din of the salty ocean.”’

CHAPTER 1016(39)

‘Sanjaya said, “The intelligent Abhimanyu’s body was mangled by the arrows. But he stationed himself before the
enemy and smilingly spoke these words to Duhshasana. ‘It is through good fortune that I behold this insolent enemy in the battle today. He is cruel and has abandoned dharma. He is addicted to praising himself. In King Dhritarashtra’s hearing and in the assembly hall, you angered Dharmaraja Yudhishthira through your harsh words. Intoxicated with victory,67 you addressed many maddening words towards Bhima. You stole the property of others.
You were enraged. You were not paciﬁed. You were avaricious. Your wisdom was destroyed. You were hateful and
you caused injury. You robbed my fathers, ﬁerce archers, of their kingdom. You acted in rage against those greatsouled ones. Because of all that, you are facing the consequences. O evil-minded one! You will reap the fruits of
terrible adharma. While all these soldiers look on, I will chastise you with my arrows today. Today, in the battle, I
will free myself of the debt of anger I bear towards you. Krishna is intolerant towards you and this is what my fathers also desire. O Kouravya! In the battle, I will free myself of the debt I owe to Bhima. If you do not give up the
battle, you will not escape with your life.’ Having spoken these words, the mighty armed one, the destroyer of enemy heroes, released an arrow towards Duhshasana. It was like death, like the ﬁre at the time of destruction and like
the wind in its energy. It swiftly approached and pierced him in his shoulder joint. He again pierced him with another twenty-ﬁve. O great king! Thus severely pierced and wounded, Duhshasana sat down on the ﬂoor of his
chariot. He was overcome by a great swoon. His charioteer quickly carried away the unconscious Duhshasana,
who was oppressed by the arrows of Subhadra’s son, from the midst of that battle. On witnessing this, the Pandavas, Droupadi’s sons, Virata, the Panchalas and the Kekayas roared like lions. The soldiers of the sons of Pandu
were delighted and in all directions, played on many different kinds of musical instruments. On witnessing the feat
accomplished by Subhadra’s son, they laughed.
‘“On seeing that the extremely hateful and insolent enemy had been vanquished, Droupadi’s maharatha sons,
who had images of Dharma, Marut, Shakra and the Ashvins on the tips of their standards,68 Satyaki, Chekitana,
Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, the Kekayas, Dhrishtaketu, the Matsyas, the Panchalas, the Srinjayas and the Pandavas, with Yudhishthira at the forefront, were ﬁlled with joy. Wishing to fragment Drona’s array, they attacked
together. An extremely great battle commenced between those on your side and the enemy. The brave ones were
unwilling to retreat and desired victory. O great king! While that extremely fearful battle raged, Duryodhana spoke
to Radheya. ‘Behold! Duhshasana has been conquered by the brave Abhimanyu. He69 is like the sun in his energy
and was slaughtering the warriors in battle. The Pandavas are advancing towards Subhadra’s son, with upraised
weapons.’ At this, Karna became enraged. Wishing to ensure the welfare of your son, he covered the unassailable
Abhimanyu with sharp arrows. In the ﬁeld of battle, he pierced his followers with sharp and supreme arrows and
was contemptuous of Subhadra’s brave son. O king! Abhimanyu swiftly pierced Radheya with seventy-three arrows that possessed iron heads. The great-minded one wished to confront Drona. In that battle, there was no one
who could repulse his advance towards Drona. He oppressed the best of the rathas, like the one with the vajra70 in
his hand against the asuras. Karna was revered by all those who wielded the bow and desired victory. He exhibited
his supreme weapons and pierced Subhadra’s son with hundreds of arrows. The powerful one was Rama’s71 disciple and was supreme among those who possessed knowledge of weapons. In that battle, he oppressed Abhimanyu,
whom enemies found invincible. He was afﬂicted by Radheya’s shower of weapons. But in that battle, Subhadra’s
son did not waver. He was like an immortal. Arjuna’s son used sharp, broad-headed and straight-tufted arrows that
had been sharpened on stone to sever the bows of the heroes and afﬂicted Karna. His standard and bow were severed and fell down on the ground. On seeing that Karna was confronting a hardship, Karna’s younger brother
stretched his ﬁrm bow and quickly advanced against Subhadra’s son. The Parthas, and those who followed them,
roared loudly. Satisﬁed with Subhadra’s son, they played on musical instruments.”’
CHAPTER 1017(40)

‘Sanjaya said, “He72 repeatedly stretched the bow that he held in his hand and roared. He quickly placed himself
between those two73 great-souled rathas. As if smiling, he quickly pierced the unassailable Abhimanyu, his um-

brella, his standard, his charioteer and his horses with ten arrows. Krishna’s son74 had performed superhuman
deeds, like his father and his grandfather. On seeing him afﬂicted by the arrows, those on your side were delighted.
Abhimanyu smiled at this. He stretched his bow and used a single arrow to sever his head,75 which fell down from
the chariot onto the ground. It was like a karnikara tree uprooted from a mountain by the wind. O king! On seeing
that his brother had been slain, Karna was overcome by grief. Having forced Karna to retreat, Subhadra’s son used
arrows tufted with heron feathers to quickly rout the other great archers. He shattered that net of elephants, horses,
chariots and infantry. The immensely illustrious Abhimanyu angrily routed them with his arrows. Karna was afﬂicted by Abhimanyu’s many arrows. He ﬂed on swift horses and the array was shattered. O king! Abhimanyu’s
arrows covered the sky, like locusts or like a shower, and nothing could be seen. The warriors on your side were
slaughtered by those sharp arrows. O king! But for the king of Sindhu,76 no one remained. Subhadra’s son, bull
among men, blew on his conch shell. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He swiftly descended on the army of the
Bharatas. He quickly consumed the enemy, like a kindled ﬁre on dry wood. Arjuna’s son circled around, in the
midst of the soldiers of the Bharatas. He used his sharp arrows to mangle the chariots, elephants, horses and men.
The earth became impassable, because it was strewn with large numbers of headless torsos. Supreme arrows were
released from the bow of Subhadra’s son. Wishing to save their lives, they77 ﬂed, killing those on their own side in
the process. There were broad and sharp vipatha arrows, terrible, and the performer of cruel deeds. They killed
charioteers, elephants and horses and swiftly covered the ground. Severed arms were seen in that battle. They held
weapons and were clad in ﬁnger guards. They held swords and were adorned with armlets. They were decorated in
golden ornaments. They held bows and arrows. There were bodies and heads with earrings and garlands. There
were thousands of these on the ground. It was impenetrable because of the decorations, seats, long poles, shattered
axles and yokes, fragmented wheels and many chariots. There were javelins, swords and other weapons. Giant
standards fell down. O lord of the earth! Kshatriyas, horses and elephants were slain. The earth became impassable
and soon assumed an extremely terrible form. The princes were slain and lamented loudly. A great sound arose and
it increased the fear of cowards. O best of the Bharata lineage! That sound ﬁlled all the directions. Subhadra’s son
attacked the soldiers and killed the horses, rathas and elephants. He roamed in all the directions and nothing could
be seen because of the dust that arose. Since they were enveloped in dust, we could not see the soldiers then. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He killed the elephants, horses and men. We saw him the next instant, like the
midday sun. O great king! Abhimanyu scorched the masses of the enemy. The son of Vasava’s son was like Vasava
in the battle. O great king! Abhimanyu roamed around in the midst of the soldiers.”’
CHAPTER 1018(41)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “He was a mere child, reared in great happiness. He was noble and proud because of his
strength. He was skilled in battle. He was brave. He was born in a noble lineage. He was ready to give up his own
life. He immersed himself in that army, borne by well-trained horses that were three years old. Was there any ratha
in Yudhishthira’s army who followed him?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, Shikhandi, Satyaki, the twins, Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, Drupada
and the Kekayas, Dhrishtaketu and the Matsyas angrily advanced in that battle. Those armed ones, arranged in battle formation, sought to protect him. On seeing those brave ones advance, all those on your side retreated. On seeing that the extremely large army of your son was retreating, your energetic son-in-law78 sought to restrain them.
O great king! Jayadratha, the son of the king of Sindhu, repulsed the Parthas, together with their soldiers, when
they sought to protect their son.79 That ﬁerce and great archer, the son of Vriddhakshatra, invoked his divine
weapons, like an elephant sporting on a sloping ground.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! I think that an extremely heavy burden was placed on Saindhava, since he had
to single-handedly repulse the enraged Pandavas who desired to protect their son. I think that Saindhava’s strength
and valour were extremely wonderful. Tell me about the valour and extreme deeds of the great-souled one. O suta!
What donations did he make? What oblations did he offer? What austerities did he torment himself with? How
could the king of Sindhu counter the enraged Parthas single-handed?”

‘Sanjaya replied, “At the time of Droupadi’s abduction, he was vanquished by Bhimasena.80 The king was tormented by his dishonour and desiring a boon, performed extremely great austerities. He withdrew his sensual organs from all objects that brought them pleasure. He bore hunger, thirst and heat and became so thin that he
seemed to be made out of veins. He chanted the name of the eternal brahman and worshipped the god Sharva.81
The illustrious one, compassionate towards devotees, became merciful towards him. In a dream, Hara revealed
himself to the son of the lord of Sindhu and said, ‘O Jayadratha! I am pleased with you. Ask for a boon. What do
you desire?’ Thus addressed by Sharva, Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, joined his hands in salutation, controlled
his soul, bowed in obeisance before Rudra and replied, ‘The Pandaveyas are terrible in battle because of their valour and prowess. I wish that I may alone be able to counter them in battle.’ O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
This is what he asked for. Thus addressed, the lord of the gods spoke to Jayadratha in these words. ‘O amiable one!
I will grant you the boon, but with the exception of Partha Dhananjaya. In a battle, you will be able to withstand
the other four sons of Pandu.’ The king agreed to these words of the lord of the gods and awoke from his sleep. It
is because of the boon that he obtained as a gift and because of the strength of his divine weapons, that he was able
to repulse the army of the Pandavas single-handed. The twang of his bowstring and the slap of his palms overwhelmed the enemy kshatriyas with fear and also caused supreme delight among your soldiers. O king! The kshatriyas82 saw that Saindhava took up the entire burden and roared and rushed to the spot where Yudhishthira’s army
was.”’
CHAPTER 1019(42)

‘Sanjaya said, “O Indra among kings! You have asked me about the valour of the king of Sindhu. I will tell you
everything, in detail, about how he fought with the sons of Pandu. Listen. There were well-trained horses from the
Sindhu region, controlled by the charioteer. They were large and as ﬂeet as the wind. These bore him. His chariot,
constructed in the appropriate way, was like a city of the gandharvas. It was radiant with a standard that bore the
mark of a large and silver-coloured boar. There was a white umbrella and pennants, with fans and whisks. These
were the marks of a king. And he was as resplendent as the lord of the stars83 in the ﬁrmament. The bumper on his
chariot was made out of iron and was decorated with pearls, diamonds, gems and gold. It was as dazzling as luminous bodies in the sky. He extended his great bow and released many arrows, ﬁlling up those parts that Arjuna’s
son shattered.84 He pierced Satyaki with three arrows and Vrikodara with eight, Dhrishtadyumna with sixty and
Virata with ten arrows, Drupada with ﬁve sharp arrows and Shikhandi with ten, the Kekayas with twenty-ﬁve and
Droupadi’s sons with three arrows each. He pierced Yudhishthira with seventy and mangled all others with a great
net of arrows. It was extraordinary.
‘“The powerful king, Dharma’s son, smiled. He ﬁxed a sharp and yellow broad-headed arrow and used this to
slice down his bow.85 But he took up another bow in the twinkling of an eye and pierced Partha86 with ten arrows, piercing the others with three each. On realizing his dexterity, Bhima again used three broad-headed arrows
and severed his bow, standard and umbrella, so that they were swiftly brought down on the ground. O venerable
one! The powerful one strung another bow and brought down Bhima’s standard, bow and horses. With his horses
slain and his bow severed, he descended from his chariot and climbed onto Satyaki’s chariot, like a lion jumping
onto the summit of a mountain. On witnessing this honourable and supreme deed on the part of the king of Sindhu,
those on your side were delighted and shouted repeatedly in appreciation. All the beings honoured this deed,
whereby he countered the enraged Pandavas alone, through the energy of his weapons. Subhadra’s son had created
a route earlier, by slaughtering many warriors and elephants. But Saindhava restrained the armoured Pandus from
that path. The brave Matsyas, Panchalas and Kekayas made every endeavour. So did the Pandavas. But they could
not withstand Saindhava. Everyone who tried to penetrate Drona’s array was checked by Saindhava, as a consequence of the boon that he had obtained from the god.”’
CHAPTER 1020(43)

‘Sanjaya said, “Desiring success, Saindhava checked the Pandus. There commenced an extremely terrible battle
between those on your side and the enemy. Arjuna’s son, invincible and unwavering in his aim, penetrated the sol-

diers and agitated them, like a makara in the ocean. The foremost among them, supreme among the Kurus, advanced duly against Subhadra’s son, the scorcher of enemies who was causing the agitation with his shower of arrows. That clash between him and them was extremely terrible and the inﬁnitely energetic ones created showers of
arrows. Arjuna’s son was obstructed in every direction by chariots of the enemy and killed Vrishasena’s charioteer
and severed his bow. The powerful one then pierced his horses with arrows and those horses, which were as swift
as the wind, bore his87 chariot away from the ﬁeld of battle. Using that opportunity, Abhimanyu’s charioteer freed
his chariot from that melee. On seeing the chariot emerge, there was delight and roars of applause. He88 was like a
lion and enraged, mangling the enemy with his arrows. Without any fear, Vasatiya swiftly advanced and attacked
him. He restrained Abhimanyu with sixty gold-tufted arrows and said, ‘As long as I am alive, you will not escape
from this battle with your life.’ He was clad in iron armour. But Subhadra’s son used a swift arrow to pierce him in
the heart. Losing his life, he fell down on the ground. On seeing that Vasatiya had been killed, the bulls among the
kshatriyas were enraged. O king! They surrounded your grandson, wishing to kill him. They stretched their many
different kinds of bows in many different kinds of ways. A terrible battle raged between Subhadra’s son and the
enemy. Phalguna’s son was wrathful. He sliced down their arrows and bows and the heads from the bodies, decorated with earrings and garlands. Severed arms were seen, decorated with golden ornaments. They held swords and
ﬁnger guards, lances and battleaxes. Garlands, ornaments, garments and giant standards fell down. There were armour and shields, necklaces, crowns, umbrellas and whisks. It became impassable because of decorations, seats
and poles. There were shattered and fragmented axles, wheels and yokes in thousands. There were anukarshas.89
And ﬂags, charioteers, horses, broken chariots and slain elephants, strewn all over the ground. Many brave kshatriyas, the lords of many countries, who had surrounded him with a desire for victory, were killed. They were
strewn on the ground and it looked terrible. The angry Abhimanyu was in the ﬁeld of battle, roaming in all the directions and sub-directions, and his form could not be seen. His golden armour and ornaments could alone be seen
and also his bow and arrows. No one was capable of glancing at him with his eyes. He killed the warriors with his
arrows and was stationed like the sun in their midst.”’
CHAPTER 1021(44)

‘Sanjaya said, “Arjuna’s son robbed the brave ones of their lives and was like Death robbing all beings of their
lives, when the time arrives. The powerful one was the son of Shakra’s son and was Shakra’s equal in valour. Agitating your army, Abhimanyu was seen to be extremely resplendent. O Indra among kings! That killer of the best
of kshatriyas was like Death when he penetrated. He descended on Satyashrava, like a tiger descending on deer.
When Satyashrava had been thus attacked, the other maharathas quickly grasped a large number of different
weapons and rushed against Abhimanyu. ‘I will be the ﬁrst. I will station myself in the forefront.’ Those bulls
among kshatriyas rivalled each other and spoke thus. They attacked Arjuna’s son together, wishing to kill him. On
seeing that army of kshatriyas advance against him, he received them, like a whale grasping small ﬁsh in the
ocean. Like rivers do not return once they head towards the ocean, not a single one who approached wished to run
away. That army was like a boat in the ocean, when it has been grasped by a mighty storm and is tossed around by
the force of the wind. It was oppressed by fear, trembled and was destroyed.
‘“The powerful Rukmaratha was the son of the lord of Madra.90 He wished to assure the frightened soldiers and
fearlessly spoke these words. ‘O brave ones! You should not be terriﬁed. As long as I am stationed here, he is nothing. There is no doubt that I will capture him alive.’ Having spoken thus, the valiant one advanced against Subhadra’s son. He was borne on a dazzling chariot that was constructed well and was well-stocked.91 He pierced Abhimanyu in the chest with three arrows and roared. He pierced him in the right arm with three and in the left with
three sharp arrows. However, Phalguna’s son severed his bow, and his left arm and his right. He swiftly severed his
head, with beautiful eyes and eyebrows, and made it fall down on the ground. Rukmaratha was Shalya’s revered
son. He had desired to capture alive, or destroy, Subhadra’s illustrious son. O king! On seeing him killed, the
friends of Shalya’s son, armed princes who were unassailable in battle and had standards decorated in gold, surrounded Arjuna’s son from every direction. The maharathas stretched bows that were as long as palm trees and
showered down arrows on him. Subhadra’s unvanquished son was brave and alone. In that battle, he was surround-

ed by these brave ones, who were skilled, powerful, youthful and extremely intolerant. They enveloped him with
their storm of arrows. On seeing this, Duryodhana was delighted and thought that he would go to Vaivasvata’s
abode.92 Those sons of kings used excellent gold-tufted arrows that were of many different kinds and forms and
Arjuna’s son disappeared in the twinkling of an eye. O venerable one! He, his charioteer, his horses, his standard
and his chariot were seen by us to be covered with arrows, like locusts. He was severely pierced and wounded and
became as angry as a goaded elephant. He afﬁxed the gandharva weapon and its powers of maya. After tormenting
himself with austerities, Arjuna had obtained it from gandharvas, Tumburu being the foremost. He93 confounded
them with this. O king! He was sometimes seen as one, or hundreds, or thousands. He was like a circle of ﬁre in
that battle, exhibiting the swiftness of his weapons. The scorcher of enemies confounded them with the skill with
which his chariot was driven and with the maya of his weapons. O king! He pierced the bodies of the kings in a
hundred places. O king! In that battle, his sharp arrows took out the breath of life away from living bodies and they
attained the other world, their bodies falling down on the ground. Phalguna’s son used his sharp and broad-headed
arrows to sever their bows, horses, charioteers, standards, arms decorated with bracelets and heads. They were like
ﬁve-year-old mango trees that were destroyed, though they were ready for yielding fruit. One hundred princes
were killed by Subhadra’s son. They were delicate and deserved happiness, but were slain by him alone, with angry and virulent serpents.94 On seeing this, Duryodhana was terriﬁed. Duryodhana saw that his chariots, elephants, horses and infantry were shattered and quickly rushed at him, in intolerance. The battle that commenced
lasted only for a short instant. Your son was oppressed by hundreds of arrows and retreated.”’
CHAPTER 1022(45)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O suta! You have told me about the battle between the one and the many. It was extremely
terrible and the great-souled one triumphed. The valour of Subhadra’s son was extraordinary and impossible to believe. But this wonderful deed is possible for those who resort to dharma. When the one hundred princes were
slain, Duryodhana retreated. What did those on my side do to counter the inﬂuence of Subhadra’s son?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “Their faces were dry and their eyes lolled out. They perspired and their body hair stood up.
They were interested in running away. They were no longer interested in defeating the enemy. They abandoned
their slain brothers, fathers, well-wishers, relatives and those with whom they had matrimonial alliances. They
swiftly urged their horses and elephants and ﬂed. On beholding that they were shattered, Drona, Drona’s son, Brihadbala, Kripa, Duryodhana, Karna, Kritavarma and Soubala angrily attacked Subhadra’s unvanquished son. O
king! Most of them were beaten back by your grandson. There was only one who had been reared in happiness. He
was a child, but proud and fearless. Lakshmana95 was extremely energetic and used his arrows and weapons to
attack Arjuna’s son. Out of anxiety and affection for the son, the father returned. Other maharathas also returned
and followed Duryodhana. They drenched him with a cloud of arrows, like clouds pouring down rain on a mountain. But he countered them single-handed, like a dry wind driving away the clouds. Your grandson Lakshmana
was invincible and handsome. The brave one was stationed near his father, the outstretched bow in his hand. He
had been reared in great happiness and was like a son of the lord of riches.96 Krishna’s son encountered him in
battle, like a crazy elephant clashing against another crazy elephant. Subhadra’s son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, approached Lakshmana and was pierced on his arms and his chest by extremely sharp arrows that were released from the bow.97 The mighty-armed one was enraged, like a serpent that has been struck with a staff. O
great king! Your grandson spoke to your grandson.98 ‘Glance well at this world. You will soon go to the other
world. In the sight of your relatives, I will convey you to Yama’s abode.’ Saying this, Subhadra’s mighty-armed
son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, used a broad-headed arrow. It looked like a snake that had just cast off its skin.
It was released from his arms and severed Lakshmana’s beautiful head, with an excellent nose, eyebrows and beautiful hair, and adorned with earrings. On seeing that Lakshmana had been slain, the people let out sounds of woe
and lamentation. When his beloved son was brought down, Duryodhana was enraged. The bull among the kshatriyas loudly urged the kshatriyas to kill him. Six rathas surrounded him—Drona, Kripa, Karna, Drona’s son, Brihadbala and Kritavarma, Hridika’s son. But Arjuna’s son pierced them with sharp arrows and drove them back.
Angrily and forcefully, he then descended on Saindhava’s large army. The armoured Kalingas, Nishadas, and

Kratha’s valiant son obstructed his path with an array of elephants. O lord of the earth! The engagement between
them was extremely ﬁerce. Arjuna’s son crushed that army of elephants, like a wind courses in every direction in
the sky and drives away hundreds of clouds. Kratha’s son enveloped Arjuna’s son with a storm of arrows. In addition, other rathas, with Drona at the forefront, also returned. They attacked Subhadra’s son, using supreme and other weapons. Arjuna’s son repulsed them with his arrows and swiftly afﬂicted Kratha’s son with a continuous ﬂood
of arrows, wishing to kill him. He brought down his bow, arrows, armlets, arms, diademed head, umbrella, standard, charioteer and horses. He99 was born in a noble lineage and possessed the strength of learning. He was the
performer of deeds and possessed the strength of weapons. When such a brave one was killed, most of the others
ﬂed from the ﬁeld of battle.”’
CHAPTER 1023(46)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “Subhadra’s unvanquished son was young. He performed deeds that beﬁtted his lineage. He
never ﬂed from the ﬁeld of battle. He was borne on three-year-old horses that were extremely strong and born from
good lineages. They seemed to glide along the sky. When he penetrated there, which brave ones countered him?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “Abhimanyu, the descendant of the Pandu lineage, penetrated your soldiers. He used his sharp
arrows and made all the kings retreat. At this, Drona, Kripa, Karna, Drona’s son, Brihadbala and Kritavarma,
Hridika’s son—these six rathas surrounded him. O great king! On seeing that Saindhava had assumed an extremely
heavy burden, your soldiers attacked Yudhishthira.100 There were those who stretched bows that were as long as
palm trees. They showered down many arrows on Subhadra’s brave son. But Subhdra’s son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, used arrows in that battle to counter all those great archers, who were skilled in all forms of learning.
He pierced Drona with ﬁfty arrows and Brihadbala with twenty, Kritavarma with eighty and Kripa with sixty arrows. Arjuna’s son stretched his bow up to his ears and used ten extremely forceful and gold-tufted arrows to
pierce Ashvatthama. In the midst of the enemy, Phalguna’s son used a yellow, sharp and tufted arrow to pierce
Karna in his ear. He brought down Kripa’s horses and the two charioteers who guarded his ﬂanks.101 He then
pierced him between the breasts with ten arrows. While your brave sons looked on, the powerful one then killed
the valiant Vrindaraka, the extender of the fame of the Kuru lineage.102 While he was thus fearlessly slaughtering
the foremost among the enemy, Drona’s son pierced him with twenty-ﬁve small arrows. O venerable one! However, while all the sons of Dhritarashtra looked on, Arjuna’s son swiftly pierced Ashvatthama back with sharp arrows. But Drona’s son pierced him with sixty extremely energetic arrows that were terrible, ﬁerce and sharp. However, though pierced, he was like Mount Mainaka and did not tremble. The immensely energetic and powerful one
pierced Drona’s son, who had caused him injury, with seventy-three gold-tufted and straight-ﬂying arrows. Wishing to protect his son, Drona pierced him with one hundred arrows. Desiring to protect his father in the battle, Ashvatthama pierced him with sixty arrows. Karna pierced him with twenty-two broad-headed arrows, Kritavarma
with fourteen, Brihadbala with ﬁfty and Sharadvata Kripa with ten. He pierced them back with ten arrows each.
Subhadra’s son mangled all of them with sharp arrows. The lord of Kosala103 pierced him in the chest with a
barbed arrow. But he104 brought his105 arrows, standard, bow and charioteer down on the ground. Bereft of his
chariot, the king of Kosala grasped a sword and a shield and wished to sever the head, decorated with earrings, of
Phalguna’s son from his body. But he pierced the lord of Kosala, Prince Brihadbala, in his heart with an arrow.
With his heart shattered, he fell down. At this, ten thousand great-souled kings ran away, shouting words of abuse,
though they wielded swords and bows.106 Having slain Brihadbala, Subhadra’s son roamed around in the ﬁeld of
battle. With a shower of arrows that were like rain, he paralysed the great archers and warriors on your side.”’
CHAPTER 1024(47)

‘Sanjaya said, “Phalguna’s son once again pierced Karna in the ear with a barbed arrow. Angering him even more,
he pierced him with ﬁfty arrows. Radheya pierced the great warrior back in turn. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Covered with arrows all over his limbs, he107 looked extremely radiant. Extremely enraged, he caused Karna to be covered in blood. Covered with arrows and streaming blood, the brave Karna was also resplendent. Both

of them were beautiful with arrows on their bodies, and blood ﬂowed from their wounds. Those great-souled ones
looked like ﬂowering kimshuka trees.108 Subhadra’s son destroyed six of Karna’s advisers, who were brave and
wonderful in the art of ﬁghting, together with their horses, charioteers, standards and chariots. Without showing
them any honour, he pierced all the other great archers back with ten arrows each and this was extraordinary. He
then slew and brought down Ashvaketu, the youthful son of the king of Magadha, with six arrows, together with
his horses and his charioteer. He used a kshurapra arrow to kill Martikavata of Bhoja, who bore the sign of an elephant on his standard. Having done this, he roared and released more arrows. Duhshasana’s son then pierced his
four horses with four arrows, his charioteer with one and Arjuna’s son himself with ten arrows. At this, Krishna’s
son pierced Duhshasana’s son with seven swift arrows. His eyes red with rage, he loudly spoke these words. ‘Like
a coward, your father has ﬂed from the ﬁeld of battle. It is your good fortune that you know how to ﬁght. But you
will not be able to escape today.’ Having spoken these words, he released an iron arrow that had been polished by
an artisan. But Drona’s son sliced this down with three arrows. Arjuna’s son severed his standard and struck
Shalya with three arrows. He pierced Shalya again with nine arrows that were tufted with the feathers of vultures.
Arjuna’s son severed his standard and killed the two charioteers who guarded his ﬂanks.109 He then pierced him
with six iron arrows and he110 climbed onto another chariot. He then killed ﬁve who were named Shatrunjaya,
Chandraketu, Mahavega, Suvarcha and Suryabhasa and pierced Soubala.
‘“Soubala pierced him back with three arrows and spoke to Duryodhana. ‘Let us unite and grind him down. Otherwise, he will kill all of us single-handed.’ Vrisha Vaikartana Karna then spoke to Drona.111 ‘Before he destroys
all of us, tell us how we can swiftly kill him.’ Drona, the great archer, told all of them, ‘Have you been able to detect any weakness in this young one? He is roaming around in all the directions. You had better search out your
forefathers now. Behold this son of Pandava. He is quick and is a lion among men. The path followed by his chariot and the circle of his bow can be seen. He afﬁxes and releases arrows extremely swiftly. His arrows confound me
and afﬂict my breath of life. But I am delighted with Subhadra’s son, the destroyer of enemy heroes. When Subhadra’s son roams around on the ﬁeld of battle, I am extremely gratiﬁed. The angry maharathas cannot detect a
weakness in him. He is dexterous in the use of his hands and releases great arrows in all the directions. In the battle, I do not see any difference between him and the wielder of Gandiva.112 At this, oppressed by the arrows of
Arjuna’s son, Karna again spoke to Drona. ‘I am oppressed by the extremely terrible and energetic arrows of the
young Abhimanyu. Nevertheless, I remain stationed here. His arrows are terrible and possess the energy of the ﬁre.
They are sapping my heart now.’ The preceptor smiled and spoke gently to Karna. ‘His armour is impenetrable. He
is young, swift and valiant. His father has been instructed by me on the art of donning armour. It is certain that this
destroyer of enemy cities knows everything about that.113 But with well-aimed arrows, you are capable of slicing
down his bow, his bowstring, the reins of his horses and the two charioteers who guard his ﬂanks.114 O great
archer! O Radheya! If you are capable, do this. Make him retreat and strike him subsequently. If he wields the bow,
the gods and the asuras are incapable of vanquishing him. If you so wish, deprive him of his chariot and his bow.’
Having heard the preceptor’s words, Vaikartana Karna used his arrows to swiftly slice down the bow of the lighthanded one. Bhoja115 killed his horses and Goutama116 the charioteers who guarded his ﬂanks. Once his bow had
been severed, the others enveloped him with a shower of arrows.
‘“At that time, when he was bereft of his chariot, the six maharathas117 quickly and ruthlessly showered him
with arrows, while the child fought single-handed. His bow had been severed and he was without a chariot. However, he was engaged in following his own dharma. The handsome one grasped a sword and a shield and leapt up
into the sky. Arjuna’s son displayed his dexterity and strength and roamed around in the sky, like a terrible king of
the birds. He showed kaishika and other motions.118 The great archers pierced him in the battle, searching for a
weakness, glancing upwards and wondering, ‘He might descend on me with the sword in his hand.’ Drona severed
the sword, decorated with a bejewelled handle, from his hand. Radheya used sharp arrows to cut down his supreme
shield. Deprived of his sword and shield, but still whole in his limbs, he again descended from the sky onto the
ground. He picked up a chariot wheel and angrily rushed at Drona. His limbs blazed because of the dust raised by
the wheels. He was radiant, with the chariot wheel raised high in his arms. In that battle, for a short while, Abhi-

manyu looked beautiful and seemed to replicate the deeds of Vasudeva.119 Blood ﬂowed from his body. His face
was red. His eyebrows were wrinkled and he roared like a lion. In the midst of the best of kings, he looked exceedingly ﬁerce.”’
CHAPTER 1025(48)

‘Sanjaya said, “He was the one who brought delight to Vishnu’s sister.120 He was adorned with Vishnu’s
weapon.121 In the battle, the atiratha122 looked as beautiful as Janardana. The tips of his hair waved around in the
wind. His supreme weapons were upraised. The lords of the earth looked at his body, though even the gods found
it difﬁcult to glance at it. They were extremely anxious because of the chariot wheel he held and sliced it down
into many fragments. Krishna’s maharatha son then grasped a gigantic club. His enemies had deprived him of his
bow and chariot, his sword and the chariot wheel. But with the club in his hand, Abhimanyu rushed against Ashvatthama. The upraised club was like a blazing thunderbolt. On beholding it, that bull among men123 alighted
from his chariot and took three steps backwards. Subhadra’s son used the club to slay his horses and the two charioteers who guarded his ﬂanks.124 With arrows on all his limbs, he looked like a porcupine. He125 then brought
down Kalakeya, Subala’s son, and killed seventy-seven of his followers from the land of Gandhara. He again
killed ten rathas from the Brahma-Vasatiyas, seven rathas from the Kekayas and ten elephants.
‘“He then advanced against the chariot of Duhshasana’s son and used the club to slay his horses. O venerable
one! At this, Duhshasana’s son was enraged and raised his club. Asking Subhadra’s son to wait, he attacked him.
Those two brave brothers wished to kill each other and raised their clubs against each other. They struck, like the
destroyer Tryambaka126 in earlier times. Having struck each other with the ends of their clubs, they both fell
down on the ground. In the midst of that battle, those two scorchers of enemies were like Indra’s standards that had
been uprooted. The ratha who was Duhshasana’s son, the extender of the deeds of the Kuru lineage, arose ﬁrst and
struck Subhadra’s son on the head with the club, as he was about to get up. Because of exhaustion and because of
the great force of the club, Subhadra’s son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, lost his senses and fell down on the
ground, unconscious.
‘“O king! Thus, in that battle, a single one was slain by many. He had agitated all the soldiers, like an elephant
among lotuses. The brave one was as resplendent as a wild elephant killed by hunters. The brave one fell down and
was surrounded by all those on your side. He looked like a ﬁre during the summer, paciﬁed by the onset of winter,
or like a storm that has subsided after destroying the tops of trees. After scorching the army of the Bharatas, he was
like a sun that has set, like the eclipsed moon, or the ocean with all its water dried up. His face was like the full
moon. His eyelashes were as dark as the wings of crows. On seeing him lying down on the ground, all the maharathas on your side were supremely delighted. They roared repeatedly, like lions. O lord of the earth! Those on
your side were overcome with great delight. But tears ﬂowed down from the eyes of those on the other side. O lord
of the earth! On seeing the brave one fallen down, like the moon dislodged from the ﬁrmament, beings were heard
to speak in the ﬁrmament. ‘With Drona and Karna at the forefront, this single one has been slain by six maharathas
from the side of the sons of Dhritarashtra. It is our view that this is not dharma.’ When that brave one was killed,
the earth looked extremely beautiful, like the full moon in the sky, with a garland of nakshatras.127 It was strewn
with gold-tufted arrows and covered with blood. There were the beautiful heads of brave ones, adorned with earrings. It was strewn with cushions, ﬂags, whisks, carpets, expensive and excellent garments, extremely dazzling
ornaments on chariots, horses, men and elephants, sharp and yellow swords that looked like serpents, bows, shattered arrows, lances, scimitars, javelins, kampanas and many other kinds of weapons. Strewn with these, it looked
extremely beautiful. There were dead and dying horses and their riders, covered with blood. They had been
brought down by Subhadra’s son and the earth was impassable. There were goads and the drivers of elephants,
with armour, weapons and standards. The elephants had been mangled and pierced by arrows and looked like
mountains. The earth was covered with these and horses, without their charioteers and warriors. Crushed by slain
elephants, the best of chariots looked like lakes. There were large numbers of slain infantry, adorned with weapons
and ornaments. The earth assumed a terrible form and generated terror among cowards. He was as resplendent as

the sun and the moon. On seeing him fallen down on the ground, those on your side were supremely delighted. The
Pandus were distressed. O king! Abhimanyu was still a child and had not yet attained youth. But he was killed.
‘“While Dharmaraja looked on, all the soldiers ﬂed.128 When Subhadra’s son was brought down, Ajatashatru
saw that his army had been shattered and spoke these words to the brave ones on his side. ‘The brave one did not
retreat and has gone to heaven. Do not be frightened and remain here. We will yet vanquish the enemy in battle.’ In
distress, the extremely energetic and extremely radiant one spoke these words. Dharmaraja was the foremost
among warriors and spoke thus, to alleviate their misery. ‘He killed many enemy princes in this battle, those who
were like venomous serpents. It was only after killing them in battle ﬁrst that Arjuna’s son gave up his life. He
killed ten thousand and the maharatha from Kosala.129 Krishna’s son was like Krishna and Arjuna and has certainly gone to Shakra’s abode. He killed thousands of rathas, horses, men and elephants. But he was still not content with what he had accomplished in battle. He is the performer of auspicious deeds. We should not grieve.’
‘“Having killed the best of their warriors and afﬂicted by arrows, we returned to your camp in the evening, covered with blood. We glanced at the enemy warriors as we slowly departed. O great king! We were overcome with
exhaustion and had lost our senses. That inauspicious time between day and night arrived. The inauspicious howls
of jackals could be heard. The sun was pale red, like the ﬁlaments of lotuses. It stretched itself on the mountain behind which it sets.130 It took away the radiance from our supreme swords, lances, scimitars, bumpers of chariots,
shields and ornaments. The earth and the sky could not be differentiated. The sun assumed its beloved form of the
ﬁre.131 There were many giant and immobile carcasses of elephants, like the summits of mountains that had been
shattered by the thunderbolt. Their standards and goads were strewn around and riders brought down, like cattle
without a cowherd. There were slain horses and shattered seats. Horses and charioteers were slain and ﬂags and
pennants brought down. O lord of men! The maharathas looked beautiful, deprived of their lives by the enemy.
There were masses of chariots and horses, with their slain riders, killed together and separately. Vessels and ornaments were strewn around. Tongues lolled out. Teeth jutted out. Entrails and eyes bulged out. The earth seemed to
be extremely terrible. There were men with expensive armour and ornaments and the best of weapons. They were
destroyed, together with their elephants, horses and chariots. Though they always deserved expensive beds and
covers, they were slain and lay down helpless on the ground. Dogs, jackals, crows, wild crows, birds,132 wolves,
hyenas, ravens, others who feed on blood, masses of rakshasas and large numbers of pishachas133 were extremely
delighted in that terrible ﬁeld of battle. They penetrated the skin and fed on the fat, blood and marrow, also eating
the ﬂesh. As they tore at the bodies and dragged them away in large numbers, they laughed and sang. A terrible
river of blood was created by the best of warriors. It was extremely fearful, like Vaitarani,134 and was difﬁcult to
traverse. The currents were blood that ﬂowed from the bodies. The chariots were like rafts and the elephants were
like rocks. The heads of men were the stones and the ﬂesh was the mud. It ﬂowed along, carrying many weapons
like garlands. That terrible river ﬂowed in the midst of that ﬁeld of battle, bearing those from the world of the living to the world of the dead. Large numbers of pishachas, horrible to look at, roared in terrible tones as they drank
and ate there. They roared loudly, causing terror among those who were still alive. Dogs, jackals and birds also fed
there. As night set in, the warriors glanced at that terrible sight, which was like the kingdom of the lord of the ancestors.135 The men glanced at that which arose with its terrible banks, and then slowly walked away. The maharatha, who was like Shakra himself, was brought down. He lay there, adorned in extremely expensive ornaments. The men saw that Abhimanyu had been killed in the battle, like a sacriﬁcial ﬁre on an altar, into which
oblations were no longer being offered.”’
CHAPTER 1026(49)

‘Sanjaya said, “When Subhadra’s brave son, the leader of rathas, was slain, all of them136 threw away their bows
and freed themselves from their armour and their chariots. They seated themselves around King Yudhishthira.
Their minds were on Subhadra’s deceased son and they reﬂected in misery. Since the maharatha Abhimanyu, his
brother’s brave son, had been killed, King Yudhishthira was extremely overcome by grief and lamented. ‘To ensure that which would bring me pleasure, he penetrated Drona’s array. He shattered and penetrated the vyuha, like

a lion in the midst of cattle. Brave and great archers from the other side encountered him in battle. They were
skilled in the use of weapons and unassailable in battle. Yet, they were shattered and forced to retreat. He clashed
against Duhshasana, our supreme enemy. But in the encounter, he used his arrows to swiftly render him unconscious and forced him to retreat. The brave one crossed the impassable great ocean that was Drona’s army. Having
encountered Duhshasana’s son, Krishna’s son departed for Vaivasvata’s137 eternal abode. When Subhadra’s son
has been killed, how will I cast my eyes on Kounteya Arjuna? How will I glance at the immensely fortunate Subhadra, without her beloved son? What meaningless, disjointed and incoherent words will I speak to Hrishikesha
and Dhananjaya? Addicted to my pleasure and desiring victory, I have performed this unpleasant deed for Subhadra, Keshava and Arjuna. An avaricious person does not understand his sins. Greed follows from delusion.
Those who desire honey do not see the fall that confronts them and I am like that. He should have been honoured
with food, vehicles, beds and ornaments. He was only a child. But we placed him at the forefront of the warriors.
He was a child. He was young. He was not skilled in battle. What good could come from placing him in danger?
He sacriﬁced himself like a well-trained horse. We will also lie down on the bare ground today, when we are
scorched by Bibhatsu’s blazing anger and the misery of his eyes. He is not greedy. He is intelligent. He is modest.
He is forgiving. He is handsome. He is powerful. He possesses a beautiful body. He is brave. He is affectionate. He
is devoted to the truth. Even the gods praise his terrible deeds. The valiant one slaughtered the nivatakavachas and
the kalakeyas, the ones who were the enemies of the great Indra and resided in Hiranyapura. He killed the Poulamas and their followers in the twinkling of an eye.138 The lord grants sanctuary even to enemies who seek refuge
with him. He is such a person. And today, we were incapable of protecting his son from danger. The extremely
powerful sons of Dhritarashtra have been overcome by a great fear now. Partha will be enraged at the slaughter of
his son and will destroy the Kouravas. The mean-minded one139 has mean-minded advisers. He will be distressed
at seeing that his own side is exterminated. Duryodhana will grieve and will no longer remain alive. I do not ﬁnd
victory pleasant, nor the kingdom, or immortality or residence in the world of the gods, when I see that the son of
the son of the supreme among the gods, with great valour and manliness, has been brought down.’”’
CHAPTER 1027(50)

‘Sanjaya said, “That terrible day, which had caused a destruction of beings, was over. The sun set and the beautiful
twilight presented itself. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Both sets of soldiers retired to their camps. Having
slaughtered the samshaptakas with his divine weapons, Jishnu, the one with the ape on his banner,140 left for his
camp, astride his victorious chariot. As he proceeded, he asked Govinda in a voice that was choked with tears. ‘O
Keshava! Why is my heart terriﬁed? Why are my words getting stuck? O Achyuta!141 Evil portents are agitating
me and my body is faltering. It is as if evil thoughts are overwhelming my heart. In every direction, the earth
seems to be ﬁerce and the omens are terrifying me. They are seen to be of many different forms and seem to foretell a disaster. I hope the king, my senior, and his advisers, are well.’ Vasudeva replied, ‘It is evident that all is well
with your brother and his advisers. Do not sorrow. There may have been some other evil somewhere else.’
‘“Those two brave ones performed their evening worship, mounted their chariot and proceeded. They spoke
about what had transpired during the day’s war, which had destroyed so many heroes. Having reached their own
camp, and after having performed extremely difﬁcult deeds, Vasudeva and Arjuna found it to be cheerless and full
of distress. Bibhatsu, the destroyer of enemy heroes, noticed that the camp was in a state of disarray. He told
Krishna with a disturbed heart, ‘O Janardana! The trumpets are not being blown with auspicious sounds. They do
not mingle with the sounds of beaten kettledrums, conch shells and drums. The veena142 is not being sounded,
with the sound of the slapping of palms. Auspicious songs are not being sung or recited. The bards are not chanting beautiful words of praise amidst our soldiers. On seeing me, the warriors are turning away and are lowering
their faces. As on earlier occasions, they are not telling me about the deeds that they have accomplished. O Madhava! I hope that everything has been well with my brothers today. On seeing that those on our side are distressed, I
can ﬁnd no peace of mind. O one who grants honours! O Achyuta! I hope all the warriors, together with the king
of Panchala and Virata, are ﬁne. Today, with his brothers, Subhadra’s son has not emerged to greet me happily,

with a smile on his face, now that I have returned from the battle.’ Having conversed in this way, the two of them
entered their own camp. They saw the distressed Pandavas there, bereft of their senses.
‘“On seeing his brothers and his sons,143 but on not seeing Subhadra’s son, the one with the ape on his banner
became cheerless and spoke these words. ‘I notice that all your faces are pale and unhappy. I do not see Abhimanyu. Nor has he come forward to greet me. I heard that Drona constructed a chakra vyuha today. With the exception of Subhadra’s son, not a single one amongst you knew how to penetrate it in the battle. However, I did not
teach him about emerging from the array. Did you ask the child to penetrate that enemy array? Did Subhadra’s son,
the great archer and destroyer of enemy heroes, penetrate that array and ﬁght with many among the enemy? Has he
been slain and brought down? His eyes were red. He was mighty-armed. He was born144 and was like a mountain
lion. He was the equal of Indra’s younger brother.145 Tell me. Has he been slain in the battle? He was delicate. He
was a great archer. He was the son of Vasava’s son. He was always my beloved. Tell me. Has he been slain in the
battle? He was the beloved of Varshneya.146 He was brave. He was always reared by me. He was always loved by
his mother. Urged by destiny, who could have killed him? He was the equal of the lion among the Vrishnis, the
great-souled Keshava. He was valiant, learned and great. Which warrior could have killed him? He was always
loved by Subhadra, Droupadi and Keshava. If I do not see my son, I will go to Yama’s abode. The tips of his hair
were delicate and curled. He was a child. His eyes were like that of a young deer. He was as valiant as a crazy elephant. He was as tall as a young shala tree. He smiled when he spoke. He was self-controlled. He was always obedient to the words of his seniors. Even though he was a child, his deeds were like those of one who wasn’t a child.
His words were pleasant and free of malice. He was great in his endeavour. He was mighty-armed. His eyes were
long, like the petals of lotuses. He was compassionate towards those who were devoted to him. He was self-controlled. He did not follow that which was inferior. He was grateful. He possessed learning. He was skilled in the
use of weapons. He did not retreat. He always rejoiced in battle and increased terror among the enemies. He was
engaged in bringing pleasure to those on his own side. He desired the victory of his fathers. He never struck ﬁrst in
an encounter, violating codes of honour. If I do not see that son, I will go to Yama’s abode. He possessed a beautiful forehead. The tips of his hair were excellent. His eyebrows, eyes, teeth and lips were beautiful. Without seeing
that face, how can there be peace in my heart? His words were pleasant and cheerful, like the melody of a male
cuckoo. Without hearing those words, how can there be peace in my heart? His beauty was unmatched and is extremely rare, even among the residents of heaven. Without seeing that brave one, how can there be peace in my
heart? He was skilled in showing honour. He was devoted to the words of his fathers. Without seeing him today,
how can there be peace in my heart? He was delicate. He was always brave. He deserved the most expensive of
beds. That supreme one among those who have protectors is lying down on the bare ground, as if he has no protector. Earlier, when he lay down, the best of women tended to him. With his limbs pierced and drained out, he is lying down today, tended to by inauspicious jackals. Earlier, he was awoken from his slumbers by the chants of
bards, minstrels and raconteurs. It is certain that he will be awoken today by the distorted tones of beasts of prey.
His beautiful face deserved to be covered by the shades of an umbrella. It is certain that it will be soiled today by
the dust that has arisen from the ﬁeld of battle. Alas, my son! I have never been satisﬁed from looking at my son. I
am unfortunate. Death has forcibly taken him away from me. Yama’s abode has always been attained by those with
virtuous deeds. It is certain that you have rendered that beautiful region even more beautiful because of your own
radiance today. It is certain that you are the beloved guest of Vaivasvata, Varuna, Shatakratu and the lord of riches
and that your valour has obtained honour from them.’147 He lamented thus, in many different ways, like a merchant whose ship has been sunk.
‘“Overcome with great misery, he then asked Yudhishthira. ‘O descendant of the Pandu lineage! Did he cause
great carnage among the enemy? Did that bull among men ascend to heaven after having fought well in the battle?
Did he kill many bulls among men who fought against him? He was without an aide. There is no doubt that he
thought of me when he sought help. When oppressed by arrows, my young son must have sought help from me. I
think he must have lamented in this way when he was cruelly slain by the many. But he was my son and that of
Madhava’s sister. He was born from Subhadra. Perhaps he could not have spoken in this way. It is certain that my
heart is extremely ﬁrm and is made out of the essence of the vajra. Despite not being able to see the red-eyed and

long-armed one, it is not shattered. How could those cruel and great archers shoot arrows at a child that penetrated
the inner organs? He was Vasudeva’s sister’s son and my son. How could they shoot arrows at him? With an unblemished soul, he always used to greet me when I returned. I have returned after killing the enemy. Why don’t I
see him today? It is certain that he has fallen down and is lying on the ground, covered in blood. He has made the
earth beautiful with his body, like a sun that has fallen down. On hearing that he has been slain in battle, Subhadra
will be miserable and will destroy herself. When she does not see Abhimanyu, what will she tell me? Overcome by
grief, what will Droupadi tell me? What will I tell them? There is no doubt that my heart is made out of the essence of the vajra. On seeing my daughter-in-law weep, oppressed by sorrow, it is not shattering into a thousand
fragments. I have heard the delighted sons of Dhritarashtra roar like lions. Krishna heard Yuyutsu censure those
brave ones in the following words. “O maharathas! Unable to withstand Bibhatsu, you have killed a child. O ones
who are against dharma! Why are you rejoicing? You will now witness Partha’s prowess. In the battle, you have
done what is disagreeable to Keshava and Arjuna. The time for sorrow has arrived, yet you are delightedly roaring
like lions. The time will swiftly arrive for you to reap the fruits of this evil deed. You have performed extremely
terrible adharma. How can you not reap the fruits soon?” Rebuking them in this way, the extremely intelligent son
of the vaishya148 cast his weapons away and departed, overcome by grief and anger. O Krishna! Why did you not
tell me about this while the battle was going on? I would then have slaughtered all those cruel maharathas.’ Vasudeva consoled the one who was overcome with grief on account of his son.
‘“He was full of terrible misery and Krishna spoke to him in these words. ‘Do not grieve. This is the path followed by all the brave ones who do not retreat, and in particular kshatriyas, whose livelihood comes from war.
This is the path for brave ones who ﬁght and do not retreat. This has been sanctioned by the sacred texts and is the
supreme goal for those who follow the objective. For brave ones who do not retreat, death is certain in battle.
There is no doubt that Abhimanyu has gone to the worlds meant for those with meritorious deeds. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! This is desired by all the brave ones. O one who shows honour! They wish to obtain death,
without retreating from battle. The brave one killed many immensely strong princes in the battle. Without retreating from battle, he obtained the death desired by valiant ones. O tiger among men! Do not sorrow. Earlier, those
who have laid down the eternal codes of dharma have decreed that death in battle is the dharma for kshatriyas. O
supreme among the Bharata lineage! All your brothers are distressed at seeing you immersed in grief, and so are
these kings and well-wishers. O one who shows honour! Comfort them with words of assurance. This should be
known and all this is known to you. You should not grieve.’ Having been thus consoled by Krishna, the performer
of extraordinary deeds, Partha spoke these words to all his brothers. His voice choked, Partha said, ‘O lord of the
earth!149 His arms were long. His eyes were as long as the petals of lotuses. I wish to hear the account of how Abhimanyu fought. You will see me slay my son’s enemies in the battle, with their elephants, chariots and horses,
with their followers and kin. All of you are skilled in weapons and you held weapons in your hands. How could
Subhadra’s son then have been slain, even if he had encountered the wielder of the vajra himself? Had I known
that the Pandus and the Panchalas were incapable of protecting my son in battle, I would have protected him myself. All of you were stationed on your chariots and were shooting arrows. How could the enemy repulse you and
kill Abhimanyu? You have no manliness. Nor do you possess any valour. While you looked on, Abhimanyu has
been brought down in the battle. Perhaps I should censure myself, since I know that all of you are extremely weak.
I went away, knowing that you are useless and cowards. Alas! Your armour, weapons and arms are only ornaments
on your hands. Your words are only meant for assemblies. You could not protect my son.’ Having spoken these
words, he sat down, with the supreme bow and sword in his hands. No one was capable of looking at Bibhatsu
then. He sighed repeatedly in anger and looked like the Destroyer himself. He was overcome with grief on account
of his son and his face was bathed in tears. With the exception of Vasudeva and the eldest son of Pandu, no one
amongst the well-wishers was capable of glancing at him, or speaking to him. Those two were always acceptable
to Arjuna and he listened to them. They were extremely revered and dearly loved and could speak to him at such
times. On account of his son, his mind was distressed and he was full of sorrow. The king spoke these words to the
enraged one, whose eyes were like the petals of lotuses.”’
CHAPTER 1028(51)

‘“Yudhishthira said, ‘O mighty-armed one! When you left to ﬁght with the army of the samshaptakas, the preceptor made efforts to capture me. But in every way, we succeeded in countering Drona’s battle formation. In the battle, we made efforts to arrange our army of chariots in a counter-formation. He was checked by the rathas and I
was protected. Wishing to kill us swiftly, he oppressed us with sharp arrows. Thus afﬂicted by Drona, we were incapable of glancing at Drona’s array and could not even think of penetrating it. All of us then spoke to Subhadra’s
son, who was your equal in valour. “O son! O lord! Penetrate the array.” Thus urged by us, the valiant one was like
a well-trained horse. He took that burden on himself, ignoring how difﬁcult it was to bear. He was valiant and he
was instructed by you in the use of weapons. Though a child, the powerful one penetrated, like Suparna entering
the ocean. In that battle, we followed Satvati’s brave son.150 We wished to penetrate the army through the path
that he had followed. O son!151 But because of a boon that he had obtained from Rudra, the vile Saindhava, King
Jayadratha, repulsed all of us. Then Drona, Kripa, Karna, Drona’s son, Brihadbala and Kritavarma—these six
rathas surrounded Subhadra’s son. All those warrior maharathas surrounded the child. Though he strove to his utmost, they were many and he was deprived of his chariot. When he had been deprived of his chariot, Duhshasana’s
son struck swiftly, though he had himself confronted great danger earlier. It was destiny that he152 met his end. He
slaughtered many thousands of the enemy earlier, elephants, horses, charioteers and riders, one hundred of the
foremost among princes and many other unnamed and brave ones. He dispatched King Brihadbala to the world of
heaven. Thus, through destiny, the supreme among those with dharma in their souls, attained his end. Everything
that extends our grief took place in this way. Thus it was that the tiger among men attained the world of heaven.’
‘Sanjaya said, “Arjuna heard the words that Dharmaraja had spoken. Lamenting, ‘Alas, son!’ he sighed in grief
and fell down on the ground in his sorrow. With distressed faces, everyone surrounded Dhananjaya. They were
overcome with misery and glanced at each other, without blinking their eyes. When he had recovered consciousness, Vasava’s son became unconscious with rage. He seemed to tremble, as if in a fever, and sighed repeatedly. He
squeezed one hand with another and sighed, eyes bathed in tears. His glances were like one who was mad. He
spoke these words. ‘Know this to be the truth. I will kill Jayadratha tomorrow. I will slay him, unless out of fear,
he abandons the sons of Dhritarashtra, or seeks refuge with us, or seeks sanctuary with Purushottama Krishna, or
with you. O great king! I will kill Jayadratha tomorrow. Engaged in doing what is pleasant to the sons of Dhritarashtra, he has forgotten his friendship with me. The evil one has been the reason behind the death of the child. I
will kill Jayadratha tomorrow. Wishing to protect him, whoever ﬁghts with me, even if it is the brave Drona or Kripa, will be covered by me with arrows. O bulls among men! O brave and revered ones! If I do not achieve this in
the battle, let me not attain the worlds meant for those with meritorious deeds. There are worlds meant for those
who kill their mothers and those who kill their fathers, for those who have intercourse with the wives of their
teachers and for those who are wicked, for those who hate virtuous ones and speak ill of others, for those who misappropriate wealth left in their custody and for those who violate trust and for those who speak ill of women they
have enjoyed earlier. There are worlds for those who kill brahmanas and those who kill cattle. There are worlds for
those who eat payasa,153 food made of barley, herbs, dishes made of sesamum, cakes and meat without offering
them to the gods ﬁrst. If I do not kill Jayadratha, let those worlds be mine. There are worlds for those who disrespect the best of brahmanas who are devoted to studying the Vedas, others who deserve honour, the aged, the virtuous and seniors. There are worlds attained by those who touch brahmanas, cattle and ﬁre with their feet and those
who release phlegm, excreta and urine in water. If I do not kill Jayadratha, let those terrible ends be mine. There
are ends obtained by those who bathe naked and those who do not serve guests. There are ends obtained by those
who take bribes, those who are liars and those who are deceitful, those who harm their own souls and those who
speak false praises. There are ends obtained by wretches who eat sweetmeats in the sight of servants, sons, wives
and dependents, without offering them a share. If I do not kill Jayadratha, let those terrible ends be mine. There are
ends obtained by those who abandon virtuous and obedient dependents and those evil-souled ones who censure
those who have done them good deeds. There are ends for those who do not give deserving neighbours shares in
shraddha154 offerings, for those who give to the undeserving, for those who have alliances with women of low
caste,155 for those who are drunkards, for those who disrespect those who deserve honour, those who are ungrateful and those who speak ill of their brothers. If I do not kill Jayadratha, let those ends swiftly be mine. I have re-

counted the ends of those who do not follow dharma and there are others that I have not enumerated. If tomorrow’s
night passes without my having killed Jayadratha, let those ends swiftly become mine. Listen to another pledge
that I am taking. If tomorrow’s sun sets without my having killed the wretched one, I will enter the blazing ﬁre at
this spot. O asuras! O gods! O men! O birds! O serpents! O ancestors! O those who wander in the night! O brahmanas! O mobile and immobile objects! O everyone else! You will be incapable of protecting my enemy. Even if
he descends to the ﬁerce nether regions, even if he goes to the city of the gods or the city of the daityas, I will
strike him with a hundred arrows in the morning. I will slice off the head of my son’s foe.’ Having spoken thus, he
stretched Gandiva with his left hand and his right. The sound of his touching the bow transcended his own words.
When Arjuna took the pledge, Janardana blew on Panchajanya.156 Enraged, Dhananjaya blew on Devadatta.157
Filled completely with the wind from Achyuta’s mouth, Panchajanya made a loud sound. The sound released from
it made the lords of the universe, the nether regions and the directions tremble, like that at the destruction of a
yuga. When the great-souled one had taken the oath, the sons of Pandu roared like lions. Musical instruments were
sounded in every direction.”’

Section Sixty-Eight
Pratijna Parva
This parva has 365 shlokas and nine chapters.
Chapter 1029(52): 33 shlokas
Chapter 1030(53): 56 shlokas
Chapter 1031(54): 26 shlokas
Chapter 1032(55): 40 shlokas
Chapter 1033(56): 41 shlokas
Chapter 1034(57): 81 shlokas
Chapter 1035(58): 33 shlokas
Chapter 1036(59): 21 shlokas
Chapter 1037(60): 34 shlokas
The word pratijna means vow or promise and this section is named after Arjuna’s vow to kill Jayadratha. There is no ﬁghting in this section,
the events transpiring between the night of the thirteenth day and the morning of the fourteenth. Arjuna obtains the pashupata weapon from
Shiva.
CHAPTER 1029(52)

‘Sanjaya said, “The spies heard the loud noise the Pandus created on account of their son and reported it.
Jayadratha arose. His heart was senseless with grief and he was oppressed by great misery. It seemed as if he was
immersed in a giant and fathomless ocean of sorrow. Having thought a lot, Saindhava went to the assembly of
kings and lamented in front of all those kings. He was frightened of Abhimanyu’s father and was ashamed. He
spoke these words. ‘He was born in Pandu’s ﬁeld when Shakra was full of desire.1 That evil-minded one wishes to
send me to Yama’s eternal abode. May all of you be fortunate. In an attempt to remain alive, I will now go back to
my own house. O bulls among kshatriyas! Alternatively, resort to your strength to save me. Partha wishes to send
me to the end meant for heroes. Grant me safety from that. Drona, Duryodhana, Kripa, Karna, the lord of Madra,
Bahlika, Duhshasana and the others are capable of saving a person who is afﬂicted by Yama, not to speak of Phalguna alone desiring to injure my limbs. Why should all you assembled lords of the earth not be able to save me?
Having heard the delighted sounds of the Pandaveyas, my fear is great. O lords of the earth! My limbs are overcome by lassitude, like one who is about to die. There is no doubt that the wielder of Gandiva has sworn my death.
That is the reason the Pandavas are roaring in delight, though it is a time for them to sorrow. Even the gods, the
gandharvas, the asuras, the serpents and the rakshasas are incapable of countering him, not to speak of lords of
men. O fortunate ones! O bulls among men! Therefore, give me permission to depart. I wish to disappear, so that
Pandava cannot see me.’ Thus did he lament, his senses overcome by fear and anxiety.
‘“King Duryodhana regarded his own task as superior to everything else and spoke these words. ‘O tiger among
men! Do not be frightened. O bull among men! When you are stationed in the midst of all these brave kshatriyas,
who is going to seek an engagement with you in battle? Other than me, there are Vaikartana Karna, Chitrasena,
Vivimshati, Bhurishrava, Shala, Shalya, the unassailable Vrishasena, Purumitra, Jaya, Bhaja, Sudakshina from
Kamboja, Satyavrata, the mighty-armed Vikarna, Durmukha, Duhshasana, Subahu, the lord of Kalinga with upraised weapons, Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti, Drona, Drona’s son and Soubala. O immensely radiant one!
You are yourself brave and the foremost among rathas. O Saindhava! How can you see any fear emanating from
the Pandaveyas? Eleven of my akshouhinis2 will be engaged in protecting you and will make endeavours to ﬁght.
O Saindhava! Therefore, do not be scared and banish this fear.’ O king! Having been thus assured by your son,
Saindhava, accompanied by Duryodhana, went to Drona that very night. O lord of the earth! He touched Drona’s
feet, showed obeisance and sat down. He then asked him the following. ‘O illustrious one! In taking aim, striking

from a distance, dexterity and ﬁrmness in striking, tell me the difference between me and Phalguna. O preceptor! I
wish to know the exact difference in learning between me and Arjuna. O lord! Tell me truly and accurately.’
‘“Drona replied, ‘O son!3 You and Arjuna are equal in what you have learned from your teachers. But because
of yoga and because of the miseries he has faced, Arjuna is superior to you. In the battle, you should never be terriﬁed on Partha’s account. O son! You will be protected by me from fear. There is no doubt about that. Even the immortals have no inﬂuence over someone who is protected by my arms. I will create a vyuha and Partha will not be
able to cross that vyuha. Therefore, follow your own dharma and ﬁght without any fear. O lord of men! Follow the
path traversed by your fathers and grandfathers. You have studied the Vedas, as is prescribed. You have offered excellent oblations into the ﬁre. You have observed many rites and sacriﬁces. You should not be frightened because
of death. It is4 an extremely rare end and cannot be attained by wicked men. It is obtained by those who are immensely fortunate. Through the valour of one’s arms, one can win the celestial and supreme worlds. The Kurus,
the Pandavas, the Vrishnis, other men, my son and I are all transient. Think of that. In due order and in due course,
all of us will be slain by powerful time. We will go to the other world, carrying our respective deeds with us. Ascetics obtain worlds after tormenting themselves with austerities. Brave kshatriyas who follow the dharma of kshatriyas also attain those.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “O king! Having been thus assured by Bharadvaja’s son, Saindhava dismissed all fears of Partha
from his heart and set his mind on the battle.”’
CHAPTER 1030(53)

‘Sanjaya said, “When Partha vowed to kill the king of Sindhu, the mighty-armed Vasudeva spoke to Dhananjaya.
‘You consulted your brothers and took the words of the pledge.5 “I will slay Saindhava.” You performed an extremely rash act. Without consulting me, you have taken up an extremely heavy burden. How can we now avoid
the ridicule of all the worlds? Spies have been sent by me to the camp of the sons of Dhritarashtra. They returned
swiftly and conveyed this information to me. After you took a pledge to kill the king of Sindhu, the sons of Dhritarashtra and Saindhava were frightened at the sounds they heard. They heard roars like lions, mingled with the
great sound of musical instruments. They thought that these roars like lions must have a reason and waited. O
mighty-armed one! A great sound arose among the Kouravas, among their elephants, horses and infantry and there
was the roar of chariot wheels. “Having heard of Abhimanyu’s death, it is certain that Dhananjaya will be enraged
and will emerge in the night.”6 This was their view and they waited. O one who is devoted to the truth! O one with
eyes like lotuses! While they prepared, they heard the truth about the pledge you had taken for the death of the
king of Sindhu. All of them, Suyodhana’s advisers and King Jayadratha, were distressed and frightened, like small
deer. The lord of Sindhu and Souvira was extremely frightened.7 He arose, and with his advisers, entered his own
camp. At the appropriate time for consultation, they consulted each other about the best course of action. He then
went to the assembly of the kings and spoke these words to Suyodhana. “Dhananjaya thinks that I am the one who
has caused the death of his son. Therefore, in the midst of the soldiers, he has promised to kill me tomorrow. When
Savyasachi takes a vow, the gods, the gandharvas, the asuras, the serpents and the rakshasas are incapable of countering it. Therefore, all of you should protect me in the battle and not allow Dhananjaya to place his foot on your
heads and thereby accomplish his objective. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Therefore, make arrangements to
protect me in the battle. O king! Otherwise, grant me permission so that I can return home.” Having been thus addressed, Suyodhana was miserable and hung down his head. On hearing this and learning about the great fear, he
silently began to think.
‘“‘On seeing that the king was distressed, Saindhava gently spoke these words, with an eye on his own self-interest and on what would be good for him. “I do not see a brave archer here who is capable of countering Arjuna’s
weapons with his own weapons in the great battle. He wields the bow Gandiva and Vasudeva is his aide. Who can
stand in front of Arjuna, even if it were to be Shatakratu himself? It has been heard that Partha, on foot, fought
with the immensely energetic lord Maheshvara earlier, in the Himalaya mountains.8 Urged by the king of the gods,
on a single chariot, he killed a thousand danavas who resided in Hiranyapura. Kounteya is now united with the intelligent Vasudeva. It is my view that he is capable of destroying the three worlds, together with the immortals. I

desire that you should give me permission to leave. Alternatively, if you so wish, the great-souled Drona and his
brave son should protect me.” O Arjuna! Thus addressed by the one who was terribly afﬂicted, the king himself
spoke to the preceptor. “All the arrangements have been made and the chariots have been arrayed. Karna, Bhurishrava, Drona’s son, the invincible Vrishasena, Kripa and the king of Madra—these six will be at the forefront.
Drona will construct a vyuha at the rear. Half of this will be in the form of a cart9 and half in the form of a lotus.
There will be an array in the form of a needle in the midst of the pericarp of the lotus. Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu who is unassailable in battle, will be stationed there, protected by brave ones.” O Partha! There is no doubt that
those six rathas are impossible to withstand, in use of the bow, in weapons, in valour, in strength and in lineage.
Without vanquishing them and their followers, one cannot reach Jayadratha. Think of the valour of each of those
six, not to speak of them united together. O tiger among men! They cannot be defeated easily. We should think
again about the best course of action for our welfare. We should consult with our advisers and well-wishers and
then determine a successful course of action.’
‘“Arjuna replied, ‘You think that those six rathas on the side of the sons of Dhritarashtra are superior to me in
strength. But it is seen that their valour is equal to half of my own. O Madhusudana! I will sever all their weapons
with my weapons. Desiring to kill Jayadratha, you will see me shatter them. In the sight of Drona and his lamenting followers, I will bring down the head of the king of Sindhu on the ground. O Madhusudana! This will be the
case even if the Sadhyas, the Rudras, Vasus, the Ashvins, the Maruts with Indra, the Vishvadevas, the asuras, the
ancestors, the gandharvas, the suparnas,10 the oceans, the mountains, the ﬁrmament, heaven, earth, the directions,
the lords of the directions, the villages, the forests and all mobile and immobile beings seek to protect the king of
Sindhu. Even then, in the battle tomorrow, you will see him slain by my arrows. O Krishna! I swear this truthfully,
as I touch my weapons.11 Drona, the great archer, is the protector of that wicked and evil-minded one. O Keshava!
I will engage him ﬁrst. Suyodhana thinks that this gambling match is based on him.12 Therefore, I will shatter him
at the forefront of the army and then assail Saindhava. Tomorrow, you will see that great archer pierced by my
ﬁerce, energetic and iron arrows in battle, like the summit of a mountain shattered by a thunderbolt. Blood will
ﬂow from the bodies of men, elephants and horses. They will be brought down by sharp arrows that descend on
them. The arrows released from Gandiva will be as swift as thought or the wind. They will rob the breath of life
from the bodies of thousands of men, elephants and horses. In the battle, men will behold terrible weapons descend, those that have been obtained by me from Yama, Kubera, Varuna, Rudra and Indra. All those who wish to
protect Saindhava will see their weapons routed in the battle by my brahmana astra.13 O Keshava! In the battle
tomorrow, you will see the earth strewn with the heads of kings, severed by forceful arrows that I release. I will
gratify carnivorous beasts and drive away the enemy. I will delight my well-wishers and bring down Saindhava.
He has performed great misdeeds. He has been a bad ally.14 He has been born in an evil land. Having been killed
by me, King Saindhava will cause sorrow among those on his own side. Saindhava has enjoyed the best of milk
mixed with rice. But he has been evil in conduct. In the forefront of the battle, you will see him destroyed with my
radiant arrows. O Krishna! In the morning, I will accomplish that which will make Suyodhana think that there is
no archer in this world who is equal to me in battle. O bull among men! Gandiva is a divine bow and I am the warrior. O Hrishikesha! You are the charioteer. Who is incapable of being vanquished by me? Lakshmi is always
present in the moon and water is always present in the ocean. O Janardana! Like that, know that my pledge is always true. Do not disrespect my weapons. Do not disrespect my ﬁrm bow. Do not disrespect my strength. Do not
disrespect Dhananjaya’s strength of arms. I will go to battle so that I am victorious and am not defeated. Know that
because of my pledge, Jayadratha has already been slain in battle. It is certain that the brahman is truth. It is certain
that there is humility in the virtuous. It is certain that there is prosperity in the wise. It is certain that there is victory
in Narayana.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “Having spoken these words to Hrishikesha and having addressed them to his own self too, Vasava’s son once again addressed the lord Keshava in a sonorous tone. ‘When night is over and it is morning, please
arrange for my chariot to be prepared. O Krishna! That is your task. The task that has to be undertaken is a grave
one.’”’

CHAPTER 1031(54)

‘Sanjaya said, “Both Vasudeva and Dhananjaya spent the night immersed in grief and sighed like serpents. They
could not sleep, even for an instant. Knowing that Nara and Narayana15 were enraged, the gods, together with
Vasava, were distressed. They began to reﬂect about what would transpire. Extremely terrible and harsh winds began to blow, portending of fearful calamities. A headless torso and a club could be seen on the disc of the sun.
Though there were no clouds in the sky, there were thunderstorms, tinged with lightning. The earth, with all its
mountains and forests, began to tremble. O great king! The ocean, the habitation of makaras, was turbulent. Rivers
ﬂowed in an opposite direction, rather than towards the ocean. The lower and upper lips of rathas, horses, men and
elephants trembled. Predatory beasts seemed to be delighted, since Yama’s kingdom would be extended. Mounts
wept and released excrement and urine. All these omens were terrible and made the body hair stand up. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! On beholding these, all the soldiers on your side were distressed. They heard about the
ﬁerce vow that the extremely strong Savyasachi had taken.
‘“The mighty-armed son of the chastiser of Paka16 spoke to Krishna. ‘Comfort your sister, Subhadra, together
with her daughter-in-law.17 O Madhava! Dispel the sorrow from the daughter-in-law and the mother-in-law. O
lord! Comfort them with truthful words and assure them with what you say.’ Thus addressed, with a distressed
mind, Vasudeva went to Arjuna’s house. He comforted his distressed sister, who was overcome with grief on account of her son. ‘O one born in the Varshneya lineage! Do not grieve, together with your daughter-in-law, for the
sake of your son. O timid one! All beings have an end that is determined by destiny. This is especially true of kshatriyas who are born in brave lineages. Your son has attained a death like that. Do not sorrow. This was good fortune for the brave maharatha who was like his father in valour. He has attained the objective decreed for kshatriyas, one that brave ones desire. He has conquered many enemies and sent them to their death. He has gone to the
eternal worlds that satisfy all desire, those obtained by those with meritorious deeds. These are obtained by those
with austerities, brahmacharya, learning and wisdom. The virtuous go there and your son has obtained them. You
are the mother of a hero. You are the wife of a hero. Your father-in-law is a hero and so are your kin. O fortunate
one! Do not grieve over a son who has attained the supreme objective. The inferior Saindhava, the slayer of a
child, together with his well-wishers, followers and relatives, will reap the fruits of his insolent deeds. O one with
the beautiful hips! As soon as night has passed, he will suffer for his wicked acts. Even if he goes to Amaravati,18
he will not be able to escape from Partha. Tomorrow, you will hear that Saindhava’s head has been severed in the
battle, in the vicinity of Samantapanchaka.19 Dispel your sorrow and do not weep. Having placed the dharma of
kshatriyas at the forefront, the brave one has attained the virtuous end. We, all the others whose livelihood is based
on arms, will also attain that. He was broad in his chest. He possessed mighty arms. He did not retreat from battle.
He killed the best. O one with the beautiful hips! Your son has gone to heaven. Overcome your fever. The valiant
one obeyed his fathers and those on his mother’s side. Having killed a thousand enemies, the brave maharatha has
been slain. O queen! O kshatriya lady! Comfort your daughter-in-law and do not sorrow grievously. O one who
brings delight!20 You will hear extremely pleasant news tomorrow. Be free from sorrow. Partha accomplishes
whatever he pledges. It cannot be otherwise. Whatever your husband wishes is never unsuccessful. Even if men,
serpents, pishachas, wanderers of the night, birds, gods and asuras come to the aid of the king of Sindhu in the battle in the morning, he will no longer exist.’”’
CHAPTER 1032(55)

‘Sanjaya said, “On hearing these words of the great-souled Keshava, Subhadra was extremely miserable and
lamented, because of grief over her son. ‘Alas, my son! I am unfortunate! You were equal to your father in valour.
O son! Having gone forth to ﬁght, how could you have been slain? Your face was as dark as a blue lotus.21 It possessed beautiful teeth and beautiful eyes. O son! It is now seen to be covered with the dust raised by battle. You
were brave and did not retreat from battle. You possessed an excellent head, neck and arms. Your chest was broad.
Your stomach was ﬂat. All your limbs were decorated with ornaments. You possessed excellent eyes. You are now
mangled with wounds from weapons. On seeing you fall, there is no doubt that all the beings are glancing at you,
as if at a rising moon. Earlier, your bed used to be covered with white and expensive sheets. You were used to hap-

piness. Pierced by arrows, how can you sleep on the bare ground now? The brave and mighty-armed one used to
be served by supreme women earlier. How can he now have been brought down on the ﬁeld of battle, served by
jackals? Earlier, you used to be delighted by bards, raconteurs and minstrels. You are now served by masses of carnivorous and ﬁerce creatures that are howling. O lord! You had the Pandavas and the brave Vrishnis as your protectors. There were also the brave Panchalas. How could you have been slain, like one without a protector? O son!
O unblemished one! I have not been satisﬁed from looking at you. I am wretched. It is evident that I will have to
go to Yama’s eternal abode now. You possessed large eyes. The tips of your hair were excellent. Your words were
pleasant and fragrant. Your face was without any blemishes. O son! When will I see it again? Shame on Bhimasena. Shame on Partha, supreme among archers. Shame on the valour of the brave Vrishnis. Shame on the strength of
the Panchalas. Shame on the Kekayas, the Chedis, the Matsyas and the Srinjayas. When you went to ﬁght, they did
not know how to prevent the fall of the brave one. Today, I see the earth to be empty, bereft of its beauty. Without
being able to see Abhimanyu, my eyes are full of sorrow. You were the son of Vasudeva’s sister and that of the
wielder of Gandiva. O brave one! How can I see you bereft of your chariot, and brought down by others? Alas,
brave one! You are like riches seen in a dream, which have been destroyed now. Man is transient, as temporary as
a bubble in water. This is your young wife. She is overcome with grief on your account. How will I comfort her? I
am myself like a cow that has lost her calf. O son! You have left me at a wrong time, when you were about to accomplish great things. You have departed without reaping the fruits. I am yearning to see you. There is no doubt
that the ways of destiny are extremely difﬁcult to fathom, even by those who are wise. You had Keshava as your
protector. But in the battle, you were like one without a protector. There are those who perform sacriﬁces, donate
and are of good conduct. There are brahmanas who control their souls. There are those who follow brahmacharya
and bathe in sacred places of pilgrimage. There are those who are grateful and generous. There are those who serve
their preceptors. There are those who give a thousand dakshinas. All these attain their ends. These ends are obtained by brave ones who ﬁght without retreating. These ends are obtained by brave ones who are slain on the ﬁeld
of battle. May you attain those ends. There are ends obtained by those who donate a thousand cows or perform
sacriﬁces with donations. There are ends for those who give away acceptable houses as gifts. May those ends be
yours. Sages, rigid in their vows, attain ends through brahmacharya. There are ends for women with a single husband. O son! Go to those ends. Kings with good conduct attain eternal ends and those who purify and protect
themselves and follow the four sacred ashramas in due order.22 There are those who are always compassionate
towards the miserable and divide everything equally.23 They refrain from wicked tendencies. O son! May you attain those ends. There are those who follow good conduct and observe dharma. There are those who serve their seniors and do not leave their guests dissatisﬁed. O son! May you go to those ends. Intelligent ones have intercourse
with their own wives at the right season. They do not serve the wives of others. O son! May you go to those ends.
There are those who look on all beings peacefully. They are devoid of malice and attain ends. There are those who
do not cause injury and forgive. They attain ends. There are those who abstain from liquor, meat, vanity and falsehood and those who do not cause pain to others. O son! May you attain those ends. There are those who are modest and learned in all the sacred texts. They are satisﬁed and have controlled their senses. There are ends obtained
by those who are righteous. O son! May you attain those ends.’ Distressed and overcome by sorrow, Subhadra
lamented in this way.
‘“At this time, Panchali and Virata’s daughter arrived there.24 They wept a lot and lamented in great misery. O
king! They were mad with grief and fell down on the ground, bereft of their senses. Krishna was himself extremely
miserable. But he sprinkled water on them and spoke these beneﬁcial words, when they had regained their senses,
but were still lamenting and weeping. Pundarikaksha25 spoke these words to his sister. ‘O Subhadra! Do not sorrow. O Panchali! Comfort Uttara. Abhimanyu, bull among the kshatriyas, has attained an objective that is extremely desired. O ones with beautiful faces! Let other virtuous ones from our lineage also attain that. All of us will go
to the end that the illustrious Abhimanyu has achieved. All of us, with all our well-wishers, wish to accomplish the
kind of deed that he has achieved. Your son, the maharatha, has accomplished this alone.’ Having comforted his
sister, Droupadi and Uttara in this way, the mighty-armed scorcher of enemies returned to Partha’s side. O king!

Krishna and the lord26 took the permission of the kings and the relatives and retired to their inner quarters. The
others also went to their own abodes.”’
CHAPTER 1033(56)

‘Sanjaya said, “The lord Pundarikaksha entered Arjuna’s unmatched abode. He touched water and spread out an
excellent bed on the plain and auspicious ﬂoor. It was made out of darbha grass, with the complexion of lapis
lazuli. He duly adorned it with garlands, parched grain, fragrances and auspicious objects and surrounded the bed
with supreme weapons. Partha also touched water. Humble servants produced sacriﬁces27 offered every night to
Tryambaka.28 Partha delightedly adorned Madhava with fragrances and garlands and tendered the nightly offerings.29 Govinda smiled and spoke to Phalguna. ‘O Partha! O fortunate one! Lie down. For the sake of your welfare, I will leave.’ He placed gatekeepers there and other well-armed men for the sake of protection. With
Daruka30 following him, the handsome one then went to his own camp. He laid himself down on his white bed
and thought about the many things that needed to be done.
‘“No one in the Pandava camp slept during that night. O lord of the earth! Everyone was awake. ‘Because he
was overcome by sorrow on account of his son, the great-souled wielder of Gandiva has suddenly taken an oath to
slay the king of Sindhu. How will Vasava’s mighty-armed son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, make his pledge
successful? The pledge that the great-souled Pandava has taken is an extremely difﬁcult one. He has taken this
great vow because he was tormented by sorrow over his son. His31 brothers are valiant and his forces are numerous. All of Dhritarashtra’s sons will serve his32 cause. May Dhananjaya return, after having killed Saindhava in
battle. Let Arjuna accomplish his pledge and vanquish masses of the enemy. If he does not kill the king of Sindhu,
he will enter the ﬁre. Partha Dhananjaya will never do something that is false. If Arjuna is dead, what will be the
state of the king who is Dharma’s son? All his hopes of victory are based on Pandava.33 If we have performed any
good deeds, if we have offered donations and oblations, because of all those great fruits, let Savyasachi be triumphant.’ O lord! Thus did they converse, desiring victory. O king! That great and difﬁcult night began to pass.
‘“When it was the middle of the night, Janardana woke up. He remembered Partha’s oath and spoke to Daruka.
‘Because he was oppressed at the death of a relative, Arjuna has taken an oath. O Daruka! He has said that he will
kill Jayadratha before tomorrow is over. Having heard this, Duryodhana will consult his advisers, so that Partha
cannot kill Jayadratha in the battle. Several of his akshouhinis will protect Jayadratha. Drona and his son are
skilled in the use of all weapons. If someone is protected by Drona, not even the brave thousand-eyed one,34 the
oppressor of daityas and danavas, ventures to kill him. Tomorrow, I will act so that Arjuna, Kunti’s son, can kill
Jayadratha before the sun has set. My wives, my friends, my relatives and my kin are not dearer to me than Arjuna,
Kunti’s son, is. O Daruka! Bereft of Arjuna, I will not be able to look at the world even for an instant. Therefore, it
shall not be that way.35 For Arjuna’s sake, I will slay the standard-bearers of the enemy, with their horses, chariots
and elephants, with Karna and Suyodhana. In the great battle tomorrow, let the three worlds witness my valour. O
Daruka! For Dhananjaya’s sake, I will show my valour in the battle. O Daruka! Tomorrow, I will rout thousands of
kings and hundreds of princes, with their horses, elephants and chariots. Tomorrow, you will witness the army of
kings shattered by my chakra. For the sake of Pandava, I will angrily bring them down in the battle. Tomorrow, the
gods, the gandharvas, the pishachas, the serpents, the rakshasas and all the worlds will know me as Savyasachi’s
well-wisher. He who hates him, hates me too. He who follows him, follows me too. Use your intelligence to comprehend that Arjuna is half of my body. When night is over and morning has dawned, prepare and yoke my
supreme chariot according to the rites decreed in the sacred texts. O suta! Place the divine club Koumodaki,36
lances, the chakra, bow and arrows. Stock the chariot with all implements. Make room on the ﬂoor of the chariot
for the standard and for Vinata’s brave son,37 the adornment of the chariot in battle. Place the golden umbrella and
make the horses don divine armour created by Vishvakarma, as radiant as the sun and the ﬁre. Yoke the supreme
horses Balahaka, Meghapushpa, Sainya and Sugriva.38 O Daruka! Armour and station yourself. You will swiftly
come to me when you hear the loud and terrible sound of Panchajanya ﬁll everything with the bhairava note.39 O

Daruka! I will alone angrily dispel all the reasons for misery that have afﬂicted my brother, the son of my paternal
aunt.40 While the sons of Dhritarashtra look on, I will make every effort so that Bibhatsu can kill Jayadratha in the
battle. O charioteer! I assure you that his victory is certain.’ Daruka replied, ‘His victory is certain. How can he be
defeated? O tiger among men! You have yourself agreed to be his charioteer. As for me, I will do what you have
asked me to. This night will give way to an excellent morning that will bring Vijaya’s41 victory.’”’
CHAPTER 1034(57)

‘Sanjaya said, “Kunti’s son, Dhananjaya, whose valour was inconceivable, began to think about how he might accomplish his pledge. He thought of mantras42 and was soon immersed in sleep. The one with the ape on his banner was tormented by sorrow. As he thought about the one with Garuda on his banner in all situations, Krishna appeared before Dhananjaya. Because of devotion and affection, the one with dharma in his soul, never failed to
stand up, welcome Govinda and offer him a seat. But having given it to him, Bibhatsu did not think of taking a seat
for himself. The immensely energetic Krishna knew about Partha’s resolution. Having seated himself, he spoke
these words to Kunti’s son, who was standing. ‘O Partha! Do not sorrow in your mind. Destiny is impossible to
defeat. Destiny conveys all beings to the supreme end. O supreme among eloquent ones! Tell me. Why are you
grieving? Learned ones do not grieve. Sorrow is the destroyer of all deeds. Sorrow delights enemies and afﬂicts
relatives. Such a man confronts decay. Therefore, you should not sorrow.’ Vasudeva spoke these words to the unvanquished and learned Bibhatsu and he spoke these meaningful words in return. ‘I have taken a great vow of
killing Jayadratha. O Keshava! Tomorrow, I will slay the evil-minded one who killed my son. O Achyuta! But the
sons of Dhritarashtra will act so as to frustrate my pledge. They will place Saindhava at the rear and have him protected by all the maharathas. O Krishna! They possess eleven akshouhinis that are extremely difﬁcult to vanquish.
If my pledge is not satisﬁed, how can someone like me remain alive? O brave one! The misery of failure is circling
around me. Let me tell you that the sun moves swiftly now.’43 Hearing the reasons for Partha’s sorrow, Krishna,
the one with the bird on his banner,44 touched water and seated himself with his face towards the east.
‘“For the welfare of Pandu’s son, who was engaged in Saindhava’s death, the lotus-eyed and immensely energetic one spoke these words. ‘O Partha! There is a supreme and eternal weapon named pashupata. With this, the
great god Maheshvara killed all the daityas in battle. Had you known about it today, you would have been able to
kill Jayadratha tomorrow. So that you may obtain the knowledge, think about the god with the bull on his banner in
your mind.45 As his devotee and with his favours, you will obtain that great object.’ On hearing Krishna’s words,
Dhananjaya touched water. He seated himself on the ground and single-mindedly ﬁxed his mind on Bhava.46
While he thus concentrated, the auspicious brahma moment arrived.47 Arjuna perceived himself and Keshava to
be travelling through the sky, full of stellar bodies and frequented by siddhas and charanas. With Keshava, Partha
travelled through the sky with the speed of the wind and it seemed as if Keshava had grasped him by the right arm.
They seemed to behold many extraordinary sights as they passed. The great-souled one saw Mount Shveta in a
northern direction. He saw Kubera’s sporting ground and a lake adorned with lotuses. He saw the Ganga, supreme
among rivers and full of water. There were trees always full of ﬂowers and fruit. There were stones like crystal.
Those parts were frequented by lions and tigers and inhabited by many kinds of deer. They were full of beautiful
and sacred hermitages that were inhabited by beautiful birds. The region around Mandara resounded with the
sounds of songs sung by kinnaras. There were gold and silver peaks, illuminated with many kinds of herbs. They
were adorned with beautiful and blossoming mandara trees.48 He reached Mount Kala, which was as lovely as a
mass of collyrium. It was a bejewelled mountain, on the foothills of the sacred Himalayas. He reached Brahmatunga and many rivers and countries. He reached Sushringa, Shatashringa and the forest known as Sharyati,49 the sacred spot known as Horse-Head and the spot known as Atharvan. He reached Vrishamdamsha, the king of mountains, and the great Mandara, which was full of apsaras and adorned by kinnaras. Together with Keshava, Partha
roamed around that mountain and saw sacred springs, adorned with golden minerals. That spot on earth was as radiant as the rays of the moon and was garlanded with many cities. Travelling through the sky, the ﬁrmament and
the earth with Krishna, he roamed and saw Vishnupada and wondered. He was then ﬂung down, like an arrow.

Partha then saw a ﬂaming mountain. Its radiance was like that of the planets, the nakshatras, the moon, the sun and
the ﬁre.
‘“Approaching that mountain, on the summit of the mountain, he saw the great-souled one who has the bull on
his banner. He was always engaged in austerities. He blazed in his own energy, like a thousand suns. He held a trident and his white hair was matted. His attire was made out of bark and skin. The immensely energetic one’s limbs
were wonderful and he possessed a thousand eyes. The god was seated with Parvati and masses of radiant beings.
His attendants sang and played on musical instruments. They laughed and danced and clapped their palms. They
shouted and the place was full of fragrant perfume. Divine sages, who knew about the brahman, praised him with
chants. He was the protector of all beings. He was the wielder of the bow. He was the one without decay. On seeing him, together with Partha, Vasudeva, the one with dharma in his soul, lowered his head down on the ground
and praised the eternal brahman. He was the origin of the worlds. He was the origin of the universe. He was without beginning. He was Ishana,50 the one without decay. He was the supreme origin of the mind. He was the reservoir for the sky, the wind and stellar bodies. He was the creator of torrents of rain. He was the lord of supreme and
original nature. He was the one who was worshipped by gods, danavas, yakshas and humans. He was the supreme
brahman, as manifested to yogis. He was the store of all knowledge about the brahman. He was the creator of
everything mobile and immobile, and their great-souled and angry destroyer too, at the time of destruction. He was
Shakra and Surya and the source of all qualities. Krishna bowed down before the source of words, thoughts, intelligence and deeds. Those who seek subtle spiritual knowledge see him. He is without origin and is the origin of all
souls and he51 sought refuge with Bhava. Arjuna also repeatedly worshipped him, knowing that he was the source
of the past, present and the future and the origin of all beings. On seeing them, Sharva52 smiled and said, ‘O foremost among men! Welcome! Arise! Be free of exhaustion. O brave ones! What is the desire in your minds? O ones
without decay! Tell me quickly. What is the reason for your coming here? I will accomplish your purpose. Tell me
what will be beneﬁcial for you and I will grant you everything.’ On hearing his words, they stood up, hands joined
in salutation.
‘“The immensely intelligent Vasudeva and Arjuna satisﬁed Sharva with a hymn. ‘O Bhava! O Sharva! We bow
down before you. O Rudra! O one who grants boons! O one who is the lord of all beings! O one who is always
ﬁerce! O Kapardin!53 O Mahadeva! O Bhima! O Tryambaka! O Shambhava! O Ishana! O destroyer of Bhaga!54
We bow down before you. O destroyer of Andhaka!55 O father of Kumara!56 O one whose throat is always blue!
O intelligent one! O one who is red! O one who has the colour of smoke! O one who is the hunter! O one who is
unvanquished! O one whose locks are always blue! O one with the trident! O one with divine eyes! O one who is
the ofﬁciating priest! O protector! O one with three eyes! O hunter! O one whose seed is the source of riches! O
one who cannot be thought of! O husband of Ambika!57 O one who is worshipped by all the gods! O one with the
bull on the standard! O tawny one! O matted one! O brahmachari! O one who performs austerities in water! O one
devoted to the brahman! O undefeated one! O soul of the universe! O creator of the universe! O one who is stationed everywhere in the universe! We bow down before you. We show obeisance to you. O one who is worshipped by all beings! O one who is always powerful! O Brahmavaktra!58 O Sharva! O Shankara! O Shiva! We
bow down before you. O lord of words! O lord of beings! We bow down before you. We worship you. O lord of
the universe! O great lord! We bow down before you. O one with the thousand heads! We bow down before you. O
one with the thousand arms! We honour you. O one with a thousand eyes and feet! We worship you. O one whose
deeds are innumerable! We bow down before you. O one with the golden complexion! O one with the golden armour! O one who is always compassionate towards devotees! O lord! Make us successful through a boon.’ Having
worshipped Mahadeva and gratiﬁed him, Vasudeva and Arjuna obtained the weapon. Partha was delighted and
worshipped the one with the bull on his banner. With dilated eyes, he gazed at the one who was the receptacle of
all energy. He always used to make offerings to Vasudeva every night and he beheld these, lying near Tryambaka.
Pandava worshipped Krishna and Sharva in his mind and addressed Shankara, desiring the divine weapon.
‘“On learning Partha’s intention and the purport of the boon, the lord god smiled and spoke to Vasudeva and Arjuna. ‘O destroyers of enemies! Near this spot, there is a divine lake that is full of amrita. There, my divine bow
and arrow have been secreted a long time ago. I used them to bring down all the enemies of the gods in battle. O

Krishnas!59 Bring the supreme bow, with the arrow, here.’ Having been thus addressed, those two brave ones went
there, with Sharva’s attendants. They went to the celestial lake, as indicated by the one with the bull on his banner,
and which was surrounded by hundreds of divine wonders. It was sacred and was the granter of all objects. Without any fear, the rishis Nara and Narayana went there. They went to the lake, which possessed the complexion of
the solar disc. Arjuna and Achyuta saw a terrible serpent in the water. There was a second supreme serpent too,
with a thousand heads. They saw it vomit giant ﬂames, with radiance like that of the ﬁre. Krishna and Partha
touched water and joined their hands in salutation. They worshipped the one with the bull on his banner and approached those serpents. They were learned in the Vedas and chanted one hundred hymns in praise of the brahman
and Rudra. They bowed before the immeasurable Bhava, who is in every soul. Because of this praise of the greatness of Rudra, those giant serpents gave up their serpent forms and assumed the form of a bow and arrow, the slayer of enemies. Delighted, they grasped the resplendent bow and arrow. Those great-souled ones took them and
gave them to the great-minded one.60 A brahmachari emerged from the side of the one with the bull on his banner.
He was tawny-eyed and he was the resort of austerities. He was powerful and bluish-red. He grasped the best of
bows and stood in that spot. He stretched the bow and ﬁxed the arrow to the supreme bow. Pandava noticed how
the bow was grasped with the hand and the position. He heard the mantras spoken by Bhava. The one whose valour was unthinkable61 grasped everything. The immensely energetic lord62 then released the arrow into the lake.
The brave one again ﬂung the bow into the lake. Arjuna, whose memory was good, knew that Bhava was gratiﬁed.
He remembered the boon he had given him in the forest and how he had beheld Shankara.63 In his mind, he
wished that all this might come true.64 Knowing what he desired, Bhava happily gave him the boon. He granted
him the terrible pashupata and the fulﬁlment of his pledge. The body hair of the invincible one65 stood up and he
thought that his task had been accomplished. Arjuna and Keshava were delighted and praised Maheshvara, with
their heads bowed. The brave ones took their leave of Bhava and instantly returned to their own camp. They were
ﬁlled with great joy. They were as delighted as Indra and Vishnu, when they desired to kill Jambha.”’
CHAPTER 1035(58)

‘Sanjaya said, “O king! While Krishna and Daruka were conversing in this way, the night ended. The king66
arose. Panisvanikas, magadhas, madhuparkikas, vaitalikas and sutas chanted and satisﬁed that bull among men.67
Dancers danced. Singers with sweet voices sang praises in honour of the Kuru lineage. There were the loud sounds
of mridangas, jharjharas, bheris, panavas, anakas, gomukhas, adamvaras, shankhas and dundubhis.68 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were many other musical instruments. Skilled and well-trained ones happily
played on them. That loud noise, like the roar of the clouds, seemed to touch the sky and awoke the sleeping Yudhishthira, supreme among kings. He had slept on an extremely expensive and supreme bed and now arose. Having
awoken, he went to the bathroom to perform the required acts. There were a hundred and eight young servants,
dressed in white. They had themselves bathed and approached, with golden pots that were full. Wearing light garments, he seated himself on his splendid seat.69 He was bathed in water in which sandalwood had been mixed and
over which mantras had been recited. Well-trained ones rubbed his body with astringent and strong water.70 He
was washed with fragrant and perfumed water. The mighty armed one smeared his body with yellow sandalwood
paste. He wore garlands and dressed himself in clean garments. He faced the east and seated himself, hands joined
in salutation. Following the path of the virtuous, Kounteya meditated and chanted. He humbly entered the room
where a blazing ﬁre was kept.71 He offered sacred kindling and oblations, over which mantras had been recited,
into the ﬁre. He then emerged from his house.
‘“The king, tiger among men, entered a second room and saw bulls among brahmanas there. Those brahmanas
were learned in the Vedas. They were self-controlled and devoted to the Vedas. They had bathed and performed
ablutions after the rites. There were one thousand who worshipped the sun and another eight thousand too. The
mighty-armed one made them recite pleasant benedictions over him. He offered them the best kind of honey mixed
with clariﬁed butter and auspicious fruit. Pandava gave each of those brahmanas a golden nishka,72 one hundred

ornamented horses, expensive garments, desired dakshina and cows that yielded milk whenever they were touched.
Pandu’s son also gave them calves with horns decorated in gold and hooves decorated in silver. He then circumambulated them, the svastikas that increased fortune, the golden nandyavartas,73 the garlands, the pots full of gold
and the ﬂaming ﬁre. There were also vessels full of parched rice, beautiful ruchakas,74 pure and ornamented
maidens, curds, clariﬁed butter, honey, water, auspicious birds and many other sacred objects. Having seen and
touched them, Kounteya went to the outer chamber.
‘“O mighty-armed one! The servants were waiting there. They brought an excellent seat that was completely
made out of gold and was decorated with pearls and lapis lazuli. It was covered with a supreme carpet, over which
an excellent cover had been spread. This supreme and divine seat had been constructed by Vishvakarma himself.
When the great-minded Kounteya had seated himself, the servants brought him all his expensive and bright ornaments. O great king! His beauty was such that it increased the sorrow of his enemies. White whisks that possessed
the radiance of the moon and had golden handles were used to fan him. He was as radiant as clouds tinged with
lightning. He was praised by bards and eulogized by panegyrists. Gandharvas began to honour the descendant of
the Kuru lineage. In an instant, the loud noise made by the panegyrists arose. The clatter of chariot wheels and the
hooves of horses were heard. This mingled with the sounds of bells on elephants and the blare of conch shells. The
earth trembled because of the footsteps of men. At that instant, one of those in charge of the gates entered. He was
young and armoured. He wore earrings and his sword was girded. He knelt down on the ground and lowered his
head in salutation to the one who had dharma in his soul. He told the great-minded one that Hrishikesha had arrived. The tiger among men replied, ‘Let Madhava be welcome. Let a supreme arghya75 and seat be kept ready for
him.’ Varshneya entered and seated himself on that supreme seat. Yudhishthira asked him about his welfare and
honoured him with worship.”’
CHAPTER 1036(59)

‘“Yudhishthira asked, ‘O Madhusudana! Have you spent the night happily? O Achyuta! Are all your senses of wisdom keen?’”
‘Sanjaya said, “Having been thus addressed by Yudhishthira, Vasudeva also asked him similar questions. An ordinary gatekeeper entered and reported that others had also arrived and were waiting for the king’s permission to
enter—Virata, Bhimasena, Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, Shikhandi, the twins, Chekitana, the Kekayas, the Kouravya
Yuyutsu, the Panchala Uttamouja and many other kshatriyas. They entered, approached the great-souled bull
among kshatriyas and seated themselves. The brave, immensely radiant, immensely strong and great-souled
Krishna and Yuyudhana seated themselves on a single seat. In their hearing, Yudhishthira spoke these sweet words.
‘O Madhusudana! O Pundarikaksha! You alone are our refuge, like the thousand-eyed one is of the immortals. We
depend on you for victory in the battle and for eternal happiness. O Krishna! You know everything about the destruction of our kingdom, about our banishment by the enemy and about the many hardships we have had to bear.
You are the lord of everything. You are everything to us. You are affectionate towards your devotees. O Madhusudana! Our happiness and our path are vested in you. O Varshneya! My mind is vested in you. Act accordingly. My
wish is that Arjuna’s pledge should be true. Help us cross this great ocean of misery and intolerance. O Madhava!
We wish to cross over. Be our boat. O Krishna! He is the equal of Kartavirya.76 When he has you as his charioteer,
there is nothing that ratha cannot accomplish in battle.’ Vasudeva replied, ‘In all the worlds, including that of the
immortals, there is no wielder of the bow who is the equal of Partha Dhananjaya. He is valiant and skilled in
weapons. He is powerful and immensely strong. He is terrible and wrathful in battle. He is energetic. He is
supreme among men. He is young. He has the shoulders of a bull. He is long-armed. He is immensely strong. His
gait is like that of a bull among lions. He is handsome. He will slay all your enemies. I will act so that Arjuna,
Kunti’s son, consumes the army of the sons of Dhritarashtra, like a ﬁre that has arisen. Through Arjuna’s arrows,
the inferior and wicked one, the slayer of Subhadra’s son, will today travel along a path from which no one returns.
Vultures, hawks, wild crows, jackals and many other meat-eaters will devour his ﬂesh today. Even if all the gods,
together with Indra, seek to protect him today, he will be slain in the encounter and conveyed to Yama’s capital.

Having slain Saindhava, Jishnu will return to you today. O king! Be bereft of sorrow and devoid of fever. You will
be bedecked with prosperity.’”’
CHAPTER 1037(60)

‘Sanjaya said, “While they were thus conversing, Dhananjaya arrived. He wished to meet the king who was the
foremost among the Bharata lineage, together with his well-wishers. He entered the auspicious chamber and having saluted him,77 stood in front. The bull among the Pandavas78 arose from his seat and affectionately embraced
Arjuna with his arms, inhaling the fragrance of his head. Having pronounced his blessings, he smilingly said, ‘O
Arjuna! It is evident that you will certainly accomplish a great victory in the battle. Your countenance shows that
Janardana is extremely pleased with you.’ Jishnu recounted to him the great and supremely wonderful incident. ‘O
fortunate one! I witnessed it through Keshava’s favours.’ Dhananjaya told him everything that he had witnessed
and about his encounter with Tryambaka, and thus assured his well-wishers. All of them were astounded and lowered their heads on the ground. Having shown obeisance to the one with the bull on his banner, they spoke words
of praise. All the well-wishers then took their leave of Dharma’s son. They swiftly armoured themselves and happily emerged to do battle.
‘“Having shown their honours to King Yudhishthira, Yuyudhana, Achyuta and Arjuna also happily emerged
from his abode. The invincible Yuyudhana and Janardana were on a single chariot and together, went to brave Arjuna’s abode. Having gone there, Hrishikesha prepared the chariot, like a charioteer. It was a supreme chariot and
bore the signs of the bull among monkeys. It possessed a roar like that of the clouds. It possessed the complexion
of molten gold. That supreme of chariots was prepared and was as resplendent as the morning sun. The tiger
among men79 prepared himself. Having prepared himself, he told Partha, who had ﬁnished his morning ablutions,
that the chariot was ready. Kiriti, the supreme among men in this world, donned golden armour. With the bow and
arrows in his hand, he circumabulated.80 The learned and the aged, who were in control of their senses and had
performed rites, pronounced benedictions for the maharatha’s victory. The supreme chariot had earlier been invoked with mantras that would bring about triumph in battle. Having been invoked with mantras, it dazzled like
the rays of the morning sun. The foremost among rathas, clad in gold, ascended the golden chariot. He was as resplendent as the unblemished rays of the sun on Meru. After Partha had ascended, Yuyudhana and Janardana also
climbed up,81 like the Ashvins coming with Indra to Sharyati’s sacriﬁce.82 Govinda, supreme among those who
hold reins, grasped the reins, like Matali for Vasava,83 when he departed to slay Vritra. Partha was with both of
them, on that supreme chariot. He was like the moon, the dispeller of darkness, together with Budha and Shukra.84
The destroyer of large numbers of the enemy departed, wishing to kill Saindhava. He was like Indra in Tarakamaya,85 accompanied by the lord of the oceans86 and Mitra. There was the sound of musical instruments and auspicious and sacred chants. Arjuna proceeded, praised by bards and minstrels. The auspicious chants of bards and
minstrels wished for his victory. These mingled with the sound of musical instruments and became extremely
pleasant. Auspicious winds began to blow from the rear, with fragrant scents. They delighted Partha and dried up
his enemies. O venerable one! Many omens of victory manifested themselves in favour of the Pandavas and it was
the reverse for those on your side.
‘“On beholding these signs of victory, Arjuna spoke to the great archer, Yuyudhana, who was on his right. ‘O
Yuyudhana! I can see that victory is certain in the battle. O bull among the Shini lineage! These good portents can
be seen. Let me go to the spot where King Saindhava is. He is waiting to witness my valour and to proceed to
Yama’s world. The slaying of Saindhava is the supreme task for me. It is also a great task to protect Dharmaraja. O
mighty-armed one! You protect him today. You will protect him the way I would have protected him myself. I do
not see anyone else I can depend on, with the exception of maharatha Pradyumna. O bull among men! Ignoring
this,87 I can then kill Saindhava. O Satvata! You should not entertain any anxiety on my account. Devote all your
attention to the supreme task of protecting the king. Where the mighty-armed Vasudeva is stationed, and where I
am, it is certain that there is no scope for danger there.’ Thus addressed by Partha, Satyaki, the destroyer of enemy
heroes, signiﬁed his assent to the words and went to the spot where King Yudhishthira was.”’

Section Sixty-Nine
Jayadratha-Vadha Parva
This parva has 2914 shlokas and sixty-one chapters.
Chapter 1038(61): 51 shlokas
Chapter 1039(62): 23 shlokas
Chapter 1040(63): 33 shlokas
Chapter 1041(64): 60 shlokas
Chapter 1042(65): 32 shlokas
Chapter 1043(66): 43 shlokas
Chapter 1044(67): 71 shlokas
Chapter 1045(68): 66 shlokas
Chapter 1046(69): 75 shlokas
Chapter 1047(70): 51 shlokas
Chapter 1048(71): 31 shlokas
Chapter 1049(72): 35 shlokas
Chapter 1050(73): 53 shlokas
Chapter 1051(74): 58 shlokas
Chapter 1052(75): 36 shlokas
Chapter 1053(76): 42 shlokas
Chapter 1054(77): 38 shlokas
Chapter 1055(78): 46 shlokas
Chapter 1056(79): 33 shlokas
Chapter 1057(80): 38 shlokas
Chapter 1058(81): 46 shlokas
Chapter 1059(82): 39 shlokas
Chapter 1060(83): 39 shlokas
Chapter 1061(84): 30 shlokas
Chapter 1062(85): 101 shlokas
Chapter 1063(86): 50 shlokas
Chapter 1064(87): 75 shlokas
Chapter 1065(88): 59 shlokas
Chapter 1066(89): 43 shlokas
Chapter 1067(90): 50 shlokas
Chapter 1068(91): 54 shlokas
Chapter 1069(92): 44 shlokas
Chapter 1070(93): 35 shlokas
Chapter 1071(94): 18 shlokas
Chapter 1072(95): 47 shlokas
Chapter 1073(96): 45 shlokas
Chapter 1074(97): 55 shlokas
Chapter 1075(98): 58 shlokas
Chapter 1076(99): 28 shlokas
Chapter 1077(100): 39 shlokas
Chapter 1078(101): 74 shlokas
Chapter 1079(102): 105 shlokas
Chapter 1080(103): 49 shlokas
Chapter 1081(104): 33 shlokas
Chapter 1082(105): 36 shlokas
Chapter 1083(106): 54 shlokas
Chapter 1084(107): 39 shlokas
Chapter 1085(108): 41 shlokas
Chapter 1086(109): 34 shlokas
Chapter 1087(110): 39 shlokas
Chapter 1088(111): 35 shlokas
Chapter 1089(112): 45 shlokas

Chapter 1090(113): 26 shlokas
Chapter 1092(115): 24 shlokas
Chapter 1093(116): 36 shlokas
Chapter 1094(117): 62 shlokas
Chapter 1095(118): 52 shlokas
Chapter 1096(119): 28 shlokas
Chapter 1097(120): 89 shlokas
Chapter 1098(121): 49 shlokas
The word vadha means death or killing and this section is named after the death or killing of Jayadratha. The Kouravas make arrangements
to protect Jayadratha. Though Arjuna ﬁghts with Drona and Kritavarma, he is really interested in Jayadratha. Shrutayudha of Kalinga is
killed. Arjuna kills Sudakshina of Kamboja, Shrutayu, Achyutayu, Ayutayu, Dirghayu and another Shrutayu (from Ambashtha). Drona fastens
invincible armour on Duryodhana. Arjuna kills Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti. Brihatkshatra (of Kekaya) kills Kshemadhurti, Dhrishtaketu
kills Viradhanva (from the Trigartas), Sahadeva kills Niramitra (from the Trigartas), Satyaki kills Vyaghradatta (from Magadha), Shatanika
(Nakula’s son) kills Shala (Somadatta’s son), Ghatotkacha kills Alambusa, Drona kills many on the Pandava side, Satyaki kills Jalasanda (of
Magadha) and Sudarshana, Drona kills several Panchala princes, Brihatkshatra (from Kekaya), Shishupala’s son Dhrishtaketu (from Chedi)
and his son, Jarasandha’s son, Kshatradharma (Dhrishtadyumna’s son), Bhima kills several of Duryodhana’s brothers, Satyaki kills Alambusa, Arjuna and Satyaki kill Bhurishrava. Finally, Arjuna kills Jayadratha.
CHAPTER 1038(61)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “After Abhimanyu had been killed, the next day arrived. They1 were oppressed with sorrow
and grief. What did they do? Who, from my side, fought with them? The Kurus knew about Savyasachi’s deeds.
Knowing this, how could they, and those on my side, fearlessly perform this wicked deed? Tell me. The tiger
among men2 was tormented by sorrow on account of his son. He was enraged. He was like Death, the destroyer.
When he advanced in that battle, how could they glance at him? In the battle, the one with the ape on his banner
shook his giant bow, grieving on account of his son. On beholding him, what did those on my side do? O Sanjaya!
What did Duryodhana confront in the course of the battle? A great sorrow has overtaken us today. I do not hear
sounds of joy.3 Those are sounds pleasant to the mind. They bring happiness to the ear. Today, all of those can no
longer be heard in Saindhava’s abode. The praises I heard earlier in the camps of my sons, can no longer be heard
today. There were masses of bards and minstrels and dancers everywhere. Earlier, those sounds used to strike my
ears. But I no longer hear them today. They must be miserable today and I can no longer hear those sounds. O Sanjaya! O son!4 Earlier, seated in the abodes of Satyadhriti and Somadatta, I used to hear those supreme sounds,
charming to the ears.5 My merits have diminished today and I hear woes and lamentations from the abodes of my
sons. I perceive that they have lost their enterprise. That is the reason I do not hear such sounds from Vivimshati,
Durmukha, Chitrasena, Vikarna and my other sons. Drona’s son, the great archer, is devoted to my sons. Brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and disciples used to wait upon him. He found delight in debate, talk and conversation
and in the playing of musical instruments. Day and night, he found pleasure in many kinds of songs. He was worshipped by many from the Kurus, the Pandavas and the Satvatas. O suta! In the house of Drona’s son, sounds cannot be heard today, as they used to be earlier. Drona’s son, the great archer, used to be worshipped by multitudes of
dancers and singers. Those sounds cannot be heard there now. Every evening, a great sound arose from the camps
of Vinda and Anuvinda. It cannot be heard today. Every day, from the houses of the Kekayas, great sounds of
rhythmic singing and dancing could be heard, as they and their soldiers amused themselves. O son! Those sounds
are non-existent today. Somadatta’s son6 is a store of learning. Ofﬁciating priests, learned in saptatantu7 sacriﬁces,
used to wait upon him. Those sounds cannot be heard. The twang of bowstrings, the praise of the brahman and the
sounds of lances, swords and chariots could be incessantly heard from Drona’s house. But they cannot be heard
now. There were the sounds of singing from those from many different countries and the playing of musical instruments. Those great sounds cannot be heard today. Janardana Achyuta arrived in Upaplavya, compassionate towards all beings and desiring peace.8 O suta! At that time, I told my wicked son, ‘O son! Use Vasudeva as a place
of pilgrimage and have peace with the Pandavas. O Duryodhana! I think that the time has come and do not cross
me. Do not refuse Keshava, who has come to solicit peace. He has your welfare in mind. Otherwise, you will truly
be defeated.’ But he refused Dasharha, who is a bull among all archers, and who was entreating him. He brought
calamity on himself. The evil-minded one was attracted by destiny and ignored my beneﬁcial words. He accepted
the views of Duhshasana and Karna. I did not desire the game with the dice. Nor did Vidura approve of it. Saind-

hava did not desire the gambling. Bhishma did not desire the gambling. O Sanjaya! Shalya, Bhurishrava, Purumitra, Jaya, Ashvatthama, Kripa and Drona did not desire the gambling either. If my son had acted in accordance
with the views of these people, with his kin and his well-wishers, he would have had a long and peaceful life. ‘The
sons of Pandu are pleasant and sweet in speech.9 In the midst of their kin, they speak pleasantly. They are born in
noble lineages. They are revered and wise. They will obtain happiness. A man who is always on the side of dharma, obtains happiness everywhere. After death, he obtains welfare and favours. Based on their capacity, they deserve to enjoy half of the earth. Right up to the frontiers of the ocean, the earth is also theirs, from their fathers and
grandfathers. Obtaining their stations, the Pandavas will remain devoted to dharma. O son! I have kin and the Pandavas will always listen to them—Shalya, Somadatta, the great-souled Bhishma, Drona, Vikarna, Bahlika, Kripa
and other aged and great-souled ones among the Bharata lineage. O son! If they speak on your behalf, they will act
in accordance with those words. Do you think that there is any among them10 who will speak in a contrary way?
Krishna will never give up dharma and all of them will follow him. Those brave ones will not act contrary to the
words of dharma that I speak to them. The Pandavas have dharma in their soul.’ O suta! Thus did I lament and
speak many words to my son. But the stupid one did not listen. It seems to me that all this is because of destiny.
Vrikodara and Arjuna are there and brave Satyaki from the Vrishni lineage. There are Uttamouja from Panchala,
the invincible Yudhamanyu, the unassailable Dhrishtadyumna, the unvanquished Shikhandi, the Ashmakas, the
Kekayas, Kshatradharma from the Somakas, Chekitana from Chedi, Abhibhu, the son of Kashi, the sons of
Droupadi, Virata, maharatha Drupada and the twins, tigers among men. Madhusudana is the counsellor. Who in
this world wishes to ﬁght the likes of these and desires to live? Who will withstand my enemies when they exhibit
their divine weapons? There are Duryodhana, Karna, Shakuni Soubala and Duhshasana as the fourth. I do not see a
ﬁfth. They have Vishvaksena11 stationed on the chariot, reins in his hand. The armoured Arjuna is the warrior.
There cannot be defeat. Does Duryodhana not remember those lamentations of mine? You have told me that
Bhishma and Drona, tigers among men, have been brought down. Those were the words spoken by Vidura, the farsighted one. Beholding the fruits of those deeds, I think that my sons must be sorrowing. At the end of the winter,
aided by a great wind, the ﬁre consumes dry wood. Thus will Dhananjaya consume my soldiers. O Sanjaya! You
are skilled in narrating. Tell me everything. O son! When Abhimanyu was slain and that wicked deed was done to
Partha in the evening, what was the state of your minds? O son! Having performed that wicked deed, in battle,
those on my side must have found it impossible to withstand the deeds of the wielder of Gandiva. What did Duryodhana do? What did Karna do and say? When they confronted this end, what about Duhshasana and Soubala? O
Sanjaya! O son! Everything that befell my assembled sons in battle was because of wicked and intolerant deeds.
The evil-minded one12 was addicted to avarice. His mind was distorted because of anger. The stupid one coveted
the kingdom. Hatred made him lose his senses. O Sanjaya! Tell me whether their actions were good or evil.”’
CHAPTER 1039(62)

‘Sanjaya said, “I will tell you everything, as I have seen it with my own eyes. Listen with patience. Your faults
have been great. When waters have receded after a ﬂood, the construction of an embankment is useless. O king! O
bull among the Bharata lineage! Lamentation is pointless. Do not sorrow. Know that the decrees of destiny are
wonderful and cannot be transgressed. O best among the Bharata lineage! Do not grieve. This destiny is ancient. If,
in earlier times, you had restrained Yudhishthira, Kunti’s son, or your own sons from gambling with the dice, you
would not have confronted this calamity. Yet again, when the time for battle arrived, had you restrained both the
angry parties, you would not have confronted this calamity. If, in earlier times, you had instructed the Kurus to kill
the disobedient Duryodhana, you would not have confronted this calamity. Then the Pandavas, the Panchalas, the
Vrishnis and all the other great ones would never have blamed you for your lack of intelligence. Had you performed the duties of a father and directed your son to a righteous path, making him follow dharma, you would not
have confronted this calamity. You are the wisest person in this world, but you abandoned eternal dharma, following the counsel of Duryodhana, Karna and Shakuni. O king! You are addicted to artha. And all these lamentations
of yours that I hear seem to be like honey laced with poison. O king! In earlier times, Krishna did not revere the
Pandava king,13 Bhishma or Drona as much as he revered you. But when he knew that you had been dislodged

from the dharma of kings, from that time, Krishna no longer regards you with high honour. When your sons addressed harsh words towards the Parthas, despite they being under your control, you remained indifferent, coveting
the kingdom for them. O unblemished one! You obtained the kingdom from your fathers and grandfathers and it
will be lost. And so will the entire earth that has been conquered by the Parthas.14 The fame and the kingdom of
the Kouravas are because of what the sons of Pandus won. The Pandavas followed dharma and added a lot to
those. But having encountered you, those deeds of theirs became extremely fruitless. They were dislodged from
their kingdom because of your avarice. O king! Now that the time for battle has arrived, you are censuring your
sons. You have indicated the many faults that they possess. But this is not deserved. When kings ﬁght in battle,
they do not seek to protect their lives. The bulls among kshatriyas are ﬁghting, penetrating the army of the Parthas.
Who other than the Kouravas will seek to ﬁght with an army of soldiers protected by Krishna, Arjuna, Satyaki and
Vrikodara? Their warrior is Gudakesha15 and their counsellor is Janardana. They are protected by Satyaki and
they are protected by Vrikodara. Other than the Kouravas and those who are following them, which mortal archer
would dare to ﬁght against these? With the devoted kings, the brave Kouravas are doing whatever they are capable
of, devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. Now listen to the supremely grievous battle between those tigers among
men, the Kurus and the Pandavas. Listen exactly to everything that occurred.”’
CHAPTER 1040(63)

‘Sanjaya said, “After night had passed, Drona, supreme among the wielders of weapons, started to arrange all his
arrays in the form of a vyuha. O king! The brave ones roared in anger and intolerance. As they sought to kill each
other, many wonderful sounds were heard. They stretched their bows and touched the bowstrings with their palms.
They sighed deeply and exclaimed, ‘Where is that Dhananjaya?’ Others unsheathed their sharp, yellow and welltempered swords, which had decorated hilts and the complexion of the sky, and tossed them up. Thousands of
brave ones were seen, their minds set on war. They were skilled and roamed around, performing the motions for
swords and bows. Others raised clubs, decorated with bells, gold and diamonds and smeared with sandalwood
paste, and asked about the Pandavas. Still others possessed arms like clubs and were intoxicated with their
strength. They raised these16 and obstructed the sky, as if with Indra’s standards. Others wielded many weapons
and were garlanded with colourful ﬂowers. Those brave ones desired to do battle and were stationed there. ‘Where
is Arjuna? Where is Govinda? Where is the proud Vrikodara? Where are their well-wishers?’ Thus did they summon them to battle then.
‘“Drona blew on his conch shell and himself urged his horses to speed up. He swiftly roamed around here and
there. All the arrays that delighted in battle were stationed. O great king! Bharadvaja’s son then spoke to
Jayadratha. ‘You yourself, Somadatta’s son, maharatha Karna, Ashvatthama, Shalya, Vrishasena and Kripa will be
stationed three govyutis17 behind me, with a hundred thousand horses, sixty thousand chariots, fourteen thousand
elephants with rent temples and twenty-one thousand armoured infantry. There the gods, with Vasava, will not be
able to attack you, not to speak of all the Pandavas. O Saindhava! Therefore, be assured.’ Thus addressed,
Jayadratha, king of Sindhu, was comforted. He went to the spot indicated, surrounded by maharathas from Gandhara. Armoured foot soldiers were stationed there, with lances in their hands. All of them had whisks decorated
with gold. O Indra among kings! Jayadratha’s horses were well trained. There were seventy-two thousand Saindhava horses. Wishing to ﬁght, your son, Durmarshana, stationed himself at the forefront of all those soldiers. He was
with ﬁfteen hundred crazy and armoured elephants that were terrible in form and were the performers of ﬁerce
deeds. Those who were skilled in ﬁghting with elephants were astride them. To accomplish the objectives of the
king of Sindhu, your sons, Duhshasana and Vikarna, also stationed themselves ahead of the soldiers. The vyuha
that Bharadvaja’s son constructed was partly in the form of a chakra and partly in the form of a cart.18 It was
twelve govyutis long and extended for ﬁve at the rear. Many brave kings were stationed there. There were chariots,
horses, elephants and infantry, stationed by Drona himself. At its rear, there was a core vyuha in the form of a lotus. It was extremely difﬁcult to penetrate. In the midst of the lotus, he again created a deep vyuha in the form of a
needle. Having created the great vyuha in this fashion, Drona stationed himself in the vyuha. The great archer, Kritavarma, was stationed at the mouth of the needle. O venerable one! Kamboja and Jalasandha were stationed next

to him. And next to them was Duryodhana, with his advisers. There were hundreds and thousands of warriors who
never retreated. All of them stationed themselves in the cart, intending to protect it for a long time. O king! King
Jayadratha was behind them, to the side of the needle, and surrounded by a large force. O Indra among kings!
Bharadvaja’s son stationed himself at the mouth of the cart. Bhoja was behind him, so as to protect him. Drona was
clad in white armour, garments and headdress. He was broad-chested and mighty-armed. He was stationed there
and stretched his bow, as angry as Death. On beholding Drona’s chariot, the Kurus were delighted. It possessed a
standard and was yoked to red horses. The signs of an altar and black deerskin were on the standard. On seeing the
vyuha constructed by Drona, which was like an agitating ocean, the siddhas and the charanas were ﬁlled with great
wonder. All the beings thought that this vyuha would devour the entire earth, with the mountains, the oceans, the
forests and the many countries. The king19 was delighted on seeing the great cart, which would shatter the hearts
of those who caused it ill. It had many chariots, men, horses, infantry and elephants. It was wonderful in form and
its roar gave rise to fear.”’
CHAPTER 1041(64)

‘Sanjaya said, “O venerable one! When the battle formations had thus been arrayed and a great sound arose, drums
and kettledrums were beaten. When the battle formations roared and musical instruments were sounded, conch
shells were blown and the sound made the body hair stand up. The ground was slowly covered with those among
the Bharata lineage who wished to ﬁght. The roudra muhurta20 arrived and Savyasachi was seen. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Many thousand wild crows and crows sported themselves in front of Savyasachi. Animals
howled in terrible tones, and jackals, inauspicious to look at, howled and advanced on our right, as we proceeded.
Flaming meteors roared and fell down in every direction. The entire earth trembled and a dreadful fear arose. Dry
and harsh winds began to blow, attracting gravel. They manifested themselves when Kounteya arrived to do battle.
Shatanika, Nakula’s son, and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna—those two wise ones arrayed the Pandava soldiers into a
vyuha. Your son, Durmarshana, stationed himself in front of all the soldiers, with one thousand chariots, one hundred elephants, three thousand horses and ten thousand foot soldiers. These covered terrain measuring ﬁfteen hundred bows. He said, ‘The wielder of Gandiva is unassailable in battle. He is a scorcher. But today, I will repulse
him, like the shoreline against the abode of makaras. Let everyone witness the invincible and intolerant Dhananjaya clash against me in battle today, like a mass of stones against another mass of stones.’ O great king! Having
said, this, the great-souled and high-minded and great archer stationed himself there. O king! He was surrouned by
great archers. He was as angry as the Destroyer and like Vasava with the vajra. Urged by destiny, he was like
Death with a staff in his hand. He was as unagitated as the one with the trident,21 or like Varuna with his noose.
He was like the blazing ﬁre that arrives at the end of a yuga to consume beings. The angry and intolerant Jaya,22
the destroyer of the nivatakavachas, was established in victory and truth. He desired to accomplish his great vow.
He was armoured. Kiriti wielded a sword that was embellished with gold. His armour and garments were white.
He sported a sword and wore beautiful earrings. Nara, with Narayana, was stationed on a supreme chariot. Shaking
Gandiva in battle, he was as resplendent as the rising sun. Dhananjaya stationed his prepared chariot at the forefront of the array, where the great shower of arrows would descend. The powerful one blew on his conch shell. O
venerable one! Together with Partha, Krishna also fearlessly blew on Panchajanya, supreme among conch shells,
with great energy. O lord of the earth! Because of the sound of the conch shells, your soldiers trembled. Their body
hair stood up and they lost their senses. Like all beings are terriﬁed at the sound of thunder, all your soldiers were
frightened at the sound of the conch shells. All the mounts released urine and excrement. The entire army, with all
the mounts, became anxious. O king! O venerable one! The men were distressed at the sound of the conch shells.
Some of them lost their senses. O king! Some were terriﬁed. Together with all the other beings who dwelt on the
standard, the ape let out a mighty roar. To frighten your soldiers, it opened its mouth wide. At this, so as to delight
your soldiers, conch shells, drums, kettledrums and tambourines were again sounded. This mixed with the sound
of many musical instruments, with the roars and the slapping of arms. To the sound of musical instruments, the
maharathas roared like lions and issued challenges. There was a tumultuous sound that increased the fear of
cowards.

‘“The son of the chastiser of Paka23 was extremely delighted. He told Dasharha, ‘O Hrishikesha! Urge the horses to the spot where Durmarshana is stationed. I will shatter the army of elephants and penetrate the enemy’s
force.’ Having been thus addressed by Savyasachi, the mighty-armed Keshava urged the horses to the spot where
Durmarshana was stationed. A tumultuous and extremely ﬁerce clash commenced between one and many,24 one
that destroyed chariots, elephants and men. Partha showered down arrows on the enemy, like Parjanya25 pouring
down rain. He was like a cloud raining down on a mountain. All the rathas swiftly displayed their dexterity of
hand. They enveloped Krishna and Dhananjaya with a net of arrows. When the foe fought against him, the mightyarmed and valiant Partha became enraged. With his arrows, he severed the heads of the rathas from their bodies.
The earth was strewn with these, with handsome heads with eyes jutting out and frowning, with teeth biting the
lips. They were adorned with earrings and helmets. In every direction, they were like lotuses that had been destroyed. The heads of the warriors were scattered around. Colourful armour was spattered with blood. O king!
They were seen there, like masses of clouds, tinged with lightning. O king! There was the sound of heads falling
down on the surface of the earth, like palm fruit that has ripened in time and is falling down. Some torsos were stationed, with the hands still wielding bows. Some upraised arms were stationed with unsheathed swords. Those
bulls among men did not even know when their heads were severed and fell down. They could not tolerate
Kounteya and wished to defeat him in battle. The earth was strewn with the heads of horses, trunks of elephants
and the arms and heads of brave ones. ‘This is Partha. Where is Partha? This one is Partha!’ O lord! Thus, your
soldiers and warriors only thought about Partha. Deluded by destiny, they thought that the entire world was full of
Partha alone. Thus, they struck and killed each other. Others struck their own selves. They destroyed themselves.
They were covered in blood. They were bereft of their senses. Their bodies were in deep pain. Many brave ones
lay down and called out to their well-wishers. The arms held slings, lances, spears, swords, battleaxes, helmets,
scimitars, bows, arrows, javelins, darts, armour, ornaments, clubs and armlets in that battle. The arms were like
clubs and giant snakes. Having been severed by those supreme arrows, they seemed to forcefully jump, twitch and
jerk in every direction, as if in anger. Any man who wrathfully advanced against Partha in that battle was killed by
his arrows, piercing the body. As he brandished his bow and danced around on the coursing chariot, no one could
detect any weakness in Partha. He swiftly picked up arrows, afﬁxed them and shot them. All the enemy soldiers
marvelled at the dexterity of Pandu’s son. Phalguna used his arrows to pierce elephants and elephant-riders, horses
and horse-riders and rathas and their charioteers. There were many who whirled around and surrounded and fought
with Pandava. There was not a single one who stood before him and was not killed. Like the sun arises in the sky
and destroys great darkness, thus did Arjuna use arrows tufted with heron feathers to slay that army of elephants.
Because of the shattered and fallen elephants and soldiers, the earth seemed to be strewn with mountains, as if it
was the time of destruction. Beings are always incapable of looking at the midday sun. Like that, the angry
Dhananjaya was incapable of being glanced at by the enemy warriors. O scorcher of enemies! Your son’s soldiers
were shattered and ﬂed. They were routed and oppressed by those arrows. Like a mass of clouds scattered by a giant wind, those soldiers were slain and no one was capable of looking at him. Those on your side used goads, the
tips of their bows, shouts, whips, lashes on the ﬂanks and eloquent words to swiftly urge their well-controlled horses to run away. The riders, the charioteers and the foot soldiers were afﬂicted by Arjuna. Others used goads and
their toes to urge the elephants on their ﬂanks. Others were confounded by the arrows and ﬂed in his direction.
Your warriors lost their endeavour. They were confused and distracted in their minds.”’
CHAPTER 1042(65)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “The forefront of my army was shattered and slain by Kiriti. In the battle, who were the
brave ones who advanced against Dhananjaya? Or did they abandon their certain resolution and enter the shakata
vyuha, seeking refuge with the fearless Drona, who was stationed like a wall?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “Arjuna shattered your forces then. Brave ones were slain and lost their endeavour. They ﬂed
at that moment. They were slain by the supreme arrows and no one was capable of looking at the son of the chastiser of Paka. O king! Duhshasana, your son, saw the state that the soldiers were in and was ﬁlled with great rage.
To ﬁght, he advanced against Arjuna. He was covered in colourful armour made out of gold. The brave one was

extremely valorous and his helmet was made out of god. O great king! Duhshasana surrounded Savyasachi with a
giant army of elephants that seemed to devour the earth. Bells tinkled on the elephants. There was the sound of
conch shells. There was the sound of bows being twanged and the roars of the tuskers. The sound enveloped the
earth, the directions and the sky. That moment was seen to be extremely ﬁerce and terrible. On seeing that these
were angry and were swiftly descending on him, urged by goads, and with extended trunks, like winged mountains, Dhananjaya, lion among men, emitted a giant roar, like a lion. He started to afﬂict and pierce that army of
elephants with his arrows. It was like a makara penetrating the great ocean, when it is agitated by mighty waves.
Like that, Kiriti penetrated that army of elephants. He was like a scorching sun that rises at the time of the destruction of a yuga, transgressing the normal rules of time.26 Partha, the destroyer of enemy cities, was seen in all the
directions. There were sounds from the hooves of the horses and the wheels of chariots. Those who were ﬁghting,
roared. There was the twang of bowstrings. There was the sound of Devadatta27 and the roar of Gandiva. Elephants lost their speed and were bereft of their senses. Savyasachi’s arrows had the touch of virulent serpents and
shattered them. Sharp arrows released from Gandiva pierced the elephants in that battle and there were many hundreds and thousands that afﬂicted all their limbs. They roared loudly and were killed by Kiriti. They incessantly
fell down on the ground, like mountains with their wings lopped off. Some elephants were pierced with arrows in
the roots of their tusks, their frontal lobes and their temples. They repeatedly shrieked like cranes. Using broadheaded arrows with straight tufts, Kiriti sliced down the heads of men who were seated on the shoulders of elephants. The heads were adorned with earrings and fell down on the ground. They looked like a mass of lotuses that
Partha was rendering as an offering. Some elephants wandered around in that battle. They possessed harnesses, but
were devoid of armour. They suffered from wounds and blood ﬂowed from these. Men were seen to hang down
from them. Sometimes two or three were pierced with a single arrow that had been released, and fell down on the
ground. With broad-headed and straight-tufted arrows, he severed bowstrings, bows, standards, yokes and headdresses of the opposing rathas. No one could detect a gap between his picking up an arrow and afﬁxing and releasing it. Partha seemed to be dancing around, with his bow stretched in a circle. They were pierced with iron arrows
and vomited blood from their mouths. In an instant, the elephants were seen to fall down on the ground. Many
headless torsos were seen to stand up in every direction. O great king! It was a dreadful carnage. Arms decorated
with golden ornaments were seen to be severed in the battle, with bows, ﬁnger-guards, swords and armlets. There
were many shattered seats, housings, headdresses, poles, chariot wheels, axles and yokes. Shields, bows and arrows were strewn around everywhere. Garlands, ornaments, garments and giant standards fell down. Elephants,
horses and kshatriyas were killed and brought down. Because of these, the earth there was seen to be dreadful.
Thus did Kiriti slaughter Duhshasana’s army. O great king! They were afﬂicted and ﬂed, together with their
leader.28 With his soldiers, Duhshasana was oppressed and terriﬁed. Seeking a protector in Drona, he went to the
shakata vyuha.”’
CHAPTER 1043(66)

‘Sanjaya said, “Having slaughtered Duhshasana’s force, Savyasachi Dhananjaya wished to get at the king of Sindhu and attacked Drona’s army. He approached Drona, who was stationed at the mouth of the vyuha. Instructed by
Krishna, he joined his hands in salutation and spoke these words. ‘O brahmana! Wish me well and pronounce
benedictions over me. Through your favours, I wish to penetrate this impenetrable army. You are like my father.
For me, you are the equal of Dharmaraja. You are the equal of Krishna. I tell you this truthfully. O father!29 O unblemished one! O supreme among brahmanas! Like Ashvatthama should be protected by you, like that, I should
always be protected by you. O best of men! Through your favours, I wish to kill the king of Sindhu in this battle. O
lord! Protect my pledge.’ Having been thus addressed, the preceptor smiled and replied, ‘O Bibhatsu! Without vanquishing me, you are incapable of defeating Jayadratha.’ Having said this, Drona smiled and enveloped him, his
charioteer, his chariot, his horses and his standard with a storm of sharp arrows.
‘“At this, Arjuna used his own arrows to repulse Drona’s storm of arrows. He attacked Drona and released more
terrible and greater arrows. O lord of the earth! Having shown reverence to Drona, he pierced him in that battle. He
resorted to the dharma of kshatriyas and pierced him again with nine arrows. Drona severed these arrows and

pierced both Krishna and Pandava with his own arrows, which were like poison or the ﬂaming ﬁre. Pandava then
thought of using his arrows to sever Drona’s bow. But while the great-souled Phalguna was thus thinking, Drona
acted vigorously. The valiant one used arrows to swiftly sever his30 bowstring and pierced his horses, standard and
charioteer. The brave one smiled and shrouded Arjuna with arrows. At this, Partha strung a great bow. He was
supreme among those who were skilled in the use of all weapons and was better than the preceptor. He quickly released six hundred arrows, as if he had grasped one alone. He again shot seven hundred arrows, and another one
thousand. These were impossible to repluse. He again shot another ten thousand arrows and killed many in Drona’s
army. He was truly powerful and wonderful in ﬁghting. Men, elephants and horses were pierced by those and fell
down, bereft of their lives. They ﬂed from the ﬁeld of battle, or fell down dead, their weapons severed. There were
rathas on the best of chariots and horses and they were afﬂicted by the arrows. They were crushed, dispersed and
burnt, as if by the vajra, the wind or the ﬁre. Elephants that were like mountain peaks, clouds and large houses fell
down. Wounded by Arjuna’s arrows, thousands of horses fell down. They were like swans on the breast of the Himalayas, struck by a torrent of water. Wounded by Pandava’s arrows, chariots, horses, elephants and infantry were
like large masses of water, dried up by the sun at the end of a yuga. Pandava’s net of arrows was like the rays of
the sun. But Drona was like a cloud that forcefully showered down arrows, and that brave and foremost warrior
among the Kurus enveloped him. This was like a cloud covering the rays of the sun. Drona then struck Dhananjaya
in the chest with an iron arrow. It was released with great force and could drink up the enemy’s blood. He31 trembled in all his limbs, like a mountain during an earthquake. However, Bibhatsu resorted to fortitude and struck
Drona with arrows. Drona used ﬁve arrows to strike Vasudeva, pierced Arjuna with seventy-three and pierced his
standard with three. O king! The powerful Drona got the better of his disciple. In an instant, he made Arjuna disappear with his shower of arrows. As his bow was drawn in the form of a circle, we saw the arrows of Bharadvaja’s
son descend continuously and it was extraordinary. O king! In the battle, the large number of arrows released by
Drona was shafted with the feathers of herons. They descended on Vasudeva and Dhananjaya. The likes of the battle between Drona and Pandava had never been seen.
‘“The immensely intelligent Vasudeva started to think about what should be done. Vasudeva addressed Dhananjaya in these words. ‘O Partha! O Partha! O mighty-armed one! We should not be wasting time. Abandon Drona
and let us perform the greater task.’ Partha told Krishna, ‘O Keshava! It shall be as you wish.’ The mighty-armed
Bibhatsu circumambulated Drona and departed, glancing backwards and shooting arrows. Drona spoke to him. ‘O
Pandava! Where are you going? Is it not true that you do not retreat until you have vanquished the enemy in
battle?’ Arjuna replied, ‘You are my preceptor. You are not my enemy. I am your disciple and am like your son.
Nor is there any man in this world who can vanquish you in battle.’ Having spoken these words, the mighty-armed
Bibhatsu advanced against the soldiers, wishing to slay Jayadratha. His wheels were guarded by the Panchalas,
Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja. They followed the great-souled one, as he penetrated your army. O great king! Jaya,
Satvata Kritavarma, the king of Kamboja32 and Shrutayu countered Dhananjaya. They had ten thousand rathas as
their followers—the Abhishahas, the Shurasenas, the Shibis, the Vasatis, the Machellakas, the Lalitthyas, the
Kekayas, the Madrakas, the Narayanas, the Gopalas and masses of Kambojas. They were revered as brave ones
and had earlier been vanquished by Karna. With Bharadvaja’s son at the forefront, they rushed at Arjuna, ready to
give up their lives. He was angry and consumed by grief on account of his son. He was like Death and the Destroyer. He was armoured and wonderful in ﬁghting. He was ready to give up his life in that tumult. Like the leader of a
herd of elephants, he was ready to devour those soldiers. He was a great archer and brave. He was a tiger among
men and they sought to counter him. A tumultuous battle commenced and it made the body hair stand up. It was
between the others who sought to ﬁght and Arjuna. The bull among men advanced, wishing to kill Jayadratha.
They united and countered him, like medicines against a disease that has surfaced.”’
CHAPTER 1044(67)

‘Sanjaya said, “Partha, the immensely strong and valiant one, was checked by them. Drona, supreme among
rathas, also quickly attacked him from the rear. But he showered rays of a large number of sharp arrows, like the
rays of the sun. He tormented your soldiers, like a large number of diseases assailing the body. Horses were

pierced. Standards were severed. Elephants and their riders were brought down. Umbrellas and bows were pierced.
Chariots were deprived of their wheels. The soldiers were afﬂicted by arrows and were routed in every direction.
This was the terrible battle and nothing could be distinguished. O king! In that battle, they fought each other with
arrows and Arjuna made the standard-bearers tremble with his sharp arrows. He was always devoted to the truth.
He was always truthful to his pledge. The one borne on white horses attacked the best of warriors, who was borne
on red horses.33 Drona, the preceptor, struck his disciple, the great archer, with twenty-ﬁve arrows that pierced the
inner organs. Bibhatsu, supreme among those who wielded all weapons, quickly attacked him with arrows that
could repluse the most forceful of arrows. The one whose soul was immeasurable34 invoked the brahmastra.35 He
used broad-headed arrows to counter the straight-tufted and broad-headed arrows used by his opponent. We beheld
the extraordinary ﬁghting skills of Drona, the preceptor. Even though he was young and exerted himself, Arjuna
could not pierce him back. The cloud that was Drona was like a mighty cloud that poured down thousands of torrents of rain in the form of a shower of arrows on the mountain that was Partha. O venerable one! Arjuna used the
brahmastra to counter the shower of arrows. The spirited one countered all those arrows with his own arrows.
Drona then struck the one on white horses with twenty-ﬁve arrows and struck Vasudeva on the chest and the arms
with seventy swift arrows. The intelligent Partha laughed at this mass of arrows released by the preceptor. He released sharp arrows and countered him in battle. Those two,36 supreme among rathas, were thus wounded by
Drona. The unassailable one was like a sun that has arisen at the end of a yuga and they avoided him. They avoided the sharp arrows that were released from Drona’s bow.
‘“Kiriti Arjuna attacked the army of the Bhojas and stationed himself between Kritavarma and Sudakshina of
Kamboja. He avoided the invincible Drona, who was like Mount Mainaka. The supreme among the Kuru lineage
was unassailable and a tiger among men.37 But quickly and forcefully, Bhoja38 struck him with ten arrows that
were tufted with the feathers of herons. O king! Arjuna pierced him with sharp arrows and confounded Satvata39
by striking him again with three arrows. But Bhoja laughed and pierced Partha and Madhava Vasudeva with twenty-ﬁve arrows each. At this, Arjuna severed his bow and pierced him with seventy-three arrows that were like
crests of ﬁre or like angry and venomous serpents. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Maharatha Kritavarma
took up another bow and swiftly struck him in the chest with ﬁve arrows. He again pierced Partha with ﬁve sharp
arrows. Partha struck him between the breasts with nine arrows. On seeing that Kounteya was obstructed by the
ratha Kritavarma, Varshneya thought that they should not waste time. At this, Krishna spoke to Partha. ‘Do not
show mercy towards Kritavarma. Forget the relationship with him and crush and kill him.’40 Thereafter, Arjuna
confounded Kritavarma with his arrows. He advanced on his swift horses against the army of the Kambojas.
Hardikya41 became angry at seeing that the one on white horses was thus penetrating. He picked up his bow and
arrows and attacked the two Panchalas who were following Arjuna and guarding his chariot wheels. Kritavarma
used his arrows to counter the two rathas. Bhoja used three arrows completely made out of iron to pierce Yudhamanyu and four for Uttamouja. They pierced him back with ten arrows each. They severed his standard and his
bow. Hardikya became senseless with anger and picked up another bow. He enveloped the two brave ones with arrows and deprived them of their bows. They grasped and readied other bows and struck Bhoja. Meanwhile, Bibhatsu penetrated the enemy’s army. But those two bulls among men endeavoured, they could not penetrate the formation of Dhritarashtra’s son, since the entry was barred by Kritavarma.
‘“In the battle, the one on the white horses spiritedly fought against the soldiers of the opposition. Though the
slayer of enemies was within reach of Kritavarma, he did not kill him. On seeing that he was advancing, the brave
King Shrutayudha angrily attacked him, brandishing a giant bow. He pierced Partha with three arrows and Janardana with seventy. He struck Partha’s standard with an extremely sharp kshurapra arrow. At this, Arjuna was extremely enraged. He used ninety arrows with drooping tufts to strike him, like a giant elephant being struck with a
goad. O king! But he could not tolerate Pandaveya’s valour and struck him with seventy-seven iron arrows. At this,
Arjuna severed his bow and deprived him of his quiver. He angrily struck him on the chest with seven arrows with
drooping tufts. The king was senseless with rage and picked up another bow. He struck Vasava’s son42 in the arms
and the chest with nine arrows. But Arjuna, the destroyer of enemies, smiled at Shrutayudha. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! He afﬂicted him with thousands of arrows. The maharatha swiftly killed his horses and his chario-

teer. The immensely strong one then pierced him with seventy iron arrows. With his horses slain, King Shrutayudha abandoned that chariot. The brave King Shrutayudha was the son of Varuna. His mother was the great river Parnasha,43 with cool waters. In the battle, the brave one raised his club and rushed against Partha. For the sake of her
son, his mother had spoken these words to Varuna. ‘In this world, let my son be unslayable by enemies.’ Pleased
with her, Varuna had said, ‘For the sake of his welfare, I will grant him this boon. Because of this divine weapon, it
won’t be possible for your son to be killed. But it is impossible for any human to be immortal. O supreme among
rivers! Everyone who has been born must certainly be mortal. Because of the power of this weapon, the enemies
will always ﬁnd him to be unassailable in battle. Dispel this fever from your mind.’ Having spoken these words,
Varuna gave him the club, with the relevant mantras. Having obtained this, Shrutayudha became invincible in all
the worlds. But the illustrious lord of the ocean again spoke these words. ‘This should never be released on someone who is not ﬁghting. If that is done, it will descend on you.’ He used that slayer of enemies to strike
Janardana.44 The valiant Krishna received it on his broad shoulders. Shouri did not tremble, like Mount Vindhya
against the wind. This was like a badly performed act of magic that backﬁres. It returned and killed the brave and
intolerant Shrutayudha, who was stationed there. Having slain the brave Shrutayudha, it fell down on the ground.
Great sounds of lamentation arose among the assembled soldiers, when they saw that Shrutayudha, the scorcher of
enemies, had been slain by his own weapon. O lord of men! This was because Keshava was a non-combatant and
Shrutayudha had hurled the club at him. He was thus slain and destroyed, just as Varuna had said. All the archers
saw him fall down on the ground. Thus was Parnasha’s beloved son brought down. He was as resplendent as a tree
with many branches, shattered by a storm. On seeing that Shrutayudha, the scorcher of enemies, had been slain, all
the soldiers and all the chiefs among the soldiers began to ﬂee.
‘“At this, the brave Sudakshina, the son of the king of Kamboja, attacked Phalguna, the destroyer of enemies, on
swift horses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Partha shot seven arrows at him. These penetrated through the
brave one’s body and entered the ground. In the battle, pierced by sharp arrows released from Gandiva, he pierced
Arjuna back with ten arrows shafted with the feathers of herons. He again pierced Vasudeva with three and Partha
with ﬁve. O venerable one! At this, Partha severed his bow and standard. Pandava pierced him with two extremely
sharp broad-headed arrows. However, he pierced Partha with three and roared like a lion. The brave Sudakshina
angrily hurled a javelin that was completely made out of iron at the wielder of Gandiva. This was terrible and was
adorned with bells. It ﬂamed like a giant meteor, emitting sparks, and descended on the maharatha. It pierced him
and fell down on the surface of the ground. However, Partha’s valour was unthinkable. He used fourteen arrows
shafted with heron feathers to pierce him, his horses, his standard, his bow and his charioteer. He used many other
arrows to shatter his chariot. Though Sudakshina of Kamboja was valiant, his resolution had been rendered unsuccessful. With a broad and sharp arrow, Pandava pierced his heart. With his armour shattered, he trembled in his
limbs. His crown and his armlets were dislodged. The brave one fell downwards, like a standard released from an
implement. He was like a handsome and well-established karnikara tree on a mountain peak in the spring in the
Himalayas, shattered by the force of the wind. The handsome Sudakshina of Kamboja was slain and lay down on
the ground, though he deserved an expensive bed. His eyes were coppery red and his ears were adorned. The son
of the king of Kamboja was brought down by Partha. All the soldiers in your son’s army ran away, on seeing that
Shrutayudha and Sudakshina of Kamboja had been slain.”’
CHAPTER 1045(68)

‘Sanjaya said, “O king! When Sudakshina and the brave Shrutayudha were killed, all your soldiers became angry
and swiftly attacked Partha. O king! The Abhishahas, the Shurasenas, the Shibis and the Vasatis started to pour
down a shower of arrows on Dhananjaya. With his arrows, Pandava simultaneously killed six hundred of these.
They were terriﬁed and ﬂed, like small animals before a tiger. Having returned again, they surrounded Partha from
all sides. Wishing to defeat the enemy in battle, he was ﬁghting with the foes and killing them. Arrows were quickly released from Gandiva and descended on them. Dhananjaya brought down heads and arms. Without any gaps,
the earth was strewn with fallen heads. Crows, vultures and wild crows ﬂew around and seemed to form a shadowy
canopy over the ﬁeld of battle. On seeing that they were being routed, Shrutayu and Achyutayu became intolerant
with rage and began to ﬁght against Dhananjaya. They were strong, proud and brave, born in noble lineages and

strong-armed. O great king! Desiring great fame, they swiftly showered down arrows from the left and from the
right. For the sake of your son, those two archers wished to kill Arjuna. They angrily covered Arjuna with thousands of arrows with drooping tufts, like clouds ﬁlling a lake. The angry Shrutayu struck Dhananjaya, best among
rathas, with a yellow and sharp javelin. Powerfully pierced by the enemy, the destroyer of enemies was overcome
by supreme lack of consciousness in the battle, confounding Keshava also. At that instant, maharatha Achyutayu
severely struck Pandava with an extremely sharp spear. It was as if he was pouring a corrosive45 into the greatsouled Pandava’s wound. Severely pierced, Partha held onto the pole of the standard. O lord of the earth! A great
sound, like the roar of lions, arose from all your soldiers, because they thought that Dhananjaya was dead. On seeing Partha bereft of his senses, Krishna was also extremely tormented and as his well-wisher, he comforted
Dhananjaya with words of assurance. Those two foremost rathas46 were successful in striking the target and covered Dhananjaya and Varshneya Vasudeva with showers of arrows from every direction. In that battle, they made
the wheels, the poles, the horses, the standards, the pennants and the entire chariot disappear and it was
extraordinary.
‘“O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bibhatsu slowly regained his senses, like one who has returned from the
capital of the king of the dead. He saw that his chariot and Keshava were covered with a net of arrows and he also
saw the two enemies stationed before him, like ﬂaming ﬁres. At this, maharatha Partha invoked the Shakra
weapon.47 From this, thousands of arrows with drooping tufts were released. Those arrows that were created
struck those two great archers. Their arrows, which were traversing through the sky, were shattered by Partha’s arrows. Through the force of his arrows, Pandava swiftly countered their arrows. He roamed around there, ﬁghting
with the maharathas. The arms and heads of those two were severed by Phalguna’s arrows. They fell down on the
ground, like two trees uprooted by the wind. On seeing that Shrutayu had been killed and that Achyutayu had also
been killed, everyone in the world wondered. It was as if the waters in the ocean had dried up. Partha then slew
ﬁve hundred rathas who had followed them and penetrated the army of the Bharatas, killing the best among them.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that Shrutayu and Achyutayu had been killed, their sons, Ayutayu
and Dirghayu, the best among men, became very angry and attacked Kounteya. Oppressed on account of their fathers, they showered down many different kinds of arrows. But the extremely wrathful Arjuna used straight-tufted
arrows to instantly despatch them to Yama’s abode. He agitated those ranks, like an elephant amidst a pond full of
lotuses. Those bulls among kshatriyas were incapable of resisting Partha.
‘“O king! Thousands of angry elephant-riders and well-trained elephants from Anga surrounded Pandava. Those
elephants were like mountains and were urged on by Duryodhana. There were kings from the east and the south,
with Kalinga at the forefront. When they descended on him, he swiftly shot arrows from Gandiva and severed the
heads and the arms of those who were at the front, together with the ornaments. Those heads and arms, together
with the armlets, were strewn around on the ground. They were as dazzling as golden stones, encircled with
snakes. Arms and heads were severed and fell down. They seemed to be like birds falling down from trees. Thousands of elephants were pierced by arrows and blood began to ﬂow from them. They seemed to be like mountains,
with haematite48 ﬂowing from them. Slain by Bibhatsu’s sharp arrows, others were lying around. There were
many mlecchas49 on the backs of elephants, hideous in form. O king! They were attired in many different kinds of
garments and wielded diverse kinds of weapons. They were slain by colourful arrows and looked resplendent,
blood ﬂowing from their limbs. Wounded by Partha’s arrows, elephants vomited blood. Thousands of them had
their bodies mangled, with their riders and with those who followed them on foot. They shrieked as they fell down.
Others ﬂed in different directions. Many were greatly terriﬁed and as those elephants ﬂed, they crushed their own
ranks. There were other ﬁghting elephants that were kept separately and they were as virulent as poison.50 These
went mad and behaved in the same way.
‘“There were asuras skilled in the use of maya, terrible and with ﬁerce eyes. There were Yavanas, Paradas,
Shakas, Sunikas, Goyaniprabhas, mlecchas, armed Kalakalpas, Darvabhisaras, Daradas, Pundras and Bahlikas.
There were hundreds and thousands of them and they formed a large force. They showered down weapons, but
proved to be incapable. The arrows released by Dhananjaya enveloped all those soldiers, like a cloud of locusts in
the sky. There were mlecchas with heads partly or completely shaved. Some had matted hair. Others were ﬁlthy in

conduct, with malicious faces. Through the maya of his weapons, he killed hundreds of those assembled ones.
Hundreds of those who lived in congregations were pierced by arrows.51 Those who lived in mountainous caverns
were frightened in that battle and ﬂed. Hundreds of elephants, horses, infantry and mlecchas were brought down
by the arrows. Wild crows, herons and wolves were delighted and drank the blood. He created a passage with destroyed foot soldiers, horses, chariots and elephants.52 The showers of arrows were the terrible boats. The hair was
the moss and weeds. Blood constituted its fearful current and the waves were terrible. The helmets were the small
ﬁsh and it seemed to be like Death at the end of a yuga. The bodies of slain elephants choked the ﬂow and that river of blood ﬂowed towards the left.53 There were bodies of princes, elephants, horses, rathas and foot soldiers and
one could not distinguish high ground from the low, like when Vasava showers profusely.54 Everywhere the earth
ﬂowed over with blood. The bull among kshatriyas sent six thousand brave and supreme ones and a thousand other
supreme kshatriyas to the world of the dead. As if decreed by destiny, thousands of elephants were pierced by the
arrows. They lay down on the ground, like mountains shattered by thunder. Thus did Arjuna roam around and kill
horses, rathas and elephants. He was like an elephant with rent temples crushing a forest of reeds. He was like a
ﬁre, aided by the wind, consuming a forest, with its many trees, lantanas and creepers and heaps of dense and dry
grass. Your soldiers were like a forest and Krishna was like the wind. The angry Pandava Dhananjaya, with his
rays of arrows, was like the ﬁre. He made the seats of chariots bereft of them and made them lie down on the
ground. With the bow in his hand, Dhananjaya seemed to dance around in that melee. His arrows were like the
touch of the vajra and he covered the ground with blood. The angry Dhananjaya penetrated the army of the
Bharatas.
‘“As he advanced, Shrutayu from Ambashtha55 countered him. O venerable one! As he endeavoured, Arjuna
swiftly used sharp arrows tufted with the feathers of herons to bring down his horses. Partha used other arrows to
sever his bow. At this, Ambashtha’s eyes became red with anger. He grasped a club and attacked Keshava and maharatha Partha in that battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The brave one laughed and raised his club. He
obstructed the chariot with his club and struck Keshava. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that Keshava had been struck with the club, Arjuna, the destroyer of enemy heroes, became extremely angry with Ambashtha. In that battle, he used gold-tufted arrows to cover the supreme of rathas and his club, like clouds enveloping the rising sun. Partha then used other arrows to shatter the club of the great-souled one and it was extraordinary. On seeing that it had fallen down, he grasped another mighty club and used that to again repeatedly
strike Arjuna and Vasudeva. Arjuna used two kshurapra arrows to slice down his arms, with the upraised club. He
then used another arrow to slice down his head, which was like Indra’s pole. O king! Thus slain, he roared and fell
down on the ground. It was like Indra’s standard, when it has been freed from the bonds that tie it to the implement. Partha was then surrounded on all sides by a dense array of chariots and hundreds of elephants and horses
and disappeared, like the sun shrouded by clouds.”’
CHAPTER 1046(69)

‘Sanjaya said, “Wishing to kill the king of Sindhu, Kounteya penetrated. He shattered Drona’s array and the irresistible array of Bhoja. O king! Sudakshina, the heir of Kamboja, was slain. The valiant Shrutayudha was also
killed by Savyasachi. On seeing that the soldiers were scattered and routed in every direction and that his own
army was destroyed, your son went to Drona. He swiftly approached Drona on a single chariot and said, ‘That
tiger among men has shattered this giant army and has departed.56 Use your intelligence to reﬂect on what should
be done after this. Given this terrible slaughter of people, how do we kill Arjuna and ensure that the tiger among
men does not kill Jayadratha? O fortunate one! You are our ultimate refuge. Act accordingly. This Dhananjaya is a
ﬁre and his anger is the wind that goads him. He is consuming the soldiers like kindling, like a raging ﬁre against
dry grass. O scorcher of enemies! O supreme among those who have knowledge of the brahman! Kounteya has
shattered the soldiers and has proceeded. The lords of men who are stationed to protect Jayadratha are overcome
by great anxiety. They thought that Dhananjaya would never be able to pass beyond Drona, not with his life. O immensely radiant one! But while you looked on, Partha has passed through your soldiers. All of them are extremely
distressed. I think that I no longer have an army left. O immensely fortunate one! I know that you have always

been engaged in the welfare of the Pandavas. O brahmana! I am confounded, thinking about what should be done.
O brahmana! I have sought to please you to the best of my strength. To the best of my capacity, I have given you
the best of livelihoods. But you do not recognize this. O inﬁnitely valorous one! We have always been devoted to
you. But you have always been affectionate towards the Pandavas and have been engaged in bringing injury to us.
Though you have obtained your livelihood from us, you have been engaged in bringing injury to us. I did not know
you earlier. You are like a razor dipped in honey. If you had not granted me the boon that you would afﬂict the
Pandavas, I would not have restrained the lord of Sindhu from returning to his own home. I displayed weak intelligence in depending on your assurance and your weapons. Having stupidly assured the lord of Sindhu, I have given
him death. Even if a man enters Yama’s mouth, he may escape. But once Jayadratha has come within Arjuna’s
reach, there is no escape for him. O one with the red horses! Act so that Jayadratha can be protected. Do not be angry at my distressed lamentations. Protect Saindhava.’
‘“Drona replied, ‘I have found no fault with your words. You are like Ashvatthama to me. O lord of the earth! I
am telling you this truthfully and act accordingly. Krishna is a supreme charioteer. His horses are swift. They are
supreme steeds. Even if a small space is created, Dhananjaya passes quickly through it. Have you not seen the innumerable arrows shot by Kiriti? As he swiftly advances, they descend one krosha57 behind his chariot. I am old
now and am incapable to travelling at such great speed. The force of the Parthas has presented itself at the mouth
of our array. O mighty-armed one! I should now capture Yudhishthira. Before all the archers and in the midst of all
the kshatriyas, this is the pledge that I made. Having been abandoned by Dhananjaya, he is stationed in front of
me. I will not move from the front of this vyuha and go to Phalguna. He is your equal in birth and deeds. With
your aides, you should go and ﬁght with that solitary enemy. Do not be frightened. You are a lord of the earth. You
are a king. You are brave, accomplished and skilled. You can uproot enemies like Pandava. O brave one! You
should yourself swiftly go to the spot where Dhananjaya is.’
‘“Duryodhana said, ‘O preceptor! O supreme among those who wield all weapons! How can I cross Dhananjaya? He has countered you too. I am capable of vanquishing Purandara, the wielder of the vajra, in battle. But I
cannot withstand Arjuna, the vanquisher of enemy cities, in battle. Through the power of his weapons, he has vanquished Bhoja Hardikya58 and you, who are an equal of the gods. His arrows have killed Shrutayu, Sudakshina,
King Shrutayudha, Shrutayu59 and Achyutayu. Hundreds of mlecchas have been killed. He has consumed many
enemies. How can I ﬁght with Pandava? How can I ﬁght with that invincible one? He is learned in the use of
weapons. How do you think that I am ﬁt to ﬁght with him today? Instruct me. I am dependent on you and your servant. Preserve my fame.’
‘“Drona replied, ‘O Kouravya! You have spoken the truth. Dhananjaya is invincible. But I will act so that you
are able to withstand him. Let all the archers in the world witness something extraordinary today. While Vasudeva
looks on, you will repulse Kounteya. O king! I will fasten this golden armour on you and arrows and weapons will
not be able to penetrate you in the battle, even if the gods, the asuras, the yakshas, the serpents, the rakshasas and
the three worlds ﬁght against you, together with all men. You have no reason to fear. Krishna, Kounteya, or anyone
else who uses weapons in battle, will not be able to pierce this armour with arrows. Resorting to this armour today,
go and ﬁght with the angry Arjuna in the battle. Go yourself and go swiftly. He won’t be able to withstand you.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “Having spoken these words, Drona, supreme among those who knew about the brahman, quickly
touched water and fastened that radiant armour on him, in accordance with the proper rites. This was for the sake
of your son’s victory in battle. All the worlds were astounded at the knowledge of the one who knew about the
brahman.
‘“Drona said, ‘Let Brahma give you benedictions. Let all the brahmanas give you benedictions. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Let the best of reptiles give you benedictions. Let Yayati, Nahusha, Dhundumara, Bhagiratha
and all the best of rajarshis60 always give you benedictions. May you have benedictions from those who have one
foot61 and those who have many feet. In this great battle, may you always have benedictions from those who possess no feet. May Svaha, Svadha and Shachi always act so that it is beneﬁcial for you.62 O unblemished one! May
Lakshmi and Arundhati always act so that it is beneﬁcial for you. O king! May Asita-Devala, Vishvamitra, Angiras, Vasishtha and Kashyapa act so that it is beneﬁcial for you. Let Dhata, Vidhata, the lord of the worlds, the di-

rections, the lords of the directions and the six-faced Kartikeya grant you benedictions today. Let the illustrious Vivasvat act in every way so that it is beneﬁcial to you. O king! Let the four elephants of the four directions,63 the
earth, the ﬁrmament, the sky, the planets, the earth which always holds us up from below and Sesha, the chief of
the serpents, give you their benedictions. O son of Gandhari! In earlier times, the daitya Vritra used his valour to
defeat the best of the gods in battle. Thousands of them were mangled in their bodies. All of them were robbed of
their energy and their strength. With Indra, those residents of heaven went to Brahma and sought refuge with him.
They were frightened of the great asura, Vritra.’
‘“The gods said, ‘O supreme among gods! The gods are afﬂicted by Vritra. O chief among the gods! Be our
refuge now. Protect us from this great fear.’
‘“Drona said, ‘He64 addressed Vishnu, who was stationed by his side and also the best of the gods, Shakra and
the others. He spoke these appropriate words to the best of the gods, who were distressed. “The gods, together with
Indra and the brahmanas, should always be protected by me. Vritra has been created from Tvashtra’s extremely invincible energy.65 In ancient times, Tvashtra performed austerities for a million years. O gods! Having obtained
Maheshvara’s permission, he then created Vritra. It is through the favours of that god that this enemy of yours has
become powerful and can strike you. Without going to Shankara’s abode, one cannot see the illustrious Hara. Having swiftly gone to Mandara and seen him, you will be able to destroy your enemy. The source of all austerities,
the destroyer of Daksha’s sacriﬁce, resides there.66 He is the wielder of Pinaka.67 He is the lord of all beings. He
is the one who uprooted Bhaga’s eyes.”68 With Brahma, the gods went to Mandara. They saw that mass of energy,
with the splendour of ten million suns. Having seen the gods, he welcomed them and asked, “Tell me. What can I
do for you? The sight of me is never fruitless. Because of this, may your desires be satisﬁed.” Having been thus
addressed, all those residents of heaven replied, “Vritra has robbed us of your energy. Be the refuge of the residents
of heaven. O god! Behold our bodies. We are afﬂicted and oppressed because of his blows. We have sought refuge
with you. O Maheshvara! Be our refuge.” Maheshvara replied, “O gods! You know that this immensely strong and
ﬁerce one has been created from Tvashtra’s energy. He cannot be resisted by those who haven’t controlled their
souls. It is certainly my task to protect all the residents of heaven. O Shakra! Accept this radiant armour from my
body. O lord of the gods! Fasten it on your body, after uttering these mantras in your mind.” Having spoken these
words, the granter of boons gave him the armour, together with the mantras. Protected by the armour, he69 advanced against Vritra’s army. In that great battle, many different kinds of weapons were hurled at him. But they
were incapable of penetrating the armour that he had fastened. In the battle, the lord of the gods himself killed Vritra. He then gave the armour, whose joints were made out of mantras, to Angiras. Angiras gave it to his son Brihaspati, who knew about mantras. Brihaspati gave it to the intelligent Agniveshya. O supreme among kings! Agniveshya gave it to me and I have fastened the armour on you, so as to protect your body, together with the
mantras.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “Having thus addressed your immensely radiant son, Drona, bull among preceptors, again gently
spoke these words. ‘O king! I have fastened this armour on you, using the strands of Brahma.70 In ancient times,
at the time of battle, Hiranyagarbha71 himself fastened it on Vishnu. In the tarakamaya battle, Brahma himself
fastened this divine armour on Shakra and I have fastened it on you.’ Having fastened the armour with the use of
mantras and in the decreed fashion, the great brahmana sent the king to the battle. The mighty-armed one was thus
armoured by the great-souled preceptor. He had one thousand rathas from Trigarta, accomplished in striking. There
were one thousand crazy tuskers that were valiant. There were ten thousand horses and other maharathas. Surrounded by these, the mighty-armed one advanced towards Arjuna’s chariot. There were the sounds of many musical instruments and he advanced like Virochana’s son.72 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A great sound arose
among your soldiers, when they saw Kourava advance like a fathomless ocean.”’
CHAPTER 1047(70)

‘Sanjaya said, “O great king! Duryodhana advanced behind those bulls among men, Partha and Varshneya, who
had already penetrated. The Pandavas, together with the Somakas, emitted a mighty roar and swiftly rushed against

Drona. The battle commenced between the Panchalas and the Kurus at the mouth of the vyuha and it was extraordinary. It was extremely terrible and tumultuous and made the body hair stand up. O king! The likes of that
encounter had not been seen, nor heard of. O lord of the earth! The battle commenced when the sun was at the
midpoint. With Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, the Parthas, who were skilled in striking, arranged themselves
into a battle formation and enveloped all of Drona’s soldiers with a shower of arrows. We had Drona, supreme
among the wielders of all weapons, at the forefront and showered down arrows on the Parthas, with Parshata at the
forefront. The heads of the two armies, adorned by chariots, were beautiful and dazzling. They looked like giant
clouds at the end of the winter season, driven towards each other by opposing winds. Those two large armies encountered and clashed against each other with the greatest of forces. It was like the rivers Ganga and Yamuna,
overﬂowing with water during the monsoon. Many different kinds of weapons were the winds. There were large
numbers of elephants, horses and chariots. In that battle, great and ﬁerce clouds were like giant clouds tinged with
lightning. Thousands of currents of arrows were released from the wind that was Bharadvaja’s son. They seemed
to pour down and pacify the immensely ﬁerce ﬁre that was created by the Pandu soldiers. The supreme of brahmanas agitated the Pandava soldiers, like the ocean at the end of the summer, when it is agitated by a ﬁerce and gigantic storm. They made every endeavour to advance against Drona. They were like a strong wind that seeks to
shatter a large embankment. But they were restrained by Drona, like a mountain repulsing a torrent of water. In
that battle, the Pandavas, the Panchalas and the Kekayas were enraged. There were other kings too, who surrounded them from all sides. In that battle, those immensely strong and brave ones countered the Panchalas.
‘“In that battle, Parshata, tiger among men, together with the Pandavas, repeatedly struck Drona, wishing to penetrate the enemy forces. Drona showered arrows on Parshata and he brought down a shower in return. Dhrishtadyumna brought down a shower of arrows. The swords were like winds at the forefront and there were lances,
spears and scimitars. The bowstrings were like lightning and Dhrishtadyumna was like the slayer of Bala.73 He
showered down a torrent of arrows in all the directions. He killed the best of rathas and horses and enveloped the
army. He prevented Drona from following the paths that the chariots of the Pandavas traversed. Parshata afﬂicted
Drona with his arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona made every endeavour in the battle. Having
encountered Dhrishtadyumna, his army was divided into three parts. One of these retreated towards Bhoja and another towards Jalasandha.74 The last one was slaughtered by the Pandavas and went towards Drona. Drona,
supreme among rathas, tried to unite his forces. But maharatha Dhrishtadyumna routed and separated them. Divided into three parts, the army of the sons of Dhritarashtra was slaughtered by the Pandus and the Srinjayas. They
were like unprotected animals75 in the forest, when attacked by many predators. Confounded by Dhrishtadyumna,
it was as if the warriors were devoured by Death. In that tumultuous battle, that is what people thought. The kingdom of a bad king is devastated by famine, disease and thieves. That is the way your army was shattered and routed by the Pandavas. Because of the rays of the sun on shattered weapons and armour and because of the dust raised
by the soldiers, the eyes were afﬂicted. Divided into three, the soldiers were slaughtered by the Pandavas.
‘“Drona became intolerant and killed the Panchalas with his arrows. While he crushed those arrays and killed
them with arrows, Drona assumed the form of the blazing ﬁre at the time of destruction. O lord of the earth! In that
battle, with only a single arrow, the maharatha pierced chariots, elephants, horses and foot soldiers. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! In the battle, there was not a single one among the soldiers of the Pandavas who could
withstand the sharp arrows that were released from Drona’s bow. They were scorched by the sun and consumed by
Drona’s arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Parshata’s soldiers began to wander around there. In that
fashion, Parshata was like Death among your forces. He blazed everywhere, like a forest ﬁre amidst dry wood. The
soldiers were killed by the arrows of Drona and Parshata. But those soldiers were ready to give up their lives and
fought to the best of their capacity. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O great king! Whether in your army, or that
of the enemy, there was not a single one who abandoned the ﬁght out of fear.
‘“The brothers Vivimshati, Chitrasena and maharatha Vikarna surrounded Kounteya Bhimasena from all sides.
Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti and the valiant Kshemadhurti—these three followed your three sons.76 The maharatha and energetic King Bahlika, born in a noble lineage, with his soldiers and his advisers, countered Droupadi’s sons. Shaibya, the king of Govasana, with a thousand supreme warriors, countered the valiant son of Kashi.

Ajatashatru Kounteya was like a ﬂaming ﬁre and King Shalya, the lord of Madra, repulsed the king.77 The brave
and intolerant Duhshasana, together with his own soldiers, advanced and fought against Satyaki, supreme among
rathas. I armoured myself and with my soldiers and four hundred great archers, countered Chekitana.78 Shakuni,
with seven hundred warriors from Gandhara who were armed with bows, lances, arrows and swords, countered
Madri’s son.79 The great archers, Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti, were prepared to give up their lives for the
sake of their friend and raised their weapons in battle, countering Virata, the lord of Matysa. The valiant Bahlika
made efforts to counter the unvanquished and powerful Shikhandi, the son of Yajnasena. Those from Avanti and
Souvira, together with the cruel Prabhadrakas countered the angry Dhrishtadyumna from Panchala. The brave rakshasa Ghatotkacha was cruel and was advancing to ﬁght. Swiftly and angrily, Alayudha rushed against him in the
battle. Alambusa, the king of the rakshasas, adopted a fearsome form and was repulsed by maharatha Kuntibhoja,
with a large body of soldiers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Saindhava remained stationed behind all the
soldiers. He was protected by the rathas who were supreme archers, Kripa and the others. O king! Saindhava’s
chariot wheels were protected by two great ones—Drona’s son to the left and the son of the suta to the right. His
rear was protected by Kripa, Vrishasena, Shala and the invincible Shalya, with Somadatta’s son at the forefront.
They knew about policy and were great archers. All of them were skilled in ﬁghting. Having made arrangements to
protect Saindhava, they80 got ready to ﬁght.”’
CHAPTER 1048(71)

‘Sanjaya said, “O king! Listen. I will describe exactly the wonderful battle that commenced between the Kurus and
the Pandavas. Bharadvaja’s son was stationed at the mouth of the vyuha. In that battle, the Parthas approached and
fought, seeking to penetrate Drona’s force. Drona himself, and the soldiers, sought to protect the vyuha. They
fought against the Parthas in that battle, desiring great fame. Desiring the welfare of your son, Vinda and Anuvinda
from Avanti angrily struck Virata with ten arrows. O great king! While those two valiant ones and their followers
were stationed in battle, Virata bravely advanced against them and fought with them. The battle between them was
terrible and blood ﬂowed like water. It was as if a lion and two foremost elephants with shattered temples had met
in the forest. Bahlika prided himself in the battle and Yajnasena’s immensely powerful son81 struck him with
sharp and terrible arrows that were capable of penetrating the inner organs. Bahlika became extremely angry and
used nine gold-tufted arrows with drooping tufts, which had been sharpened on stone, to strike Yajnasena’s son.
The encounter between them was terrible and there was a profusion of arrows and lances. It generated fear among
cowards and increased the delight of the brave. The arrows released by those two covered the sky and the directions and enveloped everything, so that nothing could be seen. In the battle, together with his soldiers, Shaibya
from Govasana fought against the maharatha who was the son of Kashi. It was like one elephant against another
elephant. In the battle, the enraged King Bahlika fought against Droupadi’s maharatha sons and this was as beautiful as the mind battling against the ﬁve senses. They,82 supreme among beings, fought ﬁercely and showered arrows in every direction, like the senses ﬁghting for possession of the body. Your son, Duhshasana, struck Varshneya Satyaki with nine sharp arrows that had drooping tufts. Having been thus grievously struck by that great
archer, the archer Satyaki, for whom truth was his valour, quickly lost his senses somewhat. But having regained
his composure, Varshneya swiftly pierced your maharatha son with ten arrows that were shafted with the feathers
of herons. O king! They pierced each other ﬁrmly with arrows and the wounded in the battle, were dazzling, like
blossoming kimshukas. The angry Alambusa was afﬂicted by Kuntibhoja’s arrows, which found their mark. He
was as beautiful as a ﬂowering kimshuka. The rakshasa pierced Kuntibhoja with many iron arrows. At the forefront of your army, he then roared loudly. Those two brave ones fought against each other in that battle. To all the
beings, they seemed to be like Shakra and Jambha in ancient times.83 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The
sons of Madri were angry and violent against Shakuni in the battle, since he had caused the enmity earlier. In the
battle, they afﬂicted him with arrows.
‘“O great king! That was the reason behind the destruction of men.84 It was created by you, extended by Karna
and maintained by your sons. O king! That ﬁre of rage85 has now arisen and is consuming the entire earth. Be-

cause of the arrows of the sons of Pandu,86 Shakuni was forced to retreat. He was unable to exhibit his valour in
battle and did not know what to do. On seeing that he was retreating, Madri’s maharatha sons again showered
down arrows on him, like clouds raining down on a large mountain. He was struck by many arrows with drooping
tufts. Using his swift horses, Soubala ﬂed towards Drona’s array. Ghatotkacha rushed against the brave rakshasa
Alayudha. But in that battle, he used only a medium violence and force.87 O great king! The wonderful battle between the two was like the battle that had taken place in earlier times between Rama and Ravana. In the battle,
King Yudhishthira pierced the king of Madra with ﬁve hundred arrows and again pierced him with another seven.
O king! An extraordinary battle raged between them. It was like the great battle that had taken place in earlier
times between Shambara and the king of the immortals.88 Your sons, Vivimshati, Chitrasena and Vikarna, were
surrounded by a large army and fought against Bhimasena.”’
CHAPTER 1049(72)

‘Sanjaya said, “The battle commenced and it made the body hair stand up. The Kouravas were divided into three
and the Pandavas rushed against them. Bhimasena rushed against the mighty-armed Jalasandha and Yudhishthira
and his soldiers attacked Kritavarma in the battle. O great king! Dhrishtadyumna showered down arrows that were
as dazzling as the rays of the sun and attacked Drona in the battle. A battle commenced between all the spirited
archers, between the Kurus and the Somakas, who were angry with each other. There was the destruction of beings
and it gave rise to great terror. The soldiers were engaged in duels and fought without any fear. The powerful
Drona fought with the powerful son of Panchala. He89 showered down a torrent of arrows and it was extraordinary. In every direction, they caused destruction, like in a forest of lotuses.90 Drona and Panchala severed
the heads of many brave men from the arrays and they were strewn around everywhere. There were also garments,
ornaments, arms, standards, armour and weapons. They were golden and colourful and were smeared with blood.
Thus smeared, they looked like masses of clouds, tinged with lightning. The arrows brought down elephants, horses and men in that battle. The maharathas released these from bows that were as long as palm trees. In that clash
between the brave and great-souled ones, swords, shields, bows, heads and armour were strewn around. O great
king! In every direction, in that supreme carnage, many headless torsos were seen to arise. O venerable one! Vultures, herons, wild crows, hawks, crows, jackals and large numbers of many other carnivorous beasts were seen. O
king! They fed on the ﬂesh and drank the blood. They dragged them91 by the hair and got at the marrow in many
ways. They tugged at the bodies and the severed limbs. Large numbers of heads of men, horses and elephants were
there. The men were skilled in the use of weapons. They were trained in war and were accomplished. They wielded arrows and desired victory in that battle. They fought ﬁercely there. In that battle, many on your side displayed
many beautiful motions of ﬁghting with swords, scimitars, javelins, spikes, spears, lances and battleaxes. There
were those who raised clubs, maces and other weapons in their arms. Men angrily fought and killed each other
with their bare arms. Rathas fought against rathas, horse-riders against horse-riders, elephants against supreme elephants and infantry against infantry. Some were excited and crazily attacked each other, as if they were roaming
around in an arena.92 They shrieked and killed each other in the battle.
‘“O lord of the earth! Thus did the battle rage, without any fear. Dhrishtadyumna’s horses got mixed up with
those of Drona’s. Those horses were beautiful and well trained and possessed the speed of the wind. They possessed the complexion of pigeons and were red like blood.93 O king! Those horses got mixed up in the battle and
were as beautiful as clouds tinged with lightning. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The brave Dhrishtadyumna
saw that Drona was near. He discarded his bow and grasped a sword and a shield. Parshata, the destroyer of enemy
heroes, wished to perform an extremely difﬁcult feat. With great strength, he approached Drona’s chariot. He stationed himself on the middle of the yoke and sometimes on the joints of the yoke. He slew half of those horses and
was honoured by the soldiers. With the sword in his hand, he roamed around amidst those red horses. Drona could
not detect a weakness in him and it was extraordinary. He was like a hawk descending in the forest, in search of
some ﬂesh. Thus did he venture forth, wishing to kill Drona. Drona released a hundred arrows to cut off the shield,
which was decorated with the mark of a hundred moons. He then severed the sword of Drupada’s son with ten ar-

rows. The powerful one used sixty-four arrows to kill his horses. With two broad-headed arrows, he severed his
standard and his umbrella and killed the charioteers who guarded his ﬂanks.94 He stretched his bow back to his
ears, like the wielder of the vajra releasing the vajra and swiftly afﬁxed a supreme arrow that would have caused
death. However, Satyaki severed that arrow with fourteen arrows. He rescued Dhrishtadyumna, as he was about to
be devoured by the preceptor’s mouth. O venerable one! The lion among men had grasped him, like a deer grasped
by a lion. But the bull among the Shini lineage freed Panchala from Drona. On seeing that Satyaki had rescued
Panchala in that great battle, Drona swiftly shot twenty-six arrows at him. While Drona was devouring the Srinjayas, Shini’s grandson pierced him back in the chest with twenty-six sharp arrows. All the Panchala rathas were
desirous of victory. They swiftly withdrew Dhristadyumna and resorted to Satvata, as he attacked Drona.”’
CHAPTER 1050(73)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O Sanjaya! After the arrows had been severed and Dhrishtadyumna had been freed by
Yuyudhana,95 foremost among the Vrishni lineage, what did the intolerant and great archer,96 supreme among the
wielders of all weapons, do? How did Drona ﬁght against Shini’s grandson, the tiger among men?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “He was venomous in his rage. His extended bow was like a gaping mouth. The sharp and iron
arrows were like his teeth. His eyes were coppery red with wrath. He sighed like a giant serpent. The brave one
among men was delighted. He was borne on extremely fast and red steeds. In every direction, he seemed to leap up
into the sky, or climb up mountains. He showered gold-tufted arrows and attacked Yuyudhana. He brought down a
mighty shower of arrows and the roar of his chariot was like that of the slayer of Bala.97 He stretched his bow and
released many iron arrows that seemed to be tinged with lightning. His lances and swords were like those of the
wielder of the vajra. They seemed to have been stirred by the force of his anger. Drona was like an unassailable
cloud and his horses seemed to have been urged on by the wind. Shini’s brave descendant, the destroyer of enemy
cities, saw him descend. He was invincible in battle and laughingly told his charioteer, ‘This brahmana is cruel. He
has been dislodged from his own duties.98 The preceptor is the refuge of the king who is Dhritarashtra’s son, his
relief from fearful grief. That prince is always insolent about his bravery. Swiftly and cheerfully, urge the horses to
use their greatest speed and let us go and ﬁght against him.’ Madhava’s99 supreme horses were like silver in their
complexion. They possessed the speed of the wind and they swiftly advanced towards Drona. Those two brave
ones fought against each other and everything was covered with a net of arrows, so that it became intolerable to
others. There was a fearful darkness, without any gaps. Both Drona and Satvata were skilled in using their
weapons swiftly. Those two lions among men were seen to shower down arrows incessantly. As the torrent of arrows showered down and struck each other, the sound that was heard was like the sound when Shakra releases his
vajra. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were pierced by iron arrows and their forms looked like those of
snakes which had been struck by venomous serpents. The extremely terrible sound of bowstrings and palms slapping was heard. It was like that of innumerable mountain tops shattered by thunder. The chariots, horses and charioteers of both looked beautiful. They were mangled by gold-tufted arrows and looked colourful. O lord of the
earth! The iron arrows were bright and ﬂew straight. As they descended, they looked as terrible as snakes that had
shed their skins. Both their umbrellas were brought down. Both their standards were also brought down. The limbs
of both ﬂowed with blood. But they were both dazzling, as they wished for victory. With blood ﬂowing from their
limbs, they looked like exuding elephants. They struck each other with arrows that were fatal.
‘“O great king! The sounds of delighted roars, mixed with the sound of conch shells and drums, ceased, because
no one else made any sound. The soldiers in the arrays became silent and the warriors stopped the ﬁghting. Everyone was curious to witness the duel between those two. Rathas, elephant-riders, horse-riders and infantry surrounded those two bulls among men, witnessing what was going on, with unblinking eyes. The arrays of elephants stood
there, and so did the arrays of horses. There were divisions of chariots, stationed in counter-formation. They were
colourful with pearls and coral. They were decorated with gems and gold. They were colourful with standards and
ornaments and with golden armour. There were vaijayanti ﬂags100 and caparisons, seats and blankets. There were
sparkling and sharp weapons on the horses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The frontal lobes of the elephants
were decorated with gold and silver and there were garlands around their tusks. They looked like a net of clouds at

the end of the summer, bedecked with cranes and ﬁreﬂies and decorated with lightning and ﬂashes.101 Those on
our side and those on Yudhishthira’s side were stationed. They wished to witness the battle between Yuyudhana
and the great-souled Drona. The gods assembled on their celestial vehicles, with Brahma and Shakra at the forefront. There were masses of siddhas and charanas, vidyadharas102 and giant serpents.
‘“Those tigers among men displayed wonderful techniques of releasing, withdrawing and hurling weapons and
all of them beheld these diverse motions with wonder. The immensely strong ones exhibited the dexterity of their
hands in using weapons. Drona and Satyaki pierced each other with their arrows. In the battle, Dasharha103 used
swift and extremely ﬁrm arrows to sever Drona’s arrows and then severed the immensely radiant one’s bow too.
But in the twinkling of an eye, Bharadvaja’s son grasped another bow. However, as he strung it, Satyaki swiftly
severed this too. Drona again grasped another bow and stood with it in his hand. As he repeatedly strung his bow,
it was again severed with sharp arrows. O Indra among kings! In the battle, Drona witnessed Yuyudhana’s superhuman deed and thought about this in his mind. ‘This kind of strength of arms has been seen in Rama,104 Kartavirya, Dhananjaya and Bhishma, the tiger among men. This is now seen in the supreme one among the Satvata
lineage.’ Having thought about this in his mind, Drona honoured his valour. The supreme among brahmanas beheld a dexterity that was like Vasava’s. The foremost among those who was knowledgeable about weapons was
gratiﬁed, and so were the gods, with Vasava. O lord of the earth! That kind of dexterity of hand and swiftness of
action, as shown by Yuyudhana, had not been seen earlier by the gods, the gandharvas and the masses of siddhas
and charanas, though they had known what Drona was capable of doing. Drona, the destroyer of kshatriyas, then
picked up another bow. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The foremost among those who knew about weapons
released weapons in the battle. However, Satyaki repulsed them with the maya of his own weapons. He destroyed
them with his sharp arrows and it was extraordinary. His superhuman deeds were witnessed in the battle and no
one else was capable of these. This was the outcome of yoga. Those on your side, who were knowledgeable about
yoga, honoured this. Whatever weapon Drona used, Satyaki used that as well. Therefore, the preceptor, the
scorcher of enemies, fought carefully. O great king! The one who knew about the science of ﬁghting became enraged. To slay Yuyudhana, he invoked a divine weapon. On seeing the extremely terrible agneya weapon, the destroyer of enemies, the great archer, released the divine varuna weapon. On beholding that both of them had resorted to the use of divine weapons, a great sound of lamentation arose. There were woes in the sky, from the beings
who had taken to the sky. However, the varuna and agneya weapons were paciﬁed when they confronted each other’s arrows.
‘“At that time, the sun began its downward course in the sky. King Yudhishthira, Pandava Bhimasena and Nakula and Sahadeva wished to protect Satyaki. With Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, Virata, the Kekayas, the Matsyas and the soldiers from the Shalveyas quickly advanced against Drona. With Duhshasana at the forefront, thousands of princes advanced towards Drona, who was surrounded by the enemy. O king! A battle started between
them and your archers. The world was covered with dust and enveloped in that net of arrows. Everyone was anxious and nothing could be distinguished. The soldiers were covered in dust. But without any fear, the battle raged
on.”’
CHAPTER 1051(74)

‘Sanjaya said, “When the sun was on a downward course, the force of the sun’s rays became less and everything
was covered in dust. Some soldiers relaxed their efforts. Some remained there. Others returned and fought again,
hoping for victory. Where the soldiers were thus engaged, striving for victory, Arjuna and Vasudeva slowly advanced towards Saindhava. With his sharp arrows, Kounteya created a path that was just sufﬁcient for the chariot.
And in this way, Janardana followed along that path. O lord of the earth! Wherever the great-souled Pandava’s
chariot advanced, your soldiers were shattered and routed there. The valiant Dasharha displayed his skills in driving the chariot. He exhibited circular motions that were superior, medium and inferior.105 The arrows were
marked with his name and were yellow.106 They ﬂamed like the ﬁre of destruction. They were tied with ligaments.107 They had well-crafted joints, were broad and could travel long distances. Those arrows were made out

of bamboo and iron. They were both similar and diverse. In that battle, together with the birds,108 they drank the
blood of beings. As he was stationed on his chariot, Arjuna shot his arrows at a distance of one krosha. Though the
chariot advanced one krosha ahead, those arrows killed the enemy. Hrishikesha advanced and caused the entire
universe to marvel. The well-trained horses possessed a speed like that of Tarkshya109 or the wind. O lord of the
earth! It advanced with a speed that the sun’s chariot, or that of Indra, Rudra or Vaishravana, could not muster. O
king! Never had anyone’s chariot moved that fast in a battle, as that of Arjuna, as fast as mind or desire. O king! O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the battle, Keshava, the destroyer of enemy heroes, urged the swift horses
and penetrated into the midst of the soldiers.
‘“Those supreme horses arrived in the midst of that mass of chariots. They were overcome with hunger, thirst
and exhaustion and bore the chariot with great difﬁculty. The horses were wounded with many weapons released
by many violent warriors. However, they110 executed diverse circular motions, as they crossed over destroyed
horses, elephants, chariots and men, lying down in thousands, like mountains. O king! Meanwhile, the two brave
brothers from Avanti saw that Pandava’s horses were tired and suddenly attacked him. They pierced Arjuna with
sixty-four arrows, Janardana with seventy and the horses with one hundred and were delighted. O great king! In
that battle, Arjuna became angry. He knew about the inner organs and used nine arrows with drooping tufts to
strike them in the inner organs. At this, the two of them111 became wrathful. They enveloped Bibhatsu and Keshava with a torrent of arrows and roared like lions. In the battle, the one with the white horses then used two broadheaded arrows to sever their colourful bows and swiftly sliced down their standards, which were bright as gold. O
king! In that encounter, they then grasped other bows and, extremely angry, began to oppress Pandava with their
arrows. At this, Dhananjaya, Pandu’s son, became wrathful. He used a couple of arrows to quickly sever their
bows again. He then swiftly used other arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone. With these,
he killed their horses, the two foot soldiers who guarded them and their parshni charioteers. With a kshurapra arrow, he severed the eldest one’s112 head from his body. Slain, he fell down on the ground, like a tree that has been
destroyed by a storm. On seeing that Vinda had been killed, the powerful Anuvinda abandoned his chariot, with
the horses having also been slain. The immensely strong one grasped a club. In the battle, remembering that his
brother had been killed, he attacked. The maharatha was foremost among those who fought with the club and
seemed to be dancing around with his club. The angry Anuvinda struck Madhusudana on the forehead with the
club. But though he was thus struck, he did not tremble and was like Mount Mainaka. At this, Arjuna used six arrows to slice off his neck, his two legs, his two arms and his head. Thus severed, they fell down, like hills. O king!
On seeing that those two had been killed, their followers were ﬁlled with rage and angrily attacked, releasing hundreds of arrows. O bull among the Bharata lineage! But Arjuna quickly killed them with his arrows. He roamed
around, like a consuming forest ﬁre at the end of winter.
‘“Dhananjaya passed over those soldiers with some difﬁculty. He was like a sun that has arisen, blazing through
the clouds. On seeing him, the Kurus were frightened. O bull among the Bharata lineage! But they recovered and
cheerfully attacked Partha from all directions. They knew that he was tired and they also knew that Saindhava was
far away. They roared loudly like lions and surrounded him from all directions. On seeing that they were so enraged, Arjuna, bull among men, smiled. He softly spoke these words to Dasharha. ‘Our horses are oppressed by
arrows and are exhausted. Saindhava is at a distance. What do you think is the best course of action now? What is
your wish? O Krishna! Tell me exactly. You have always been the wisest. In this battle, with you as their eyes, the
Pandavas will be victorious over the enemy. Let me tell you what I think we should do next. Listen to me. O Madhava! I think it is best to unyoke the horses. Remove their stakes.’ Having been thus addressed by Partha, Keshava
replied, ‘O Partha! My view is identical to what you have expressed.’ Arjuna said, ‘O Keshava! I will repulse all
the soldiers. You can properly perform the task that must be undertaken next.’ Dhananjaya got down from his chariot and stood there fearlessly. He held Gandiva bow and was stationed, as immobile as a mountain. The kshatriyas
desired victory. On knowing that Dhananjaya was now stationed on the ground, they thought that this was a weakness. Roaring loudly, they attacked. They surrounded the solitary one with a large number of chariots. They
stretched their bows and released arrows. They angrily displayed many different kinds of weapons. They covered
Partha with arrows, like clouds enveloping the sun. The kshatriyas forcefully attacked that bull among the ksha-

triyas. He was a lion among rathas and those warriors attacked him, like crazy elephants attacking a lion. The great
strength of Partha’s arms was then seen, since he angrily resisted a large number of soldiers surrounding him from
every direction. The lord repulsed all the arms and weapons of the enemy. He quickly covered all of them with
many arrows. O lord of the earth! The sky was dense with arrows. As a result of the friction, a giant ﬁre with
ﬂames was ignited. The great archers sighed deeply and were covered with blood. Horses and elephants were shattered and roared in distress in all the directions. Desiring victory in the battle, those brave ones were angry and
many of them wrathfully attacked the solitary one. The arrows were like waves.113 The standards were the currents. The elephants were the crocodiles and it was impossible to traverse. The foot soldiers were the innumerable
ﬁsh. There was the roar of conch shells and drums. There were many who crossed over to Yama and the dust was
intolerable. The headdresses were strewn around like tortoises. The pennants were like garlands of foam. The chariots were like waves on the ocean. The limbs of elephants were like mountains. With his arrows, Partha repulsed it,
like the shoreline.114
‘“In the battle, the mighty-armed Janardana fearlessly addressed these words to his beloved Arjuna, supreme
among men. ‘O Arjuna! In this battle, there is no well for the horses to drink from. They desire water to drink, not
to have a bath.’ Having been thus addressed, Arjuna cheerfully replied, ‘Here.’ He struck the earth with a weapon
and created a pure lake from which the horses could drink. Arrows were the bamboos there. Arrows were the pillars and it was covered with arrows. It was extraordinary. Partha created an abode made out of arrows and this extraordinary deed was like one of Tvashtra’s.115 At this, Govinda laughed and spoke words of praise. In that great
battle, thus did Partha create a pavilion made out of arrows.”’
CHAPTER 1052(75)

‘Sanjaya said, “The great-souled Kounteya created the water. Having repulsed the enemy soldiers, he then created
a pavilion made out of arrows. The immensely radiant Vasudeva quickly descended from the chariot. He freed the
horses and removed the arrows tufted with the feathers of herons. On seeing a sight that had never been seen before, a giant roar, like that of lions, arose from the masses of siddhas and charanas and all the soldiers. Though
Kounteya fought on foot, the bulls among men who fought against him could not counter him and it was wonderful. Large numbers of chariots and many elephants and horses descended on him. But Partha did not exhibit the
slightest bit of fear towards these men. The kings released large numbers of arrows towards Pandava. But these did
not afﬂict Vasava’s son. He had dharma in his soul and was the destroyer of enemy heroes. The valiant Partha received those nets of arrows, clubs and lances, like the ocean receiving rivers. With the great force of his weapons
and the strength of his arms, Partha countered the supreme arrows shot by all those Indras among kings. O great
king! The Kouravas worshipped the supremely wonderful valour of Partha and Vasudeva. ‘Has there ever been
anything more wonderful in this world, or will there ever be, than the way in which Partha and Govinda freed their
horses in this battle? Those supreme among men displayed great energy and great assurance in the forefront of the
battle. They generated great fear in us.’116 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Hrishikesha began to smile, as if
he was amidst women,117 after Arjuna had crated a pavilion made out of arrows in that ﬁeld of battle. O lord of
the earth! While all the soldiers on your side looked on, the lotus-eyed one led the horses inside. Krishna was
skilled in all acts connected with horses. He removed all their exhaustion, pain, trembling, nausea and wounds. He
removed the stakes with his hands and rubbed the horses down. Having comforted them in due fashion, he made
them drink the water. Having obtained water and having bathed, they were free of pain and exhaustion. He again
cheerfully yoked them to that supreme of chariots. Shouri, supreme among those who wield all weapons, then
mounted the chariot, together with the immensely energetic Arjuna, and they departed swiftly.
‘“On seeing that the supreme of chariots had been yoked to horses that had obtained water, the best among the
Kuru army again became distressed. O king! They sighed, like snakes that had been defanged. They separately
said, ‘Shame! Shame on us! While all the kshatriyas looked on, the armoured Partha and Krishna have passed us,
on a single chariot. They have shattered our forces, like children playing with a toy. All the kings displayed their
own valour. They shouted and made their best endeavours. But those scorchers of enemies have passed us, while
we looked on.’ On seeing that they had departed, other soldiers again said, ‘O Kouravas! Let all of us make haste,

so that we can kill Krishna and Kiriti. Dasharha has yoked his chariot while all the archers have looked on. Repulsing us in the battle, he is proceeding towards Jayadratha.’ O king! There were some other lords of the earth who
had seen a sight that had never before been seen in battle. On beholding that extraordinary wonder, they spoke to
each other. ‘All these soldiers of King Dhritarashtra, the kshatriyas and the entire earth are in distress because of
Duryodhana’s crime. They are confronting destruction. But the king118 does not understand this.’ O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Thus did the kshatriyas speak there. Others said, ‘The king of Sindhu has gone to Yama’s
abode. Let Dhritarashtra’s weak-sighted son decide on what should be done now.’ Meanwhile, the one with the
sharp rays was on a downward course and Pandava headed towards Saindhava with greater speed. The horses were
cheerful, now that they had drunk water. As the mighty-armed one, supreme among the wielders of all weapons,
proceeded angrily, like Death, none of the warriors were capable of resisting him. Pandava, the scorcher of enemies, drove away those soldiers, like a lion agitating a mass of deer, for the sake of Saindhava. Dasharha goaded
the horses and swiftly penetrated the array. He blew on Panchajanya, which possessed the complexion of cranes.
The arrows shot earlier by Kounteya began to fall behind him, so fast did those horses, with the speed of the wind,
proceed. The chariot roared like the clouds and the standard ﬂuttered in the wind. On seeing that terrible standard,
with the monkey on it, the rathas were distressed. The sun was covered everywhere with dust. The warriors were
severely afﬂicted with arrows in that battle and no one was capable of glancing at the two Krishnas.119 Dhananjaya wished to kill Jayadratha. Many enraged kings and many other kshatriyas surrounded him. In that great battle,
when Partha, bull among men, stopped to remove the arrows, Duryodhana swiftly followed him.”’
CHAPTER 1053(76)

‘Sanjaya said, “O king! On seeing that Vasudeva and Dhananjaya had penetrated, the kings on your side were immersed in fear. All of those great-souled ones were both angry and ashamed and were immobile. But having been
urged by their spirits, they proceeded towards Dhananjaya. However, those who were driven by anger and intolerance and went to ﬁght with Pandava did not return, like rivers heading towards the ocean. Those who were not virtuous ﬂed, like atheists turning away from the Vedas. They committed sins and served the cause of hell. Those two
bulls among men crossed over and freed themselves from that array of chariots and could be seen, like the sun and
the moon freed from Rahu’s mouth.120 They were like ﬁsh that had broken through a large net and were now devoid of fever. Thus did the two Krishnas look, after having broken through that net of soldiers. They freed themselves from Drona’s extremely impenetrable array, obstructed by weapons. Those great-souled ones were seen, like
suns that had arisen at the end of a yuga. They were liberated from that obstruction of weapons and freed from that
danger of weapons. Those great-souled ones could now be seen, creating obstructions for the enemy. It was as if
they had been freed from the touch of a ﬁre, or like ﬁsh freed from the mouth of a makara. Instead, those two agitated the soldiers, like a couple of makaras in the ocean. When they were stationed inside Drona’s array, those on
your side and your sons had held the view that they would not be able to cross beyond Drona. O great king! On
seeing that those two immensely radiant ones had passed beyond Drona’s array, they were no longer assured about
the king of Sindhu remaining alive. O king! O lord! Earlier, your sons had possessed the strong hope that the two
Krishnas would not be able to free themselves from Drona and Hardikya. O great king! But negating those hopes,
those two scorchers of enemies passed beyond Drona’s array and Bhoja’s impenetrable array. Having crossed, they
were seen to be like blazing ﬁres. Everyone was driven to despair and was certain that the king of Sindhu would no
longer remain alive.
‘“Krishna and Dhananjaya began to fearlessly converse among themselves about Jayadratha’s slaying, thus increasing the terror of the enemy. ‘He has been placed in the midst of six maharathas from the side of Dhritarashtra.
But once he is seen, Saindhava will not escape us. Even if he is protected in the battle by Shakra and the masses of
gods, I will still kill him.’ This is what he121 told Krishna. Thus did the two mighty-armed Krishnas converse with
each other, while looking for the king of Sindhu. Your sons heard this. They were like two thirsty elephants that
had passed through a desert and were now assured after having drunk water. Those two scorchers of enemies
seemed to have crossed over mountains infested by tigers, lions and elephants. Those mighty-armed ones seemed
to have overcome death and disease. On seeing that those two had been freed, all those on your side shrieked and

thought that the complexion on their faces122 was terrible. They had been freed from Drona, who was like a virulent serpent, or as if from a blazing ﬁre, and also from the other kings. They were as radiant as two suns. Those
two scorchers of enemies had been freed from Drona’s array, which was like an ocean. They were seen to be extremely delighted, like those who had crossed a sea. They had been freed from a great shower of weapons, protected by Drona and Hardikya. They were seen to be blazing in that battle, like Indra or Agni. Because of the sharp arrows of Bharadvaja’s son, there was blood on the two Krishnas and they were as beautiful as mountains with
karnikara trees. They had crossed over a lake in which Drona was the crocodile, lances were virulent serpents, iron
arrows were makaras and kshatriyas were the deep water. They had been freed from the cloud that was Drona’s
weapons, where thunder was the twang of bowstrings and the slapping of palms and clubs and swords were the
lightning. They were like the sun and the moon, freed of darkness. With their arms, they had swum across the six
rivers that head to the ocean,123 at the end of the summer, when the waters are overﬂowing and are also infested
with giant crocodiles. The two Krishnas were great archers and their renown was famous in the world. But all the
beings were astounded at their having withstood the strength of Drona’s weapons.
‘“Having approached, they looked around for Jayadratha, driven by the desire to kill. They looked like two
tigers who wished to descend on ruru deer. O great king! Such was the complexion on their faces that all your warriors thought that Jayadratha had already been slain. The mighty-armed Krishna and Pandava were together and
their eyes were coppery red. They were delighted on seeing the king of Sindhu and roared repeatedly. The resplendence of Shouri with the reins and Partha with the bow was like that of the sun or the ﬁre. They were delighted at
having been freed from Drona’s array and at having seen that Saindhava was nearby, like two hawks at the sight of
meat. On seeing that Saindhava was present nearby, they were like two hawks at the sight of meat. They descended, swiftly, angrily and suddenly.
‘“Having seen that Hrishikesha and Dhananjaya had crossed,124 your valiant son, King Duryodhana, wished to
protect the king of Sindhu. O lord! He had the armour that Drona had fastened on him. He was skilled in handling
horses and rushed on a single chariot. Your son overtook the great archers, Krishna and Partha.125 O lord of men!
Having gone on ahead, he turned and faced Pundarikaksha. At this, all the soldiers delightedly sounded musical
instruments, since your son had overtaken Dhananjaya. There were roars like lions, mixed with sounds of conch
shells and drums, on seeing that Duryodhana was stationed there, in front of the two Krishnas. O lord! There were
also those, like ﬁres, who had been assigned to protect the king of Sindhu. In that battle, they were also delighted
to see your son. O king! On seeing that Duryodhana and his followers had crossed them, Krishna spoke these
words, which were appropriate for the occasion, to Arjuna.”’

CHAPTER 1054(77)

‘“Vasudeva said, ‘O Dhananjaya! Behold. Suyodhana has overtaken us. I think that this is marvellous and there is
no ratha like him. The great archer can shoot up to a great distance. He is skilled in the use of weapons and is invincible in battle. He is ﬁrm in wielding weapons and is colourful in ﬁghting. Dhritrarashtra’s son is extremely
strong. He has been reared in great happiness, but is honoured by the maharathas. O Partha! He has always been
accomplished, but he has always hated the Pandavas. O unblemished one! Therefore, I think that the time has
come for you to ﬁght with him. Like the stake in a gambling match, on him rests victory, or its reverse. O Partha!
Release the venom of your anger here, which you have bottled up for a long time. This maharatha is the main
source of the injury to the Pandavas. He is now within striking distance. See that you are successful. This king desires the kingdom. That is why he has come to ﬁght with you. It is through good fortune that he has now arrived
within the reach of your arrows. O Dhananjaya! Act so that he is deprived of his life. He is intoxicated and deluded
because of his prosperity. He has never suffered from unhappiness. O bull among men! Nor does he know your
valour in battle. O Partha! There is no one in the three worlds, gods, asuras or men, who can withstand you and
vanquish you in battle, not to speak of Suyodhana alone. O Partha! It is through good fortune that he has come
near your chariot. O mighty-armed one! Kill him, like Purandara against Vritra. O unblemished one! This powerful
one has always sought to cause you injury. Through deceit, he cheated Dharmaraja in the gambling match. O one
who grants honours! He has performed many extremely cruel deeds towards him. Fight with this evil-minded one.
You have never set your mind on evil. You have always been noble. This inferior man has been addicted to kama.
O Partha! Set your mind on ﬁghting nobly and without reﬂecting on it, kill him. O Pandava! He deceitfully robbed
the kingdom and sent you on an exile to the forest. He caused oppression to Krishna.126 Remember those in your
heart and act valorously. It is through good fortune that he is circling around, within the range of your arrows. It is
through good fortune that he is in front of you and is trying to act against you. He knows that it is through good
fortune that he has to ﬁght against you in the battle. O Partha! It is through good fortune that you will be successful
in everything that is desired by you. O Partha! Therefore, in this battle, kill Dhritarashtra’s son, the wretch of the
lineage, just as in earlier times, in the battle between the gods and the asuras, Indra killed Jambha. If you kill him,
the soldiers127 will be without a protector and you can penetrate them. Sever the root of these evil-souled ones
and let the avabhritha of this enmity be completed.’”128
‘Sanjaya said, “Having been thus addressed, Partha replied, ‘I will do everything accordingly. Ignore everything
else and go to the spot where Suyodhana is. He has enjoyed the kingdom for a very long time, without any thorns.
Exhibiting my valour in ﬁghting, I will slice off his head in the battle. O Madhava! Though she did not deserve it,
he caused oppression to Krishna. She was dragged by the hair. Will I now be successful in avenging this?’ The two
Krishnas talked to each other in this way. Borne on the best of white horses, they urged them in the battle, looking
for the wicked one. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O venerable one! Having approached them, your son was
not the least bit frightened, though there was reason for great fear. At this, all the kshatriyas on your side honoured
him, because he advanced against Arjuna and Hrishikesha, desiring to repulse them. O lord of the earth! On seeing
the king in that battle, a great sound arose from all the soldiers on your side. As that great and terrible sound arose,
your son countered and checked them. Obstructed by your son, Kounteya became extremely angry and so did that
scorcher of enemies.129 On seeing that Duryodhana and Dhananjaya were angry with each other, all the kings, terrible in form, surrounded them from all sides. O venerable one! On seeing that Partha and Vasudeva were enraged,
your son laughed and wishing to ﬁght, challenged them. Dasharha was delighted at this and so was Pandava
Dhananjaya. They let out loud roars and blew on their excellent conch shells.130 On seeing that the two of them
were so cheerful, all the Kouravas gave up any hope of your son remaining alive. All the Kurus, and some among
the enemy, began to sorrow. They thought that your son had already been offered as an oblation into the ﬁre. The
warriors saw that Krishna and Pandava were delighted. Afﬂicted with fear, they exclaimed, ‘The king has been
slain. The king has been slain.’ On hearing the roars of the men, Duryodhana said, ‘Dispel your fears. I will send
the two Krishnas to the land of the dead.’ Having spoken thus to all the soldiers, the king expected to be victorious.
He angrily addressed Partha and spoke these words. ‘O Partha! If you have actually been born from Pandu, quickly

show me your weapons, divine and human. Show me your strength and your valour, and also that of Keshava. Act
swiftly against me and show me your manliness. They have spoken about deeds you have done, but we have not
seen them. They have been regarded as deeds of valour. Show them to me.’”’
CHAPTER 1055(78)

‘Sanjaya said, “Having said this, the king pierced Arjuna with three arrows that penetrated the inner organs. With
another four extremely forceful arrows, he pierced his four horses. He pierced Vasudeva between the breasts with
ten arrows and with another broad-headed arrow, severed the whip, so that it fell down on the ground. Partha
quickly struck him, without being distracted, with fourteen arrows that had been sharpened on stone and were
colourfully tufted. But those were neutralized by the armour. On seeing that those were unsuccessful, he131 again
struck him with fourteen sharp arrows. But these were also neutralized by the armour. On seeing that twenty-eight
of his arrows had become unsuccessful, Krishna, the destroyer of enemy heroes, spoke these words to Arjuna. ‘I
have never seen anything like this before. It is as if boulders have begun to move. O Partha! Arrows shot by you
are bcoming unsuccessful. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Has Gandiva lost its life? Is the grasp of your ﬁst
and the strength of your arms not what it used to be earlier? Is this not the time for your ﬁnal encounter with your
enemy? Tell me. I am asking you. O Partha! In the battle, I am amazed at seeing that all your arrows are unsuccessful and are falling down in front of Duryodhana’s chariot. They are as terrible as the vajra or thunder. They
penetrate the bodies of enemies. But those arrows are becoming unsuccessful. O Partha! What mockery is this
now!’
‘“Arjuna replied, ‘O Krishna! It is my view that Dhritarashtra’s son has sought refuge with Drona and he has
fastened this weapon, so that the weapons are unsuccessful. O Krishna! This armour possesses the essence of the
three worlds. Drona alone knows this. And I have learnt it from that excellent one. My arrows are incapable of
penetrating this armour. O Govinda! Maghavan himself cannot shatter it with his vajra. O Krishna! Knowing this,
why are you trying to confuse me? O Keshava! You know everything that goes on in the three worlds. You know
everything about what will happen in the future. O Madhusudana! No one else knows it as well as you do. O
Krishna! This Duryodhana has been prepared by Drona and is stationed fearlessly in this battle, having donned the
armour. O Madhava! But he does not know something about the appropriate course of action. He has only donned
the armour like a woman. O Janardana! Witness the valour of my arms and my bow. I will defeat Kouravya, although he is protected by the armour. The lord of the gods gave this radiant armour to Angiras. The lord of the
gods again gave me the armour, with the understanding that goes with it.132 Even if this armour is divine and even
if it has been created by Brahma himself, the evil-minded one will be pierced by my arrows today and will not be
protected by it.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “Having said this, Arjuna invoked some arrows with mantras and ﬁxed them. He afﬁxed those
arrows on the bow and stretched it. But Drona’s son cut them down with a weapon that was capable of destroying
all weapons. The one with the white horses was astounded at the sight of the one who knew about the brahman133
making those arrows unsuccessful from a distance. He told Keshava, ‘O Janardana! I am incapable of releasing
this weapon a second time. If I do that, the weapon will kill those on our own side. But behold my power today.’ O
king! Meanwhile, in that battle, Duryodhana pierced each of the two Krishnas with nine arrows that had drooping
tufts and were like virulent serpents. In that encounter, he again showered down arrows on Krishna and Pandava.
At this great shower of arrows, those on your side were delighted. They roared like lions and sounded their musical
instruments. At this, Partha became enraged in that battle and licked the corners of his mouth. He did not see any
part of the body that was not protected by the armour. He released some well-directed and sharp arrows that were
like death. These killed his134 horses and the two charioteers who guarded his ﬂanks.135 The valiant Savyasachi
severed his colourful bow, the leather guards on his hands and shattered his chariot into fragments. With sharp arrows, he deprived Duryodhana of his chariot. Arjuna then pierced both his palms. On seeing that the supreme
archer was in such great difﬁculty and was afﬂicted by Dhananjaya’s arrows, many rushed there to save him.
‘“There were many thousands of chariots and elephants and horses that had been readied. There were angry
warriors on foot and they surrounded Dhananjaya. Arjuna, Govinda, or the chariot could no longer be seen. That

mass of men surrounded them and brought down a giant shower of weapons. But Arjuna slew those troops with
the valour of his weapons. Hundreds of rathas and elephants fell down, deprived of their limbs. They were killed,
or were being killed, and could not reach that supreme chariot.136 That chariot was stationed one krosha away in
every direction.137
‘“Quickly, the hero of the Vrishni lineage then spoke these words to Arjuna. ‘Stretch Gandiva with force and I
will blow on my conch shell.’ Arjuna drew Gandiva with force and began to slaughter the enemy again. He
brought down a mighty shower of arrows and there was a slapping sound from his palms. Keshava powerfully
blew a loud note on Panchajanya, his eyelashes covered with dust and his face sweating profusely. At the roar of
the conch shell and the sound of the bow, the men, whether they were spirited or dispirited, fell down on the
ground. Arjuna’s chariot was freed from the melee, like a cloud driven by the wind. Those who were protecting
Jayadratha, and their followers, became disturbed. The ones who were protecting Saindhava suddenly saw Partha.
They roared loudly, in many ways, and made the earth tremble. The sound of their arrows mixed with other ﬁerce
sounds and the blare of conch shells. Those great-souled ones roared like lions. On hearing the terrible noise raised
by those on your side, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya blew on their conch shells. O lord of the earth! That great sound
ﬁlled the earth, with its mountains, oceans, islands and the nether regions. O best of the Bharata lineage! That
sound ﬁlled all the ten directions and echoed there, from the Kuru and Pandava forces. The rathas on your side saw
Krishna and Dhananjaya and were frightened. But the maharathas quickly regained their spirits. Having seen the
immensely fortunate Krishnas, those on your side armoured themselves and angrily attacked. It was wonderful.”’
CHAPTER 1056(79)

‘Sanjaya said, “Those on your side beheld the supreme ones from the Vrishni-Andhaka and Kuru lineages. Each
one desired to be the ﬁrst to kill them and Vijaya also rushed against the enemy. The giant chariots were colourful,
decorated in gold and tiger skins. They thundered and blazed in all the directions, like ﬂaming ﬁres. O lord of the
earth! The handles of the bows were inlaid with gold and were difﬁcult to look at. The chariots rumbled deeply and
the horses that drew them were angry. Bhurishrava, Shala, Karna, Vrishasena, Jayadratha, Kripa, the ruler of
Madra and Drona’s son, supreme among rathas—these eight maharathas seemed to devour the sky. They were armoured and angry. They blazed in the ten directions in chariots that roared like masses of clouds and were decorated with tiger skins and golden moons. From all directions, they enveloped Partha with sharp arrows. Colourful
horses from good lineages bore those maharathas. They possessed great speed and illuminated the ten directions.
These extremely swift and supreme horses came from many lineages and many countries. They were from mountainous and riverine regions and from Sindhu. O king! The best of warriors from among the Kurus wished to protect your son and swiftly dashed towards Dhananjaya’s chariot from every direction. Those best of men grasped
giant conch shells and blew on them. O king! They ﬁlled the sky, the earth and the oceans. Vasudeva and Dhananjaya, supreme among beings, also blew on their supreme conch shells, best among all the conch shells on earth.
Kounteya’s was Devadatta and Keshava’s was Panchajanya. Sounded by Dhananjaya, there was a loud blast from
Devadatta. It spread through the earth, the sky and the directions. Blown by Vasudeva, Panchajanya was also like
that. It surpassed all sounds and ﬁlled heaven and earth.138 There was thus a terrible and loud noise. It generated
fear among cowards and increased the delight of those who were brave. O Indra among kings! Drums, tambourines, cymbals and other drums were sounded in large numbers. Those maharathas had been assembled for the
sake of Duryodhana’s welfare. Those supreme archers became angry and intolerant at this sound. There were kings
from many countries, protected by their own soldiers. Those brave maharathas wished to answer Keshava and Arjuna’s sound and intolerantly blew on their giant conch shells. Your soldiers were urged by the sound of those
conch shells. O lord! The rathas, elephants and horses became anxious and seemed to be ill. Agitated by the sound
of the conch shells blown by the brave ones, they became extremely anxious and were like the sky, agitated by a
hurricane. O king! All the directions echoed with that great sound. It terriﬁed the soldiers, as if the end of the yuga
had arrived.
‘“Duryodhana and the eight maharatha kings assigned to protect Jayadratha then surrounded Pandava.139
Drona’s son struck Vasudeva with seventy-three arrows, Arjuna with three broad-headed arrows and his standard

and horses with ﬁve. Arjuna was extremely angry at Janardana having been struck and pierced Angiras’s descendant back with a hundred arrows.140 He pierced Karna with twelve arrows and Vrishasena with three. The valiant
one then sliced down Shalya’s bow and arrows from his hand. Having picked up another bow, Shalya pierced Pandava. Bhurishrava pierced him with three arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone, Karna
with thirty-two and Vrishasena with ﬁve. Jayadratha pierced him with seventy-three arrows and Kripa with ten. In
that battle, the lord of Madra pierced Phalguna with ten arrows. Drona’s son countered Partha with sixty arrows.
Yet again, he pierced Vasudeva with seventy arrows and Partha with ﬁve. The tiger among men, the one with the
white horses and with Krishna as his charioteer, laughed and pierced all of them back, displaying the dexterity of
his hands. He pierced Karna with twelve arrows and Vrishasena with three. In that battle, he sliced down Shalya’s
bow from his hand. He pierced Somadatta’s son with three arrows and Shalya with ten. He used eight arrows that
were sharp and were like the ﬂames of ﬁres to pierce Drona’s son. He pierced Goutama with twenty-ﬁve and
Saindhava with a hundred. He again struck Drona’s son with seventy arrows. Bhurishrava became angry and cut
down Hari’s whip. He then struck Arjuna with seventy-three arrows. The one with the white horses became wrathful. He brought down hundreds of sharp arrows and struck them, like a mighty storm shredding clouds.”’
CHAPTER 1057(80)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! There were many resplendent standards of diverse forms, belonging to the Parthas
and those on our side. Describe those to me.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “Those great-souled ones possessed many different standards, of diverse forms. They had different forms, colours and names. Listen to me. The chariots of those foremost among rathas had many different
kinds of standards. O Indra among kings! They were seen to blaze like ﬁre. They were golden, decorated with
gold, or garlanded with gold. They were like golden summits and like giant mountains made out of gold. Those
standards were surrounded by pennants in every direction. These were of many different colours and hues and surrounded them everywhere. Those pennants were stirred by the wind. They were seen to be dancing around, like
female dancers in an arena. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those pennants had the complexion of Indra’s
weapon.141 They stirred above the chariots and adorned the maharathas. There was a standard with the sign of an
ape, as ﬁerce as the face and tail of a lion.142 This belonged to Dhananjaya and was seen to cause terror in battle.
O king! The ﬂag was adorned with the supreme of apes. Your soldiers were terriﬁed by the standard of the wielder
of Gandiva. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that way, the top of the standard of Drona’s son had the mark
of a lion’s tail and was seen to be as radiant as the rising sun. It was golden and ﬂuttered in the wind. It was as resplendent as Shakra’s standard. The standard of Drona’s son arose high and delighted the Indras among the
Kouravas. The standard of Adhiratha’s son143 had the mark of an elephant’s housing that was fashioned in gold. O
great king! It dazzled and in the battle, seemed to ﬁll up the sky. In the battle, golden pennants and garlands were
attached to Karna’s standard. Stirred by the wind, they seemed to dance around on top of the chariot. The preceptor
of the Pandus was the illustrious brahmana. Kripa, the son of Goutama, had a well-crafted bull on his.144 O king!
With the mark of the bull, the maharatha was resplendent, like the destroyer of Tripura is dazzling with the mark of
the bull.145 Vrishasena had a golden peacock, adorned with gems and jewels. Stationed there, it seemed to crow
and adorn the front of the army. The great-souled one’s chariot was dazzling with the peacock. O Indra among
kings! It was like the resplendent Skanda aloft his peacock. Shalya, the king of Madra, possessed a beautiful golden image of a plough on the top of his standard and it was like the ﬂame of a ﬁre. O venerable one! The plough
was luminescent on the top of his chariot. The plough was surrounded by prosperity, with every kind of seed
sprouting from it. A silver boar adorned the top of the king of Sindhu’s standard. It was decorated with golden nets
and had the complexion of a bloodless crystal.146 With that silver standard, Jayadratha looked beautiful, like
Pusha was radiant in ancient times in the battle between the gods and the asuras.147 Somadatta’s intelligent son
was devoted to sacriﬁces and his standard had the mark of a sacriﬁcial stake and was seen to be as radiant as the
sun or the moon. O king! Somadatta’s son was dazzling with that golden sacriﬁcial stake. It was like a sacriﬁcial
stake raised in rajasuya, the best of all sacriﬁces. O great king! Shala had a large silver elephant. The pennant was

golden and colourful and was adorned with the sign of peacocks. O bull among the Bharata lineage! That pennant
adorned your troops, like the giant white elephant adorns the army of the king of the gods.148 There was a bejewelled elephant on the king’s standard, which was decorated with gold.149 It tinkled with the sound of one hundred
bells and colourfully blazed on the supreme of chariots. O king! O lord of the earth! Your son, a bull among the
Kurus, looked extremely resplendent with that large standard in the battle. These nine supreme standards arose in
your army. They blazed amidst the forces, like the sun at the time of the destruction of a yuga.
‘“The tenth standard was Arjuna’s, marked with a giant ape. Arjuna blazed, like a ﬁre on the Himalayas. The
maharathas, scorchers of enemies, grasped colourful, bright and extremely large bows and swiftly advanced
against Arjuna. Partha, the destroyer of enemies, also grasped the bow Gandiva, the performer of divine deeds. O
king! All this happened because of your evil counsel. Because of your crimes, many men and many warriors were
killed. They had been summoned from many directions, with horses, chariots and elephants. With Duryodhana at
the forefront, there were these on one side and that bull among Pandus on the other. They roared at each other and
the encounter began. Kounteya had Krishna as his charioteer and performed supreme and extraordinary deeds.
Fearlessly, the single one advanced against the many. The mighty-armed one was resplendent when he stretched
the bow Gandiva. The tiger among men wished to kill Jayadratha. O great king! Arjuna released thousands of arrows. That scorcher of enemies made the warriors on your side invisible. In that battle, all those maharathas, tigers
among men, also showered down a cloud of arrows and made Partha invisible. On seeing that Arjuna, bull among
the Kuru lineage, was thus covered through the hands of those lions among men, a great sound arose among the
soldiers.”’
CHAPTER 1058(81)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O Sanjaya! When Arjuna reached Saindhava and the Panchalas were enveloped by Bharadvaja’s son and clashed against the Kurus, what did they do?”
‘Sanjaya said, “O great king! There was a battle in the afternoon and it made the body hair stand up. Drona was
like the stake in the clash between the Panchalas and the Kurus. O venerable one! The Panchalas were cheerful in
their minds and wished to kill Drona. They roared and showered down arrows. A tumultuous and terrible battle
commenced between the Panchalas and the Kurus and it was like that between the gods and the asuras. With the
Pandavas, all the Panchalas reached Drona’s chariot. Wishing to penetrate his array, they displayed great weapons.
There were rathas stationed on their chariots and with medium speed,150 they caused a tremor and reached up to
Drona’s chariot. Brihatkshatra, the maharatha from the Kekayas, showered sharp arrows that were like the great
Indra’s vajra and advanced. He was swiftly countered by the immensely illustrious Kshemadhurti, who showered
hundreds and thousands of sharp arrows. Dhrishtaketu, bull among the Chedis and possessing great strength,
quickly attacked Drona, like the great Indra against Shambara. On seeing him suddenly descend, like death with a
gaping mouth, Viradhanva, the great archer, quickly countered him. O great king! Yudhishthira was stationed
there, desiring victory, and he and his soldiers were repulsed by the valiant Drona. Nakula was skilled in battle and
was valiant. O lord! As he advanced, your valorous son, Vikarna, countered him. Durmukha, the afﬂicter of enemies, repulsed the advancing Sahadeva with many thousand swift arrows. Vyaghradatta used extremely sharp and
pointed arrows to repeatedly make Satyaki, tiger among men, tremble. Droupadi’s sons, tigers among men, angrily
released supreme arrows. But those best of rathas were repulsed by Somadatta’s son. Bhimasena advanced wrathfully. But he was countered by Rishyashringa’s maharatha son, who was ﬁerce and terrible of form.151 O king! In
the battle, the encounter that took place between the man and the rakshasa was like that between Rama and Ravana
in ancient times.
‘“O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Yudhishthira, foremost among the Bharata lineage, struck Drona with
ninety arrows with drooping tufts and these penetrated all the inner organs. At this, Drona became angry and struck
the illustrious Kounteya, foremost among the Bharata lineage, between the breasts with twenty-ﬁve arrows. While
all the archers looked on, Drona again struck him, his horses, his charioteer and his standard with twenty arrows.
However, Pandava, with dharma in his soul, showed the dexterity of his hands and countered Drona’s arrows with
a shower of arrows of his own. The archer Drona became extremely enraged in that battle. He suddenly severed

the bow of the great-souled Dharmaraja. Having severed the bow, the maharatha swiftly covered him everywhere
with many thousands of arrows. All those there saw that King Yudhishthira had been rendered invisible because of
the arrows of Bharadvaja’s son and thought that he had been killed. Some others thought that he had run away. O
Indra among kings! They said, ‘The king has been slain by the illustrious brahmana.’ Dharmaraja Yudhishthira
thus confronted a great hardship. He cast aside the bow that had been severed by Bharadvaja’s son in the battle and
grasped another divine bow that was capable of bearing a great burden and was more forceful. In that encounter,
the brave one sliced down all the thousands of arrows that had been released by Drona and it was extraordinary.
Having severed the arrows, the king’s eyes became red with rage. In that battle, he grasped a lance that was capable of shattering the mountains. It was extremely terrible and ﬁerce. It possessed a golden handle and was decorated with eight bells. The extremely powerful one roared cheerfully and hurled it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the beings screamed in terror. On seeing the lance raised by Dharmaraja in that battle, all the beings suddenly exclaimed, ‘May all be well with Drona.’ Hurled from the king’s arms, it was like a snake that had cast off
its skin. It blazed in the sky and in the directions and the sub-directions. It was like a she-serpent with a ﬂaming
mouth and it was as if Drona confronted death. O lord of the earth! On seeing it suddenly descend, Drona, supreme
among those who knew about weapons, released the brahmastra. That weapon reduced the terrible-looking lance to
ashes and then quickly advanced towards the chariot of the illustrious Pandava. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Drona’s weapon advanced, the immensely wise King Yudhishthira used a brahmastra to pacify it. In
that battle, he then pierced Drona with ﬁve arrows with drooping tufts and used a sharp kshurapra arrow to severe
his great bow. O venerable one! Drona, the destroyer of kshatriyas, cast aside the severed bow and suddenly hurled
a club at Dharma’s son. On seeing that the club was powerfully descending, Yudhishthira, the scorcher of enemies,
became angry and grasped a club. Those two clubs were powerfully hurled towards each other. They countered
each other and emitted sparks because of the collision. They then fell down on the ground. O venerable one! Drona
became extremely angry with Dharmaraja. He used four extremely sharp and supreme arrows to kill his horses.
With another arrow, he severed his bow, which was like Indra’s standard. He severed Pandava’s standard and
struck him with three arrows. With the horse slain, Yudhishthira quickly descended from the chariot. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! The king stood there, with his arms raised and without any weapons. O lord! On seeing that
he was without a chariot, and speciﬁcally without any weapons, Drona confounded the enemy and all the soldiers.
Displaying the dexterity of his hands, the one who was ﬁrm in his vows released large numbers of sharp arrows
and advanced against the king, like an angry lion towards a deer.152 On seeing that Drona, the destroyer of enemies, was advancing, sudden sounds of lamentation arose from the assembled Pandavas. O venerable one! ‘The
king has been slain. The king has been slain by Bharadvaja’s son.’ These and other loud noises arose from all the
Pandu soldiers. But the king ascended Sahadeva’s chariot. Those swift horses bore Yudhishthira, Kunti’s son,
away.”’
CHAPTER 1059(82)

‘Sanjaya said, “O great king! Kshemadhurti used his arrows to pierce Brihatkshatra of the Kekayas, ﬁrm in his valour, in the chest. King Brihatkshatra wished to penetrate Drona’s array and swiftly struck him in that battle with
ninety arrows with drooping tufts. Kshemadhurti became angry. He used a yellow, sharp and broad-headed arrow
to sever the bow of the great-souled Kekaya. Having severed his bow, he then used an arrow with drooping tufts to
quickly pierce that supreme of archers in the chest. Brihatkshatra laughed and took up another bow. He deprived
maharatha Kshemadhurti of his horses, charioteer and standard. He then used another yellow, sharp and broadheaded arrow to sever the king’s head, with its blazing earrings, from the body.153 That head, with its curly hair
and crown, was suddenly lopped off and fell down on the ground, as resplendent as a stellar body dislodged from
the sky. On seeing that he had been slain in the battle, maharatha Brihatkshatra was delighted. For the sake of the
Parthas, he descended powerfully on your soldiers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The great archer Viradhanva countered the powerful Dhrishtaketu, who was advancing against Drona. Those two spirited ones clashed
against each other and seemed to possess arrows as their teeth. Wishing to kill each other, they struck each other
with many thousand arrows. Those two tigers among men fought with each other, like two leaders of elephant
herds, ﬁerce and crazy, ﬁghting with each other in a great forest. They were like angry tigers in a mountainous cav-

ern. Wishing to kill each other, those immensely valorous ones fought. O lord of the earth! The battle was tumultuous and worth watching. Masses of siddhas and charanas witnessed the extraordinary wonder. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! The angry Viradhanva laughed and used a broad-headed arrow to sever Dhrishtaketu’s bow
into two. The maharatha king of Chedi discarded the severed bow. He grasped a large iron spear that possessed a
golden handle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The immensely valorous one suddenly hurled this towards Viradhanva’s chariot. That spear was one that could kill heroes. Struck by it, he was severely hurt and with his heart
shattered powerfully, fell down from the chariot onto the ground. O lord! When the brave maharatha from Trigarta
was killed, the Pandaveyas shattered your army from every direction.
‘“Durmukha shot sixty arrows at Sahadeva. He roared loudly with that great roar, challenged Pandava to do battle. Madri’s son became angry and laughingly, pierced Durmukha with ten arrows. Brother fought against brother.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the immensely strong Sahadeva was ﬁghting violently in the
batte, Durmukha struck him with nine arrows. However, the immensely strong one154 used a broad-headed arrow
to sever Durmukha’s standard and then used four sharp arrows to slay his four horses. He then used another yellow, sharp and broad-headed arrow to sever his charioteer’s head, with blazing earrings, from his body. He used a
sharp kshurapra arrow to slice down Kouravya’s giant bow. Having severed it in the battle, Sahadeva then pierced
him with ﬁve arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! With his horses slain, Durmukha was distressed. He abandoned his chariot and climbed onto Niramitra’s chariot. In that great battle, in the midst of those
soldiers, Sahadeva, the destroyer of enemy heroes, used a broad-headed arrow to angrily slay Niramitra. Niramitra,
the lord of men and the son of the king of Trigarta, fell down from the seat of his chariot and this caused sorrow to
your forces. Having killed him, mighty-armed Sahadeva roamed around, like Rama, Dasharatha’s son, after having
killed the immensely strong Khara.155 O lord of men! On seeing that the immensely strong Prince Niramitra had
been slain, great sounds of lamentation arose among the Trigartas.
‘“O king! In that battle, in an instant, Nakula vanquished Vikarna, your son with the large eyes. It was extraordinary. Vyaghradatta struck Satyaki with arrows that had drooping tufts. In the midst of the soldiers, he rendered him, his horses, his charioteer and his standard invisible. But Shini’s brave descendant showed the dexterity
of his hands and countered those arrows. He used his arrows to bring down Vyaghradatta, his horses, his charioteer
and his standard. O lord! On seeing that the prince, the son of Magadha, had been killed, all the Magadhas made
efforts and attacked Yuyudhana from every direction. They released thousands of arrows and javelins, catapults,
spikes, clubs and maces. In the encounter, the brave ones fought with Satvata, who was invincible in battle. Satyaki, powerful and invincible in battle, laughed and without any difﬁculty, repulsed all of them. The bull among men
vanquished them. On seeing that the Magadhas had been routed, the few that were left ran away in every direction.
O lord! Your army was afﬂicted with Yuyudhana’s arrows. The supreme of the Madhava lineage destroyed your
soldiers in that battle. The greatly illustrious one, supreme among archers, brandished his bow and was resplendent. O king! The army was shattered by the great-souled Satvata. Terriﬁed of the long-armed one, no one advanced against him in that battle. Drona became extremely angry and rolled his eyes in anger. He himself advanced against Satyaki, whose deeds were based on truth.”’
CHAPTER 1060(83)

‘Sanjaya said, “Somadatta’s immensely illustrious son pierced each of Droupadi’s sons, great archers, with ﬁve arrows each and then struck them again with seven arrows more. O lord! They were sorely afﬂicted by the force of
that terrible warrior. In that battle, they were stupeﬁed and for some time, did not know what they should do.
Shatanika, Nakula’s son and the scorcher of enemies, used two arrows to pierce Somadatta’s son, bull among men,
and roared in delight. In that battle, the others156 also made efforts and struck Somadatta’s intolerant son with
three arrows each. O great king! He shot ﬁve arrows at them and struck each of those immensely illustrious ones in
the heart with an arrow. Those ﬁve great-souled brothers were struck by the arrows. They surrounded the brave
ratha and pierced him severely with arrows. Arjuna’s son used four sharp arrows to angrily slay his horses and dispatched them to Yama’s abode. Bhimasena’s son severed the bow of Somadatta’s great-souled son. He roared powerfully and pierced him with sharp arrows. Yudhishthira’s son sliced his standard and brought it down on the

ground. Nakula’s son brought down his charioteer from the seat on the chariot. O king! On ascertaining that he had
been forced to retreat by his brothers, Sahadeva’s son used a kshurapra arrow to sever the great-minded one’s
head.157 That head, adorned with gold, fell down on the ground. It was resplendent on the ﬁeld of battle, with a
complexion like that of the rising sun. O king! On seeing that the head of Somadatta’s great-souled son had been
brought down, all those on your side were terriﬁed and ﬂed in different directions.
‘“In that battle, Alambusa angrily fought against the immensely strong Bhimasena, like Lakshmana against Ravana’s son.158 All the beings were astounded and delighted at the battle between the man and the rakshasa. O
king! Bhima laughed and pierced Rishyashringa’s intolerant son, Indra among rakshasas, with nine sharp arrows.
Pierced in the battle, the rakshasa let out a mighty roar and he and his followers attacked Bhima. He pierced Bhima
with ﬁve arrows that had drooping tufts. In that battle, the scorcher of enemies quickly destroyed thirty rathas who
were following Bhima. He slew four hundred more and pierced Bhima with arrows. Having been thus pierced by
the immensely strong rakshasa, Bhima sat down on the ﬂoor of his chariot. He lost his senses. When he recovered
his senses, the son of the wind god was overcome by great rage. He stretched his terrible and supreme bow, which
was capable of bearing a great burden. He struck Alambusha all over the body with sharp arrows. O king! He was
like a large mass of collyrium and pierced by these many arrows all over his body, looked as beautiful as a kimshuka. He was struck in the battle by those arrows that had been released from Bhima’s bow and remembered how his
brother had been killed by the great-souled Pandava. He assumed a terrible form and addressed Bhimasena. ‘O
Partha! Wait for a while in this battle and witness my valour today. O extremely evil one! The powerful Baka,
supreme among rakshasas, was my brother. It is true that you killed him, but that happened when I did not see it.’
Having thus spoken to Bhima, he disappeared and enveloped him with a great and severe shower of arrows. O
king! When the rakshasa became invisible in that battle, Bhima covered the sky with his straight-tufted arrows.
Thus struck by Bhima, he instantly returned to his chariot. He entered deep inside the earth and suddenly rose up
into the sky. He adopted many different kinds of forms, some large and some small. From above, he showered
down many different kinds of words in every direction. Many Pandava soldiers died.159 O king! So did ﬁghting
elephants, many horses and foot soldiers. Because of those arrows, rathas were brought down in their chariots. A
river of blood began to ﬂow and the chariots were eddies. It was infested by crocodiles in the form of elephants.
The umbrellas were the swans. It was full of mud.160 The arms161 were like serpents. That river began to ﬂow
and was populated by large numbers of rakshasas. O king! It ﬂowed and bore along many Chedis, Panchalas and
Srinjayas. O king! Thus did he fearlessly roam around in that battle. The Pandavas became extremely anxious at
witnessing his valour. The hearts of your soldiers became full of joy. Musical instruments were sounded in ﬁerce
and extremely loud tones and this made the body hair stand up. On hearing the terrible sound emitted by your soldiers, the Pandavas could not tolerate it, just as a snake cannot bear the slapping of palms.
‘“Bhimasena’s eyes became coppery red in anger and they seemed to consume, like the ﬁre. O venerable one! In
the battle, he released the weapon known as tvashtra, as if it had been released by Tvashtra himself. From that,
thousands of arrows were produced in every direction. Because of those arrows, your soldiers were severely routed. It destroyed the great maya created by the rakshasa and also afﬂicted the rakshasa. Thus, the rakshasa was
struck in many parts of his body by Bhimasena. He abandoned that encounter with Bhima and ﬂed towards
Drona’s array. O king! When that Indra among rakshasas was vanquished by the great-souled one, the Pandavas
roared like lions and made all the directions resound. They delightedly honoured the wind god’s immensely strong
son, like the masses of Maruts worshipping Shakra after he had vanquished Prahlada in battle.”’162
CHAPTER 1061(84)

‘Sanjaya said, “Alambusa fearlessly roamed around in the ﬁeld of battle.163 Hidimba’s son164 attacked him and
powerfully struck him with sharp arrows. The battle that commenced between those lions among rakshasas caused
great terror. They invoked many different kinds of maya, like Shakra and Shambara. Alambusa was extremely angry and struck Ghatotkacha. Ghatotkacha pierced Alambusa between the breasts with twenty iron arrows and repeatedly roared like a lion. O king! In that way, Alambusa also repeatedly pierced Hidimba’s son, who was invincible in battle and ﬁlled the sky with his roars. Those two immensely strong Indras among the rakshasas were ex-

tremely enraged. They fought and used maya against each other, but neither surpassed the other. They insolently
created a hundred different kinds of maya and confounded each other. They were extremely skilled in ﬁghting with
maya and one’s maya was countered by the other one’s. O king! Whatever maya was used by Ghatotkacha in that
battle, was destroyed by Alambusa’s maya. O king! On seeing Alambusa, skilled in ﬁghting with maya, ﬁght in
this way, the Pandavas were extremely enraged. O king! Having been thus greatly enraged, all those supreme
rathas, Bhimasena and the others, attacked and surrounded him. O venerable one! They penned him in with a large
number of chariots. They surrounded him with arrows from every direction, like torches against an elephant.165
He countered their weapons with the maya of his own weapons. He freed himself from those roaming rathas, like
an elephant from a forest ﬁre. He stretched his terrible bow, which had a roar like that of Indra’s vajra. He pierced
the son of the wind god with twenty-ﬁve arrows and Bhimasena’s son with ﬁve. He pierced Yudhishthira with
three arrows, Sahadeva with seven and Nakula with seventy-three. O venerable one! He pierced each of Droupadi’s ﬁve sons with ﬁve arrows and roared terribly. Bhimsena pierced the rakshasa back with nine arrows, Sahadeva
with ﬁve, Yudhishthira with one hundred, Nakula with sixty-four and each of Droupadi’s sons with three arrows.
In that encounter, Hidimba’s son pierced the rakshasa with ﬁve hundred arrows. The immensely strong one pierced
him back with seventy and roared like a lion. Having been pierced from every direction by those maharathas, the
great archer pierced each of them back with ﬁve arrows.
‘“O foremost among the Bharata lineage! In that battle, the rakshasa who was Hidimba’s son became enraged
with the other wrathful rakshasa and pierced him with seventy arrows. Severely and powerfully pierced, the immensely strong Indra among the rakshasas swiftly showered arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened
on stone. Those straight-tufted arrows penetrated the rakshasa,166 like angry and immensely strong serpents penetrating a mountain top. O king! The Pandavas released sharp arrows from every direction. In that battle, Ghatotkacha, Hidimba’s son, desired the victory of the Pandavas and became anxious. He167 was like a burnt mountain summit, or like a broken mass of collyrium. He raised him up in his arms and whirled him around
repeatedly.168 He crused him powerfully down on the ground, like an earthen pot dashed against a rock. He169
possessed strength and dexterity. He also possessed valour. In that battle, Bhimasena’s enraged son terriﬁed all the
soldiers. All his170 limbs were mangled. His bones and ornaments were shattered. He was slain by the brave Ghatotkacha, like the twisted wood of a shala tree. On seeing that the traveller of the night had been killed, the Parthas
were delighted. They roared like lions and waved their garments around. O bull among Bharatas! On seeing that
Alambusa, terrible in form and the immensely strong Indra among the rakshasas had been killed and shattered like
a mountain, the soldiers on your side uttered sounds of lamentation. Curious people assembled to see the rakshasa’s body, which was lying on the ground, like a lump of charcoal. Having killed the supremely strong one, the
rakshasa Ghatotkacha roared loudly, like Vasava after slaying Bala. Having performed this extremely difﬁcult
deed, Ghatotkacha was honoured by his fathers and their relatives. He was delighted that the enemy Alambusa had
been slain, like a ripe alambusa fruit.171 A great sound arose.172 There was the sound of many different kinds of
conch shells and the noise of arrows. Having heard this, the Kouravas roared back in return and this ﬁerce sound
seemed to touch the entire earth.”’
CHAPTER 1062(85)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O Sanjaya! In that battle, tell me how Yuyudhana countered Bharadvaja’s son. I am extremely curious to hear the details.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! O immensely intelligent one! Listen. That encounter between Drona and the Pandavas, with Yuyudhana at the forefront, made the body hair stand up. O venerable one! On seeing that the army
had been slaughtered by Yuyudhana, Drona himself advanced against Satyaki, for whom, truth was his valour. On
seeing the maharatha who was Bharadvaja’s son suddenly descend, Satyaki pierced him with twenty-ﬁve kshudraka arrows. Drona was valorous in battle. Steadfastly and swiftly, he pierced Yuyudhana with ﬁve gold-tufted arrows that had been sharpened on stone. These drank up the blood of the enemy. O king! They penetrated the extremely ﬁrm armour and penetrated the earth, like sighing serpents. The long-armed one became angry, like an elephant urged with a goad. He pierced Drona with ﬁve hundred iron arrows that were like ﬁre. In that battle, Bharad-

vaja’s son was thus quickly pierced by Yuyudhana. Taking care, he pierced Satyaki with many arrows. The immensely strong and great archer became enraged. He afﬂicted Satvata with one hundred arrows with drooping
tufts. O lord of the battle! For a short while, thus pierced in that battle by Bharadvaja’s son, Satyaki did not know
what he should do. O king! On seeing Bharadvaja’s son release sharp arrows in that battle, Yuyudhana’s face
looked distressed.
‘“O lord of the earth! On seeing him in this state, your sons and the soldiers were delighted in their minds and
repeatedly roared like lions. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing this terrible roar and on seeing that Madhava was thus oppressed, Yudhishthira spoke to all the soldiers. ‘This brave Satyaki, the performer of
truthful deeds, is supreme among the Vrishni lineage. He is being devoured in the battle by the brave one,173 like
the sun by Rahu. Go quickly to the spot where Satyaki is ﬁghting.’ The lord of men spoke to Dhrishtadyumna from
Panchala. ‘O Parshata! Attack Drona quickly. Why are you waiting? Can you not see the terrible danger that confronts us because of Drona? This Drona is a great archer. In the battle, he is playing with Yuyudhana, like a child
with a bird that is tied to a string. Let the rathas go there, with Bhimasena at the forefront, and with all of you, towards Satyaki’s chariot. I will follow you, with my soldiers. Satyaki must be rescued now. He is within the jaws of
death.’ Having spoken in this way, for Yuyudhana’s sake, the king and all the Pandava soldiers attacked Drona in
that battle. O fortunate one! The Pandavas and all the Srinjayas raised a great roar there, as they fought with the
single-handed Drona.
‘“Those tigers among men united against the maharatha who was Bharadvaja’s son. They showered down sharp
arrows, tufted with the feathers of herons, peacocks and hawks. However, Drona smiled and received all those
brave ones himself, like receiving guests who have arrived, with seats and water. O king! Bharadvaja’s archer son
tormented them with arrows, as if offering hospitality to guests who have arrived in a house. O lord! None of them
were capable of looking at Bharadvaja’s son. He was like the one with a thousand rays174 when it is midday.
Drona, supreme among those who wield weapons, scorched all those great archers with the storm of his arrows,
like the sun with its rays. O king! The Pandavas and the Srinjayas were slaughtered in that battle and could see no
protector, like an elephant that is immersed in mud. Drona was seen to release great arrows. They travelled in the
sky and scorched all the directions, like the sun. Twenty-ﬁve Panchalas were killed by Drona. They were all famous as maharathas and had been honoured by Dhrishtadyumna. All the soldiers of the Pandus and the Panchalas
saw Drona kill the best of brave warriors. O great king! Having killed one hundred Kekayas and routed them in all
the directions, Drona was like Death with a gaping mouth. The mighty-armed Drona defeated hundreds and thousands of Panchalas, Srinjayas, Matsyas, Kekayas and Pandavas. They were pierced by Drona’s arrows and emitted
a mighty sound, like the residents of a forest when the forest is consumed by a ﬁre.175 O king! The gods, the
gandharvas and the ancestors said, ‘The Panchalas and the Pandavas are being driven away, with all their soldiers.’
When Drona thus slaughtered the Somakas in the encounter, no one dared to advance against him in the battle and
no one could pierce him.
‘“While that terrible destruction of the best of brave ones was going on, Partha176 suddenly heard the sound of
Panchajanya being blown. Blown by Vasudeva, that king of conch shells emitted a terrible blare. As the brave ones
who were protecting Saindhava fought and the sons of Dhritarashtra roared and advanced towards Vijaya’s
chariot,177 the twang of Gandiva could not be heard in any direction. The Pandava king lost his senses and
thought, ‘There is no doubt that Partha is not well, since the king of conch shells is blaring. The Kouravas are repeatedly roaring in delight.’ Having thought in this way, Ajatashatru became anxious. Kounteya repeatedly spoke
to Satvata, as if he was bereft of his senses and in a voice choking with tears.
‘“He thought about everything that should be done next and spoke to Shini’s descendant, the bull of the Shini
lineage. ‘O Shini’s descendant! There is an eternal dharma that has been indicated by the virtuous ones from ancient times and this is for well-wishers who are in distress. That time has now arrived. O bull among the Shini lineage! O Satyaki! Having considered all the warriors and having thought about it, I do not know of a greater wellwisher than you. You have always been affectionate towards us. You have always been devoted to us. It is my view
that it is such a person who must be used in times of distress. Keshava has always been the refuge of the Pandavas.
O Varshneya! You have also been like that and you are Krishna’s equal in valour. I will impose this burden on you

and you should not refuse me. You should never act contrary to my intentions. He178 is your brother and your
friend. He is your preceptor in battle.179 O bull among men! Perform this hardship to help Arjuna. You are devoted to the truth. You are brave. You free your friends from fear. You are famous in the worlds. O brave one! You are
the performer of deeds. You are truthful in speech. O Shini’s descendant! One who gives up his body while ﬁghting for his friends, is the equal of someone who has followed the proper rites and has donated the entire earth to
brahmanas. We have heard of many kings who have ascended to heaven, after having followed the proper rites and
having donated the entire earth to brahmanas. You have dharma in your soul. I am begging you, with my hands
joined in salutation. O lord! Obtain fruits that are the equal of donating the earth, or something higher. There is one
named Krishna who is always the dispeller of the fears of his friends and is ready to give up his life in battle.180 O
Satyaki! You are the second such. Desiring fame, it is only a brave one who can provide succour to a brave one in
battle. O Madhava! In times of supreme hardship like this, it is only a brave one who can be an aide, not an ordinary person. There is no one other than you who can protect Vijaya in battle. Pandava has boasted about your hundreds of deeds and has talked about them repeatedly, creating delight in me. “He is dexterous in using
weapons.181 He is a colourful ﬁghter. There is lightness in his valour. He is wise in all weapons. He is brave. He
does not get confused in battle. He is broad in the shoulders. He is broad in the chest. He is mighty-armed. He
wields a giant bow. He is immensely strong. He is immensely valorous. He is great-souled. He is a maharatha. He
is my student. He is my friend. I love him and he loves me. Yuyudhana will be my aide and will crush the
Kouravas. O Indra among kings! O great king! Even if Keshava, Rama,182 Aniruddha,183 maharatha Pradyumna,
Gada,184 Samba185 and all the Vrishnis armour themselves for our sake and seek to help us in the forefront of the
battle, I will appoint Shini’s descendant, that tiger among men, for whom truth is his valour, as our aide. There is
no one else who is his equal.” O son!186 This is what Dhananjaya told me in Dvaitavana, when you were not
present. He recounted your qualities in an assembly of noble ones. O Varshneya! You should not belie the expectations of Dhananjaya, Bhima, or me. While on the visit to the tirthas, I had gone to Dvaraka. There, I had witnessed
your devotion to Arjuna. O Shini’s descendant! While we were in Upaplavya, I did not witness in anyone else the
affection of heart towards us that you possessed. You have been born in a noble lineage. You are devoted to us.
You are your preceptor’s friend. O Madhava! You are a well-wisher. You are brave. You have been born in a noble
lineage! O mighty-armed one! You are truthful. Show compassion towards Partha. O great archer! You should act
in a deserving way. Suyodhana was armoured by Drona and has suddenly gone towards Vijaya, where the Kourava
maharathas had gone earlier. A great sound can be heard there. O Shini’s descendant! O Madhava! You should
swiftly go there. If Drona advances against you, Bhimasena and we, and all our soldiers, will prepare ourselves
and counter him. O Shini’s descendant! Behold. The soldiers of the Bharatas are being routed in the battle and as
they are running away in the encounter, are uttering sounds of woe. It is like the ocean on the night of the new or
full moon, driven by the force of the great wind. O son! The army of the sons of Dhritarashtra is being scattered by
Savyasachi. Chariots, men and horses are quickly running away. The dust raised by the soldiers is spreading everywhere. The brave Phalguna, the destroyer of enemy heroes, has been surrounded by the brave Sindhus and the
Souviras, who are ﬁghting with nails and lances, and is severely afﬂicted. Without countering these forces, it is impossible to kill Jayadratha. All of them are prepared to give up their lives for Saindhava’s sake. There is a forest of
arrows, spears and standards. There are large numbers of horses and elephants. Behold. The forces of the sons of
Dhritarashtra are extremely difﬁcult to assail. Hear the roar of the drums and the magniﬁcent sound of conch
shells. They are roaring like lions and there is the clatter of chariot wheels. Hear the sounds of the elephants and
thousands of infantry. Listen. The earth is trembling because the riders are running. Saindhava’s array is in front of
him and Drona’s array is at the rear. O tiger among men! There are so many that even Indra of the gods would be
afﬂicted. He is immersed in an unlimited force and may lose his life. If he is killed in the battle, how can someone
like me remain alive? Even if I were to obtain everything, life would be a hardship. Gudakesha is dark and young.
Pandava is handsome. He possesses weapons. He is colourful in ﬁghting. O son! The mighty-armed one has penetrated the army of the Bharatas at the time of sunrise. The day is almost over. O Varshneya! I do not know whether
he is alive or not. This army of the Kurus is as large as an ocean. O son! The mighty-armed Bibhatsu has penetrated the army of the Bharatas alone and in a great battle, even the gods are incapable of resisting it. In today’s battle,

my mind does not know what to do. Drona is violent in the battle and is oppressing my forces. O mighty-armed
one! You can see how that brahmana is roaming around. When several tasks present themselves, you are skilled in
knowing which should be done. O Madhava! You should do what is the most important. You have always known
which among several tasks should be performed ﬁrst. In this battle, it is my view that Arjuna’s rescue is the immediate task. I do not sorrow over Dasharha. He is the protector and the lord of the universe. O son! O tiger among
men! Even if the three worlds assemble together in battle, he is capable of withstanding them and defeating them,
not to speak of this extremely weak force of the sons of Dhritarashtra. I tell you this truthfully. O Varshneya! But
Arjuna is afﬂicted by many warriors. He may give up his life in the battle and that is the reason I am distressed.
Therefore, follow in his footsteps. That is the way someone like you must tread at a time like this, especially when
you are urged by someone like me. In a battle, among the foremost ones of the Vrishni lineage, two have been said
to be atirathas. These are the mighty-armed Pradyumna and the illustrious Satvata.187 You are equal to Narayana
in weapons and equal to Samkarshana188 in strength. O tiger among men! You are Dhananjaya’s equal in valour.
You surpass Bhishma and Drona and all those who are skilled in ﬁghting. In this world, the virtuous ones have
spoken of you as a tiger among men. O Madhava! It has been said that there is nothing in the world that Satyaki
cannot perform. O immensely strong one! Therefore, do what I am asking you to do. You should do what all the
worlds and both the Parthas189 are asking you to do. O mighty-armed one! You should not act contrary to those
wishes. Give up your beloved life in this battle and roam around like a brave one. O Shini’s descendant! Those
from the Dasharha lineage do not seek to protect their lives in battle. Staying in a battle without ﬁghting and running away—those paths followed by cowards are not followed by those of the Dasharha lineage. O son! Arjuna is
your preceptor. O bull among the Shini lineage! You have dharma in your soul. Vasudeva is your senior and so is
the intelligent Partha. Knowing of both these reasons,190 I am addressing these words to you. Do not disregard my
words. I am senior to your seniors and this is approved of by both Vasudeva and Arjuna. I am telling you this truthfully. Go to the spot where Dhananjaya is. O one for whom truth is valour! Follow these words of mine. O son!
Penetrate the forces of the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra. Having penetrated in the proper way, encounter those
maharathas. O Satvata! In the battle, display the deeds that are worthy of your own self.’”’
CHAPTER 1063(86)

‘Sanjaya said, “Those words were full of affection. They were sweet as honey. They were appropriate to the occasion. They were colourful and were addressed by Dharmaraja himself. On hearing those words, Satyaki, bull
among the Shini lineage, spoke to Yudhishthira, foremost among the Bharata lineage. ‘O unblemished one! I have
heard all your words. They are just, colourful, for Phalguna’s beneﬁt and conducive to fame. O Indra among kings!
At times like this, it is appropriate for you to command someone like me, who is in front of you.191 It is exactly as
you have said. I am just like Partha to you. For Dhananjaya’s sake, I have never sought to preserve my own life.
Instructed by you, what will I not do in this great battle? O Indra among men! If instructed by you, I will ﬁght the
three worlds, with all the gods, asuras and men, not to speak of this extremely weak force of Duryodhana’s. O
king! In this battle today, I will ﬁght with them in every direction and conquer them. I am telling you this truthfully. I will be safe and will also reach Dhananjaya, who is also safe. O king! After Jayadratha has been killed, I will
return before you again. O lord of men! However, I must tell you all the words that were spoken by Vasudeva and
the intelligent Phalguna. In the midst of all the soldiers and in Vasudeva’s hearing, Arjuna repeatedly and ﬁrmly
instructed me. “O Madhava! Today, it is your task to protect the king earnestly. O noble one! Set your mind on
ﬁghting, until I have killed Jayadratha. O mighty-armed one! Having handed over the king to you and to maharatha Pradyumna, I am going undistractedly towards Jayadratha. You know that Drona is violent in battle and is
regarded as the best. O Madhava! You also know about the pledge that he has taken in everyone’s hearing. Bharadvaja’s son has promised to capture Dharmaraja in battle. Drona is capable of afﬂicting Yudhishthira in the battle.
Having entrused the task of protecting Dharmaraja, supreme among men, to you, I am going today to kill Saindhava. O Madhava! It is certain that I will return after killing Jayadratha. Ensure that Drona does not forcibly capture
Dharmaraja in the battle. O Madhava! If the foremost among men is seized by Bharadvaja’s son, I will obtain no
delight from having slain Saindhava. If the truthful Pandava, foremost among men, is seized, it is evident that we

will have to go to the forest again. If the angry Drona captures Yudhishthira in the battle, it is evident that my victory will obtain no success. O mighty-armed one! O Madhava! For the sake of doing that which will bring me
pleasure, and for the sake of victory and fame, protect the king in the battle.” You have been given to me as a trust
by Savyasachi. O lord! You can see that there is always a fear because of Bharadvaja’s son. O mighty-armed one!
O lord! In this battle, with the exception of Rukmini’s son,192 I do not see anyone who is capable of withstanding
him. In an encounter, I am regarded as a match for Bharadvaja’s intelligent son. I cannot act against that reputation
or against the words of my preceptor. I cannot leave you. O lord of the earth! The preceptor193 is light in hand and
is clad in impenetrable armour. If he approaches you in the battle, he will toy with you, like a child with a bird.
Had Krishna’s son194 been here, with the makara on his banner and with the bow in his hand, I would have handed you over to him and he would have protected you, like Arjuna. Protect yourself. Who will protect you when I
am gone? When I go to Pandava, who will advance against Drona in the battle? O king! You should not have any
fear on Arjuna’s account. The mighty-armed one does not suffer from any burden. There are warriors from the
north, the Souviras, the Saindhavas and the Pouravas. There are other maharathas from the south, with Karna at the
forefront. O king! They are famous as the best of rathas. But before an angry Arjuna, they do not amount to one of
sixteen kalas.195 O king! Even if the entire earth were to rise up against him, with all the gods, asuras, humans,
masses of rakshasas, kinnaras,196 giant serpents, together with all the mobile and immobile objects, they are incapable of withstanding Partha in battle. O great king! Knowing this, banish any fear on Dhananjaya’s account.
Where those two brave and great archers, the two Krishnas who have truth for their valour, exist, there is nothing
that can stand against what they wish to do. They are divine. They are skilled in the use of weapons. They possess
yoga. They are intolerant in battle. Think of the gratefulness and compassion of your brother. I will go towards Arjuna, as you have asked me to. O king! Drona is wonderful in the use of weapons in battle. Think about that. O
king! The preceptor is extremely keen to capture you. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I have to protect my
pledge. I have to protect my truth. Who will protect you when I am gone? O Partha! Without handing over your
protection to someone, how can I go towards Phalguna? O great king! I cannot leave you unprotected in this great
battle. O Kouravya! How can I do that? I am telling you this truthfully. O supreme among those who possess intelligence! Use your intelligence to reﬂect on this in many ways. Use your intelligence to determine what is most
beneﬁcial. O king! Then instruct me accordingly.’
‘“Yudhishthira replied, ‘O mighty-armed one! O Madhava! It is exactly as you say. O venerable one! But on account of the one with the white horses, my mind is not at rest. I will take the utmost care in protecting myself.
Commanded by me, go to the spot where Dhananjaya is. Using my intelligence, I have reﬂected on both—protecting myself in this battle and going towards Arjuna. I think you should go. Therefore, prepare yourself to go where
Dhananjaya has gone. The immensely strong Bhima will perform the task of protecting me. O son! There is no
doubt that Droupadi’s sons will also protect me. There are the ﬁve brothers from Kekaya and the rakshasa Ghatotkacha, Virata, Drupada and maharatha Shikhandi. O venerable one! There are the powerful Dhrishtaketu and
Kuntibhoja, Nakula, Sahadeva, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas. O son! There is no doubt that all these assembled
ones will protect me. Drona with his soldiers, or Kritavarma, will not be capable of oppressing me in this battle. In
the battle, Dhrishtadyumna, the scorcher of enemies, will display his valour and hold back the enraged Drona, like
the shoreline against the abode of makaras.197 When Parshata, the destroyer of enemy heroes, is stationed in the
battle, Drona and his soldiers will never be able to assail us forcibly. He198 has arisen from the ﬁre for Drona’s destruction, sporting armour, arrows, sword, bow and the best of ornaments. O Shini’s descendant! Go without any
anxiety. Do not be anxious on my account. In the battle, Dhrishtadyumna will repulse the angry Drona.’”’
CHAPTER 1064(87)

‘Sanjaya said, “On hearing these words of Dharmaraja, the bull among the Shini lineage was afraid that Partha199
would censure him if he abandoned the king. But he especially thought that the worlds would speak of him as being a coward, if he did not go towards Phalguna. Having thought about this in many ways, Satyaki, unassailable in
battle and bull among men, spoke these words to Dharmaraja. ‘O lord of the earth! If you think that this will ensure

your protection and make sure that you are safe, I will follow Bibhatsu and act in accordance with your words. O
king! I tell you truthfully that there is nothing in the three worlds that is dearer to me than Pandava.200 O one who
provides honours! As you have instructed, I will follow in his footsteps. There is nothing that I will not do for your
sake. O supreme among men! The words of my preceptor are special. But your words are even more special for
me. O bull among kings! Know that your brothers, Krishna and Vasudeva, are always engaged in doing what
brings you pleasure and base themselves on your welfare. O lord! For Arjuna’s sake, I accept your words on my
head. O supreme among men! I will penetrate these impenetrable soldiers. I will angrily pass through Drona’s array, like a ﬁsh through the ocean. O king! I will go to the spot where King Jayadratha is. He is stationed in the assembly of soldiers there, frightened of Pandava. He is protected by the best of rathas there—Drona’s son, Karna,
Kripa and the others. O lord of the earth! I think that the spot where Partha is, prepared to slay Jayadratha, is three
yojanas from here. But though he has advanced three yojanas, I will follow in his footsteps. O king! Firm in my
resolution, I will remain there until he has killed Jayadratha. Instructed by his superiors, which man does not ﬁght,
not to speak of someone like me? O king! I have been commanded by you. O lord! I know the spot to which I have
to go. This ocean of soldiers is full of iron rods, spears, clubs, lances, swords, shields, javelins, arrows and the best
of weapons, but I will agitate it. You can see that there is an array of elephants, with one thousand of them. They
have been born in the lineage known as Anjana201 and are valorous. They are mounted by many mlecchas, who
are armed and ﬁnd delight in battle. O king! These elephants have the complexion of clouds and are exuding like
clouds.202 If they are urged by the elephant-riders, they never retreat. O king! They cannot be vanquished until
they have been killed. O king! You can see the rathas. These maharathas are princes and have the name of Rukmarathas.203 O lord of the earth! They are skilled in ﬁghting on chariots and on elephants. They are supreme in
knowledge of ﬁghting and are skilled in ﬁghting with their ﬁsts. They are accomplished in ﬁghting with clubs and
also skilled in ﬁghting at close quarters.204 They have swords as weapons and can attack with the sword and the
shield. These brave ones are skilled in knowledge and seek to rival one another. O king! They always vanquish a
large number of men in battle. O king! They were vanquished by Karna and follow Duhshasana. They were applauded by Vasudeva as supreme rathas. They always seek to do that which brings Karna pleasure and follow his
instructions. O king! It is on his instructions that they retreated from their pursuit of the one with the white horses.
They have no wounds and are not exhausted. They possess strong armour and bows. On the commands of Dhritarashtra’s son, they are certainly waiting for me. O Kourava! For the sake of bringing you pleasure, I will crush
them in the battle. I will then follow Savyasachi’s footsteps. O king! There are seven hundred other elephants that
you can see. They are armoured and are ridden by kiratas.205 To protect his life, the king of the kiratas had earlier
ornamented them and presented them to Savyasachi, together with many servants. O king! They have performed
many hard deeds for you earlier. Behold the vagaries of time that they are now battling against you. These elephants are ridden by kiratas, who are invincible in battle. All of them are skilled in handling elephants and descended from Agni. Savyasachi defeated all of them in a battle earlier. They follow Duryodhana’s instructions and
are carefully waiting for me now. O king! These kiratas are invincible in battle, but I will shatter them with my arrows. I will follow Pandava, as he is engaged in Saindhava’s death. These other extremely great elephants have
been born in Anjana’s lineage. They are both harsh and humble and their temples and mouths are exuding. Their
armour is completely made out of gold and they are well ornamented. O king! In a battle, they succeed in accomplishing their objectives and are like Airavata. They hail from the northern mountains, and ﬁerce dasyus206 are
astride them. They are harsh and supreme warriors and their armour is made out of black iron. There are also those
who have been born from cows and those who have been born from monkeys. There are others who have been
born from other species and those who have been born as humans. That army, which seems to have the complexion
of smoke from a distance, consists of mlecchas who reside in fortresses in the Himalayas. They are the performers
of evil deeds. Duryodhana obtained them and this large number of elephants, together with Kripa, Somadatta’s
son, Drona, supreme among rathas, the king of Sindhu and Karna. He disregards the Pandavas. Driven by destiny,
he thinks himself to be successful. But those that I have named will be within the reach of my iron arrows. O
Kounteya! They will not escape from me, even if they possess the speed of thought. He207 has always drawn sustenance from the valour of others and honours them. But they will be afﬂicted by arrows, and destruction confronts

them. O king! You can see the rathas with golden standards. They are difﬁcult to resist and are famous by the name
of Kambojas. They are brave and skilled in knowledge. They are devoted to the science of ﬁghting. They desire
each other’s welfare and have assembled ﬁrmly. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! These angry ones constitute
one akshouhini for Dhritarashtra’s son. They are stationed for my sake and are protected by the brave ones among
the Kurus. O great king! They are not distracted and have presented themselves before me. I will destroy them,
like a ﬁre against straw. O king! Therefore, let those who prepare chariots make my chariot ready and equip it with
all the implements, as has been decreed by those who prepare chariots. Let all the different weapons used in war be
placed. But compared to what the instructors have said, let ﬁve times the number be placed on the chariot. I will
have to clash against and kill the Kambojas, who are as angry as venomous serpents. They possess many weapons
and ﬁght with many different kinds of weapons. I will have to clash against the kiratas, who are skilled in striking
and like poison. They have always been nurtured by King Duryodhana and have his welfare in mind. I will have to
clash against the Shakas, who are like Shakra in their valour. They are as unassailable as the ﬁre and blaze like
ﬁres. There are many other warriors, who are as difﬁcult to resist as time. O king! I will clash against many such
invincible ones in the battle. Therefore, let the best of horses again be yoked to my chariot. Let them be without
exhaustion. Let them bear auspicious marks. Let them be groomed and watered.’
‘“The king arranged for all the equipment and all the implements to be placed on the chariot. There were many
different kinds of weapons. Skilled men unyoked all the well-trained horses. They were given tasty water and fed.
After this, they were fanned. When they had drank and bathed, they were adorned with golden garlands. Stakes
were plucked out from the four horses. Those handsome and swift-coursing horses were dressed in golden harnesses. They were cheerful and well trained and were yoked to the chariot. The giant standard, with the mark of a lion
with golden manes, was erected. Pennants decorated with gold, gems and colourful coral were fastened. There was
an ornamented ﬂag, with the complexion of a white cloud. There was an umbrella with a golden staff and there
were many weapons. With many golden trappings, the horses were duly yoked to the chariot. Daruka’s208
younger brother was the charioteer and was also his209 beloved friend. Like Matali to Vasava, he came and reported that the chariot had been yoked. Having bathed, Satyaki, supreme among handsome ones, puriﬁed himself. He
performed the auspicious ceremonies and gave away one thousand nishkas of gold to snatakas.210 They blessed
him. He drank madhuparka211 and kailavata liquor.212 His eyes were red and his eyes were unsteady because of
the intoxication. The brave one touched the brass and his joy increased.213 His energy doubled and he blazed like
a ﬁre. The supreme of rathas slung the bow around his hips and picked up the arrows. He was armoured and ornamented and the brahmanas pronounced benedictions on him. Beautiful maidens honoured him by showering
parched rice, fragrances and garlands on him. He joined his hands in salutation and touched Yudhishthira’s feet.
He214 inhaled the fragrance of his head. He then ascended the giant chariot. The horses were cheerful and well fed
and were as ﬂeet as the wind. They were from the Sindhu region and bore him on that victorious chariot. Satyaki’s
limbs were full of cheer and he spoke to Bhima. ‘O Bhima! Protect the king. That is your supreme duty. I will
pierce through this army, which has been ripened by time. I will proceed and it is your supreme duty to protect the
king. O destroyer of enemies! You know my valour and I know yours. O Bhima! Return and let me accomplish my
desired objective.’215 Having been thus addressed, he216 replied, ‘O Satyaki! Go and accomplish your objective.
O supreme among men! I will perform the task of protecting the king.’ Having been thus addressed, Madhava said
to Bhimasena. ‘O Partha! Go! Go swiftly. It is certain that victory will be mine, since you are obedient, affectionate and devoted to me today. O Bhima! That is what these auspicious portents are telling me. There is no doubt that
the wicked Saindhava will be slain by the great-souled Pandava and that I will embrace the king who has dharma
in his soul.’ Having thus addressed Bhima, the great-minded one took his leave. He glanced towards your soldiers,
like a tiger towards a mass of deer. O lord of men! On seeing his glances, your soldiers were extremely confounded and began to tremble. Thus did Satyaki suddenly descend on your soldiers. O king! On Dharmaraja’s instructions, he wished to see Arjuna.”’
CHAPTER 1065(88)

‘Sanjaya said, “O great king! Wishing to ﬁght, Yuyudhana advanced against your soldiers. Dharmaraja, surrounded
by his own soldiers, advanced towards Drona’s chariot, wishing to follow Yuyudhana from the rear. The son of the
king of Panchala217 was indomitable in battle. In the midst of the army of the Pandavas, he and King Vasudana
loudly shouted, ‘Come! Strike! Advance swiftly against the enemy, so that Satyaki, indomitable in battle, can pass
through easily. Many maharathas will endeavour to vanquish him.’ Having said this, they descended forcefully on
your army. ‘We will defeat those who advance against him.’218 A great sound then arose from the direction of
Yuyudhana’s chariot and this made your son’s forces tremble mightily. O great king! They were shattered into a
hundred fragments by Satvata. Shini’s maharatha grandson shattered them and crushed seven brave and great
archers who were stationed at the forefront of the army. They were terriﬁed, crushed and routed by the long-armed
one. On seeing that superhuman one, the brave ones ﬂed from the ﬁeld of battle. O venerable one! Chariots were
shattered and seats on chariots broken. Wheels were shattered and umbrellas and standards brought down. O lord
of the earth! There were ﬂags, bumpers and golden helmets. There were arms smeared with sandalwood paste,
with armlets. O supreme among men! The thighs of men were strewn around on the ground. They were like the
trunks of elephants, or the tapering bodies of serpents. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were handsome
faces with earrings and eyes like bulls, with complexions like that of the moon. They fell down and made the earth
look beautiful. There were many mangled elephants, lying down like mountains. They were wounded severely and
were strewn around on the ground, like elephants. Their harnesses were made of gold and they were garlanded
with strings of pearls. The colourful breast plates of the horses were beautiful. They were destroyed by the longarmed one and having lost their lives, fell down on the ground. Satvata slew diverse kinds of your soldiers. Having
penetrated your soldiers, he violently drove that army away.
“He then wished to proceed along the path that Dhananjaya had followed. But as Satyaki proceeded, he was obstructed by Drona. O venerable one! Yuyudhana confronted Bharadvaja’s son. But the angry one did not retreat,
like the store of water on encountering the shoreline. In that battle, Drona repulsed maharatha Satyaki. He pierced
him with ﬁve sharp arrows that penetrated the inner organs. O king! In that encounter, Satyaki pierced Drona with
seven arrows that were gold-tufted, sharpened on stone and with the feathers of herons, peacocks and hawks.
Drona struck his horses and the charioteer with six arrows. Maharatha Satyaki could not tolerate this on Drona’s
part. Satyaki roared like a lion and pierced Drona with ten other arrows and yet again with another fourteen.
Yuyudhana again pierced Drona with ten arrows, his charioteer with one and his four horses with four arrows. O
venerable one! In that battle, he pierced his standard with an arrow. Drona swiftly enveloped his horses, his charioteer, his chariot and his standard with swift arrows, like ﬂying locusts. Yuyudhana also fearlessly covered Drona
with many swift arrows. Drona said, ‘Your preceptor219 has abandoned the battle and departed like a coward. He
was ﬁghting me. But keeping me to the right, he has left. O Madhava! If you do not swiftly avoid me in this battle,
like your preceptor did, and continue to ﬁght with me, you will not escape with your life today.’ Satyaki replied, ‘I
am following Dhananjaya’s footsteps on Dharmaraja’s instruction. O brahmana! Be fortunate. I am leaving. I do
not wish to waste time.’ O king! Having said this, Shini’s descendant abandoned the preceptor and proceeded
quickly. He told the charioteer, ‘Drona will make every effort to restrain me. O charioteer! Take care in this battle.
Listen to these supreme words of mine. Behold. There is the extremely resplendent army of the Avantis. Next to
that, there is the extremely powerful army from the south. Next to that, there is the large army of the Bahlikas.
Joined to the Bahlikas, there is the large force of Karna. O charioteer! These armies are different from one another,
but are dependent on each other. They support each other and will not give up the ﬁeld of battle. Cheerfully goad
the horses into the space that is between them. O charioteer! Adopt a medium speed and take me there, where the
Bahlikas can be seen, with many weapons raised in their arms and there are many from the south, with the son of
the suta at the forefront. His army of elephants, horses and chariots can be seen in an array. They have been raised
from many countries and are stationed in the midst of the infantry.’ He avoided the brahmana and spoke thus to his
charioteer. ‘Pass through the gap, towards Karna’s extremely large and ﬁerce army.’ Drona became angry at this
and followed him, releasing many arrows. But the mighty-armed Yuyudhana left and did not return.
‘“Satyaki struck Karna’s extremely large army with sharp arrows and penetrated into the limitless army of the
Bharatas. When Yuyudhana penetrated and the soldiers began to run away, the intolerant Kritavarma repulsed
Satyaki. As he was advancing, the valiant Satyaki quickly struck him with six arrows and killed his four horses

with four arrows. Satyaki again used sixteen swift arrows with drooping tufts to pierce Kritavarma between the
breasts. O great king! Having been thus afﬂicted by many arrows of great energy released by Satvata, Kritavarma
could not tolerate this. O king! He afﬁxed a vatsadanta arrow that was like a tongue of ﬁre. He stretched his bow
up to his ear and struck Satyaki in the chest. The gold-tufted arrow penetrated the armour on his body and passing
through the body, penetrated the earth, drenched in blood. O king! Kritavarma knew about supreme weapons. He
used many arrows to slice down his bow, with the arrows afﬁxed to them. O king! In that battle, he pierced Satyaki, for whom truth was his valour. He angrily struck him between the breasts with ten sharp arrows. With his bow
shattered, Satyaki, supreme among strong ones, picked up a javelin and used this to strike Kritavarma’s right arm.
The brave Satyaki then grasped another ﬁrm bow and quickly released hundreds and thousands of arrows. He enveloped Kritavarma and his chariot. With a broad-headed arrow, he sliced down the charioteer’s head. Having been
slain, Hardikya’s charioteer fell down from the great chariot. When the charioteer was slain, the horses ﬂed at great
speed. Disturbed, Bhoja himself controlled the horses, with the bow in one hand. At this, the soldiers honoured
him. In an instant, he urged those well-trained horses on. He did not suffer from any fear, but caused great terror
among his enemies. However, Satyaki had gone on ahead and he220 attacked Bhima.
‘“O Indra among kings! Yuyudhana emerged from Drona’s army and swiftly advanced towards the great army
of the Kambojas. He was countered there by many brave maharathas. O king! Though truth was Satyaki’s valour,
he could not move at all. Having arranged his army, Drona entrusted the burden to Bhoja and followed Yuyudhana
in the battle, wishing to ﬁght with him. He followed Yuyudhana from the rear and the largest of the Pandu armies
angrily began to resist him. Having encountered the chariot of Hardikya, who was supreme among rathas, the Panchalas, with Bhimasena at the forefront, lost their enterprise. O king! The brave Kritavarma repulsed them with his
valour. Though they endeavoured, all of them lost their spirits. Fearlessly, Bhoja used his torrent of arrows to obstruct and afﬂict their mounts. In that battle, those brave ones were oppressed by Bhoja’s army. But desiring great
fame, they remained stationed, like noble ones.”’
CHAPTER 1066(89)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “Our army possesses many kinds of soldiers, who are supreme and have been tested. O Sanjaya! They are many and have been arrayed in the proper way. They have always been honoured by us and have
always been devoted to us. They are mature221 and are wonderful in form. The ﬁrmness and valour have been
seen earlier. They are not aged, nor young. They are not thin, nor are they obese. They are agile and tall and all
their limbs are free of disease. They are adorned with armour and have many kinds of weapons. They are accomplished in many kinds of knowledge connected with weapons. They know how to ascend on the shoulders,222 advance and retreat. They are accomplished in striking, moving forward and back. They have been tested in many
ways, on elephants, horses and chariots. They have been examined properly and have been paid their wages, not
on account of lineage, favour or relationships.223 They have not arrived without being summoned. Nor have soldiers in my army not been paid. They have been born in good lineages and are noble. They are contented, well fed
and submissive. They have been rewarded well. They are illustrious and spirited. O son!224 They are sustained by
the best of men, who are the equals of the guardians of the worlds. These are the foremost of advisers and many
others who have performed the best of deeds. There are many kings who wish to do what is beneﬁcial for us and
protect them. They have voluntarily sided with us, with their forces and their followers. Our army is like a giant
ocean, with ﬂowing rivers merging into it from every direction. It possesses many chariots and horses. Though
they are without wings, they are like birds. The large number of warriors constitutes the water. The ﬁerce mounts
are the waves. There are catapults, swords, maces, spears, lances, arrows and javelins that are like ﬁsh. There are
standards and ornaments, decorated with bejewelled garments. The advancing mounts are like the force of the
wind that agitates it.225 Drona is the fathomless nether regions. Kritavarma is a giant lake. Jalasandha is a giant
crocodile. Karna is the rising moon.226 O Sanjaya! When that bull among the Pandavas227 swiftly entered and
penetrated my ocean of soldiers on a single chariot and Yuyudhana followed him, I do not see any remnant being
left. O Sanjaya! After Savyasachi penetrated my soldiers, so did Satvata, supreme among rathas. On seeing those
two valiant ones fearlessly and spiritedly advance and on seeing the king of Sindhu within the reach of Gandiva’s

arrows, what did the Kurus do, driven by destiny? When that terrible time arrived, what happened to them? O son!
I think that the assembled Kouravas were devoured by death. Today, their valour in battle can no longer be seen. In
the battle, Krishna and Pandava have penetrated, without being injured. O Sanjaya! There is no one who can resist
them. There are many paid warriors and tested maharathas. Some have been paid due wages and others served
with pleasant words. O son! There is no one among my soldiers who has not been served, without due cause. The
devoted ones have all obtained due wages, in accordance with their deeds. O Sanjaya! There is no warrior in my
army who has been paid less than what is his due. O son! There is no man who has not been paid. To the best of
my capacity, they have been honoured with gifts, honours and seats. O son! My sons, kith and kin have also acted
in the same way. But when they confronted Savyasachi in the battle, they have been vanquished. They have been
supremely crushed by Shini’s descendant. Other than destiny, what can this be? O Sanjaya! Those who are the protectors and those who are being protected are following the same path, the protectors, as well as those who are protected. On seeing Arjuna stationed in the battle in front of Saindhava, what did my extremely foolish son do? On
seeing Satyaki fearlessly penetrate in the battle, what course of action, appropriate to the occasion, did Duryodhana
adopt? Those supreme rathas, who are beyond the reach of all weapons, penetrated the army. On witnessing this in
the encounter, what did those on my side decide to do? On beholding Dasharha Krishna stationed for Arjuna’s sake
and on seeing the bull among the Shini lineage, I think that my sons must have been full of sorrow. On seeing that
Satvata and Arjuna had passed through the soldiers and that the Kurus were running away, I think that my sons
must have been full of sorrow. On seeing that the rathas were routed and had lost interest in subjugating the enemy
and on seeing that they had set their minds on running away, I think that my sons must have been full of sorrow.
The seats of the chariots were rendered empty by Satvata and Arjuna. On seeing that the warriors were slain, I
think that my sons must have been full of sorrow. On seeing horses, elephants and chariots and thousands of brave
ones anxiously running away from the ﬁeld of battle, I think that my sons must have been full of sorrow. Horses
were deprived of brave ones. Men were deprived of their chariots by Satyaki and Partha. I think that my sons must
have been full of sorrow. On seeing that all the masses of infantry had given up all hope of victory and were running away in every direction, I think that my sons must have been full of sorrow. On seeing that those two brave
ones had instantly passed through Drona’s array, without being defeated, I think that my sons must have been full
of sorrow. O son! I am extremely benumbed on hearing that Krishna and Dhananjaya, the ones without decay, have
penetrated my soldiers, together with Satvata. Shini’s descendant, supreme among rathas, penetrated the army. After he had passed through Bhoja’s array, what did the Kouravas do? O Sanjaya! Tell me everything about how
Drona afﬂicted the Pandus in the battle and how that battle progressed there. Drona is brave and powerful. He is
skilled in the use of weapons and is ﬁrm in his valour. How did the Panchalas ﬁght against that great archer in the
battle? Desiring Dharmaraja’s victory, they are ﬁrm in their enmity towards Drona. Bharadvaja’s maharatha son is
also ﬁrm in his enmity towards them. Wishing to kill the king of Sindhu, what did Arjuna do? O Sanjaya! You are
skilled in this. Tell me everything about what transpired.”’
CHAPTER 1067(90)

‘Sanjaya said, “O bull among the Bharata lineage! This hardship is the result of your own transgressions. O brave
one! You should not grieve like an ordinary person. O supreme among kings! Knowing your absence of qualities,
your partiality towards your sons, your duplicity about dharma, your malice towards the Pandavas and your many
piteous lamentations, Vasudeva, the one who knows about all the worlds and the lord and preceptor of all the
worlds, caused the great war to arise among the Kurus. This great and pervasive destruction has arisen because of
your own crimes. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! No good deeds by you can be seen at the beginning, in the
middle, or at the end. That is the root of this defeat. Therefore, knowing the fate of this world, be patient and listen
to how the battle raged, like the terrible one between the gods and the asuras.
‘“Shini’s descendant, with truth as his valour, penetrated amidst your soldiers. The Parthas, with Bhimasena at
the forefront, advanced against your army. Maharatha Kritavarma alone resisted the Pandus in that battle, as they
arrived in violence and anger, together with their followers. Just as the shoreline holds back the salty ocean,
Hardikya repulsed the Pandu soldiers in that battle. Hardikya’s valour was regarded as extraordinary. The united
Parthas could not crush him in that battle. The mighty-armed Bhima pierced Kritavarma with three iron arrows and

blew on his conch shell, delighting all the Pandavas. Sahadeva pierced Hardikya with twenty arrows, Dharmaraja
with ﬁve and Nakula with one hundred. Droupadi’s sons pierced him with seventy-three, Ghatotkacha with seven
and Dhrishtadyumna struck Kritavarma with three. Virata, Drupada and Yajnasena’s son228 pierced him with ﬁve
each. Shikhandi pierced Hardikya with ﬁve swift arrows and laughing, again pierced him with twenty arrows. O
king! Kritavarma pierced each of those maharathas with ﬁve arrows and piercing Bhima with seven, brought down
his bow and his standard from his chariot. Once the bow was severed, the spirited maharatha angrily struck him in
the chest with seventy arrows. Having been severely and powerfully struck by Hardikya’s supreme arrows, he
trembled on his chariot, like a mountain during an earthquake. On seeing Bhimasena in that state, they,229 with
Dharmaraja at the forefront, afﬂicted Kritavarma with the release of terrible arrows. O venerable one! They
hemmed him in with a large number of chariots. To protect the son of the wind god in the battle, they cheerfully
pierced him with arrows.”
‘“The immensely strong Bhimasena recovered his senses. In that encounter, he grasped an iron javelin with a
golden handle. From his chariot, he swiftly hurled it towards Kritavarma’s chariot. Released from Bhima’s arms, it
was like a snake that has cast off its skin. Flaming extremely ﬁercely, it headed towards Kritavarma. On seeing it
suddenly descend towards him, with a hue like that of the ﬁre at the time of the destruction of a yuga, Hardikya
used two arrows to slice it into two. That javelin, decorated with gold, was severed and fell down on the ground. O
king! It illuminated the directions, like a giant meteor that has been dislodged from the sky. On seeing that the
javelin had been destroyed, Bhima was extremely enraged. He picked up another bow that was forceful and made
a great sound. In that battle, Bhimasena angrily attacked Hardikya and struck him between the breasts with ﬁve arrows. O king! Bhima was terrible in his strength and all this was because of your evil policy. O venerable one!
Bhimasena mangled Bhoja in all his limbs. In that ﬁeld of battle, he was as beautiful as a red ashoka tree that was
blooming. However, that great archer only laughed. In that battle, he angrily struck Bhimasena with three arrows
and then ﬁrmly and carefully, pierced those maharathas back with three arrows each. They also pierced him back
with seven arrows each.
‘“O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that encounter, the maharatha laughed and wrathfully used a kshurapra arrow to sever Shikhandi’s bow. On seeing that his bow had been severed, Shikhandi became angry. In that
encounter, he grasped a sword and a brilliant shield that was marked with one hundred moons. He whirled that giant shield, which was decorated with gold and dispatched the sword towards Kritavarma’s chariot. O king! In that
encounter, the giant sword severed his bow and arrow and fell down on the ground, like a stellar body dislodged
from the ﬁrmament. At the same time, in the battle, those maharathas quickly and severely pierced Kritavarma
with arrows. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Hardikya, the destroyer of enemy heroes, discarded the giant
bow, which had been shattered. In that encounter, he picked up another bow and pierced each of the Pandavas with
three arrows. He pierced Shikhandi with three arrows, and then yet again with another ﬁve. The immensely illustrious Shikhandi picked up another bow and countered Hridika’s son with arrows that had heads made out of the
nails of tortoises. O king! In that battle, Hridika’s son became angry and powerfully attacked Yajnasena’s maharatha son, the one who was responsible for the death of the great-souled Bhishma in the battle. O king! The
brave and powerful one attacked him, like a tiger against an elephant. Those two were like ﬂaming ﬁres, or two
elephants in charge of the directions. Those destroyers of enemies clashed against each other with a torrent of arrows and released showers of arrows at each other from the best of bows. They released hundreds of arrows, like
the rays of two suns in the sky. Those two maharathas tormented each other with their sharp arrows. Those two
brave ones were as resplendent as suns at the end of a yuga. Kritavarma ﬁercely struck Yajnasena’s maharatha son
with seventy-three arrows and pierced him again with another seven. Severely pierced and wounded, he sat down
on the ﬂoor of his chariot, letting go of his bow and arrows and becoming unconscious. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! On seeing him thus distressed in the battle, those on your side honoured Hardikya and waved their garments around in the air. On discerning that Shikhandi was thus afﬂicted by Hardikya’s arrows, his charioteer swiﬂy
bore the maharatha away from the ﬁeld of battle.
‘“On seeing Shikhandi on the ﬂoor of the chariot in the battle, the Parthas quickly surrounded Kritavarma with
chariots. Maharatha Kritavarma accomplished a supreme wonder there. In that battle, he single-handedly repulsed
the Parthas and their followers. Having defeated the Parthas, maharatha Kritavarma vanquished the Chedis, the

Panchalas, the Srinjayas and the Kekayas, all of whom were immensely valorous. In the battle, the Pandavas were
slaughtered by Hardikya. In that encounter, they were unable to retain their spirits and ﬂed in all directions, bereft
of their senses. In the battle, Hardikya defeated the sons of Pandu, with Bhimasena at the forefront. He was stationed there, like a ﬁre without smoke. Those maharathas were driven away by Hardikya in the battle. They were
afﬂicted by his shower of arrows and were forced to retreat.”’
CHAPTER 1068(91)

‘Sanjaya said, “O king! Listen attentively to what you have asked. Those soldiers were driven away by the greatsouled Hardikya. They were overcome by shame and those on your side were delighted. The Pandus were immersed in fathomless waters, without a refuge, and sought refuge. O king! In that great battle, on hearing the ﬁerce
roars emitted by those on your side, Shini’s descendant swiftly attacked Kritavarma.230 Hardikya Kritavarma angrily covered Shini’s descendant with sharp arrows and Satyaki also became enraged. In the encounter, Shini’s descendant released an extremely sharp and broad-headed arrow at Kritavarma and shot another four arrows at him.
These slew his horses and the broad-headed arrow severed his bow. Satyaki, for whom truth was his valour, used
sharp arrows to pierce his charioteer and those who guarded his rear and thus deprived him of his chariot. He then
afﬂicted the soldiers with arrows with drooping tufts. Oppressed by the arrows of Shini’s descendant, the army
scattered. Satyaki, for whom truth was his valour, then swiftly departed. O king! Listen to what that valiant one did
to your soldiers.
‘“O great king! He passed through the giant ocean that was Drona’s army. Delighted at having vanquished Kritavarma in the battle, the brave one spoke these words to his charioteer. ‘Proceed slowly and fearlessly.’ On seeing
your forces, with a large number of chariots, horses, elephants and infantry, he again spoke to the charioteer. ‘The
army on the left, which is like a cloud, is Drona’s. It has a large army of elephants and Rukmaratha is at the forefront.231 O charioteer! There are many of them and they are unassailable in a battle. Instructed by Duryodhana,
they are ready to give up their lives and are waiting for me. All these princes are great archers and are brave in
ﬁghting. These foremost of rathas come from Trigarta and their standards are embellished with gold. These brave
ones are stationed there, desiring to ﬁght with me. O charioteer! Urge the horses quickly and take me there. While
Bharadvaja’s son looks on, I will ﬁght with the Trigartas.’ The charioteer was obedient to Satvata’s instructions
and slowly proceeded there, on a chariot that possessed the complexion of the sun and was radiant with ﬂags.
Supreme horses were harnessed to it and they were obedient to the charioteer. In a battle, they possessed the speed
of the wind and their complexions were like the kunda ﬂower,232 the moon, or silver. The chariot bore him there,
drawn by supreme horses that had the complexion of conch shells. In every direction, the brave ones surrounded
him with an army of elephants. They showered many kinds of sharp arrows that could easily penetrate. Satvata
also used sharp arrows to ﬁght with that army of elephants. He was like a giant cloud that showers down on a
mountain at the end of the summer. The arrows were like the vajra or thunder to the touch and slaughtered the elephants. They were driven away from the ﬁeld of battle by Shini’s brave descendant. Their tusks were broken. They
were covered in blood. Their temples and frontal lobes were shattered. Their ears, faces and trunks were lopped
off. They were without riders and ﬂags. Their armour and bells were fragmented. The giant standards were brought
down. O king! The blankets were torn apart. With the riders slain, they roamed around in different directions. They
shrieked and roared in many ways, like the thunder of the clouds. They were mangled by Satvata’s iron and vatsadanta arrows.
‘“When that army of elephants was routed, maharatha Jalasandha233 urged the elephant that he was riding towards the chariot with the silvery horses. The brave one had a golden complexion and was adorned with armlets
made of puriﬁed gold. He had earrings, a diadem and a conch shell and was smeared with red sandalwood paste.
There was a ﬂaming garland made out of gold around his head. There were golden and resplendent chains on his
chest and around his neck. He was seated on the head of his elephant and stretched a golden bow. O great king! He
was as radiant as a cloud tinged with lightning. On seeing Magadha suddenly descend on him on a supreme elephant, Satyaki countered him, like the shoreline driving back the ocean. The elephant was checked by the supreme
arrows of Shini’s descendant. O king! On seeing this, the immensely strong Jalasandha became enraged in that bat-

tle. Angrily, the great archer Jalasandha pierced Shini’s grandson on his broad chest with arrows that were capable
of bearing great loads. He then used another yellow, sharp and broad-headed arrow to sever the bow of the brave
one from the Vrishni lineage, just as he was drawing it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Once the bow had
been severed, the brave one from Magadha laughed and pierced Satyaki with ﬁve sharp arrows. He was pierced by
many arrows released by the valiant Jalasandha. But the mighty-armed one did not waver and it was extraordinary.
Without any fear, the powerful one thought about the arrows he should use. He took up another bow. Asking
Jalasandha to wait, Shini’s descendant laughed and severely struck him on his broad chest with sixty arrows. He
then used a yellow kshurapra arrow to sever Jalasandha’s giant bow in his hand and pierced him with three arrows.
Jalasandha cast aside the bow, which had an arrow still afﬁxed to it. O venerable one! He swiftly hurled a lance towards Satyaki. In that great battle, this pierced Madhava’s left arm and penetrated the earth, like a giant and ﬁerce
serpent that was sighing. When his left arm had been pierced, Satyaki, for whom truth was his valour, struck
Jalasandha with thirty sharp arrows. The immensely strong Jalasandha picked up a sword and a giant shield that
was made out of the hide of bulls and was marked with the signs of one hundred moons. He whirled the sword and
hurled it at Satvata. Severing the bow of Shini’s descendant, the sword fell down on the ground. When it fell down
on the ground, it looked like a circle of ﬁre. He234 picked up another bow that was capable of shattering all bodies. It was as large as the trunk of a shala tree and its roar was like that of Indra’s vajra. He angrily stretched that
bow and pierced Jalasandha with an arrow. The supreme one of the Madhava lineage laughed and used two kshurapra arrows to sever Jalasandha’s arms, with their ornaments and their armlets. Those arms were like clubs and
fell down from that supreme of elephants. They fell down on the ground, like two ﬁve-headed serpents falling
down from a mountain. With a third kshurapra arrow, Satyaki severed his head, possessing beautiful teeth and a
handsome jaw and adorned with charming earrings. When the head and arms had been cut down, the torso looked
fearful and sprinkled Jalasandha’s elephant with his blood. O lord of the earth! Having swiftly slain Jalasandha,
Satvata brought down the housing from the elephant’s shoulder.235 Jalasandha’s elephant was covered with blood,
all over its limbs. He was hanging upside down from that supreme seat. Afﬂicted by Satvata’s arrows, the giant
elephant ﬂed, uttering terrible and piteous shrieks, and crushing its own soldiers.
‘“O venerable one! On seeing that Jalasandha had been slain by the bull among the Vrishni lineage, a giant roar
of lamentation arose among your soldiers. Your warriors retreated and ﬂed in different directions. They were interested in running away and not in defeating the enemy. O king! At this time, Drona, supreme among those who
wielded weapons, quickly approached maharatha Yuyudhana, borne on his swift horses. On seeing that Shini’s descendant was rampaging, many bulls among the Kurus angrily surrounded Satyaki, together with Drona. A battle
commenced between the Kurus, with Drona, and Satvata. O king! It was a terrible clash, like that between the gods
and the asuras.”’
CHAPTER 1069(92)

‘Sanjaya said, “O great king! All of them swiftly fought with Yuyudhana. They were skilled in striking and made
endeavours. They showered down a storm of arrows. He struck Drona with seventy-seven sharp arrows. Durmarshana struck him with twelve arrows, Duhsaha with ten. Vikarna struck him on his left side and between the
breasts with thirty sharp arrows that were tufted with the feathers of herons. Durmukha struck him with ten arrows
and Duhshasana with eight. O venerable one! Chitrasena pierced Shini’s descendant with two arrows. Duryodhana
brought down a great shower of arrows on Madhava. O king! In that battle, other maharathas also afﬂicted him.
Your maharatha sons countered him from all directions. However, Shini’s descendant pierced each of them back
with separate arrows. He struck Bharadvaja’s son with three arrows, Duhsaha with nine, Vikarna with twenty-ﬁve,
Chitrasena with seven, Durmarshana with twelve, Vivimshati with four, Satyavrata with nine and Vijaya with ten
arrows. The maharatha struck Rukmangada’s bow and brandished his own bow. Satyaki then quickly advanced
against your maharatha son.236 While everyone looked on, he severely pierced the king, supreme among the
wielders of all weapons, with his arrows and a battle commenced between the two. Both of them afﬁxed and released sharp arrows. In that battle, those two maharathas rendered each other invisible. Pierced by Satyaki, the
king of the Kurus looked extremely beautiful. A lot of blood ﬂowed from his body, like the sap from a sandalwood

tree. Satvata was also pierced by a mass of arrows released by your son. He was as beautiful as a golden sacriﬁcial
stake that had been erected. O king! In that battle, the Madhava archer suddenly severed the Kuru king’s bow with
a kshurapra arrow and laughed. When the bow had been severed, he released many arrows and pierced the enemy
with those swift-acting arrows. In the battle, the king could not tolerate these signs of victory on the part of his foe.
He grasped another unassailable bow that possessed a golden back and quickly pierced Satyaki with a hundred arrows. He was severely and powerfully struck by your archer son. Overcome by sentiments of intolerance, he began
to afﬂict your son. On seeing that the king was oppressed, your maharatha sons showered powerful arrows on Satvata and enveloped him. When he was shrouded by your maharatha sons in many ways, he pierced each of them
with ﬁve arrows and pierced them again with seven each. He swiftly struck Duryodhana with eight arrows. Laughing, he severed his bow and frightened the enemy. With more arrows, he brought down his standard, which was
decorated with a bejewelled elephant. He used four sharp arrows to slay his four horses. The immensely illustrious
one then brought down the charioteer with a kshurapra arrow. The maharatha countered the king of the Kurus with
many arrows that were capable of penetrating the inner organs and was delighted. O king! Having been thus struck
in the battle by the supreme arrows released by Shini’s descendant, your son, Duryodhana, suddenly ﬂed. The
archer king mounted Chitrasena’s chariot and a great lamentation arose in the world on seeing that the king was
about to be devoured by Satyaki, like the moon by Rahu.
‘“On hearing this great uproar, maharatha Kritavarma suddenly advanced towards the spot where the illustrious
Madhava was. He brandished his supreme bow and censured his charioteer, urging him to speedily goad the horses
and head swiftly in that direction. O great king! On seeing that he was descending, like Death with a gaping
mouth, Yuyudhana spoke to his charioteer. ‘With his arrows, Kritavarma is quickly advancing towards me on his
chariot. Drive your chariot and let us clash against this supreme of all archers.’ The horses were prepared well and
were fast and advanced in the battle against Bhoja, who was revered by archers. Those two tigers among men were
extremely angry and were like blazing ﬁres. They clashed against each other, like two spirited tigers. Kritavarma
struck Shini’s descendant with twenty-six sharp arrows and his charioteer with seven. He struck Satvata’s four
horses, which were from the Sindhu region and were well trained and well controlled, with four supreme arrows.
His237 standard was golden and he brandished his giant bow, with a golden back. His armlets were golden and his
armour was golden. He countered him with gold-tufted arrows. Wishing to leave and see Dhananjaya, Shini’s descendant also quickly struck Kritavarma with sharp arrows. Struck by his powerful enemy, the unassailable
scorcher of enemies238 trembled, like a mountain during an earthquake. Satyaki then quickly pierced Kritavarma’s
four horses with sixty-three sharp arrows and his charioteer with seven. Satyaki then afﬁxed an arrow with golden
tufts and released it. It blazed like a giant ﬁre and was like an angry serpent. The arrow was like Yama’s staff and
he released it at Kritavarma. It penetrated his armour, which shone like the sun and was decorated with colourful
gold. Having drunk his blood, it ﬁercely penetrated the earth. Afﬂicted by Satvata, he was drenched in blood. He
cast aside his bow and sank down on the ﬂoor of the supreme chariot. His teeth were like that of a lion and he was
inﬁnite in his valour. But afﬂicted by Satyaki’s arrows, the bull among men sank down on his knees on the ﬂoor of
the chariot. Having countered Kritavarma, who was like the thousand-armed one239 and like an ocean that cannot
be agitated, Satyaki left. That place was full of swords, lances and bows and populated by elephants, horses and
chariots. It looked terrible, because of the blood shed by the bulls among the kshatriyas. While all the soldiers
looked on, the bull of the Shini lineage passed through it. He immersed himself in that army and penetrated it, like
the slayer of Vritra through an army of asuras. Meanwhile, Hardikya grasped another giant bow and stationed
there, began to powerfully resist and ﬁght with the Pandavas.”’
CHAPTER 1070(93)

‘Sanjaya said, “At the time when the soldiers were scattered by Shini’s descendant, Bharadvaja’s son repulsed him
with a great shower of arrows. While all the soldiers looked on, a tumultuous clash commenced between Drona
and Satvata, like that between Bali and Vasava. Drona pierced Shini’s grandson in the forehead with three colourful arrows that were completely made out of iron and were like venomous snakes. O great king! Pierced in the
forehead by those arrows, Yuyudhana was as beautiful as a mountain with three peaks. Bharadvaja’s son was look-

ing for an opportunity in the battle. He released many other arrows, with roars like those of Indra’s vajra. While the
arrows released from Drona’s bow were descending, Dasharha, who was supreme in the knowledge of weapons,
severed them with two arrows that had excellent tufts. O lord of the earth! On beholding this dexterity of hand,
Drona smiled and suddenly struck the bull among the Shini lineage with twenty arrows. He surpassed Yuyudhana’s
lightness of hand with his own dexterity and pierced him with ﬁfty arrows, and then yet again with one hundred. O
king! They arose from Drona’s chariot, like large and angry serpents from a termite hill, and penetrated his body.
In that fashion, Yuyudhana released hundreds and thousands of arrows. Those arrows could drink up blood and enveloped Drona’s chariot. O venerable one! No difference in dexterity could be seen between the foremost of brahmanas and Satyaki. Those bulls among men were equal. Extremely angry, Satyaki struck Drona with nine arrows
with drooping tufts and also struck his standard with sharp arrows. While Bharadvaja’s son looked on, he struck
his charioteer with one hundred arrows. On witnessing Yuyudhana’s dexterity, maharatha Drona pierced Satyaki
with seventy arrows and each of the horses with three. With a single arrow, he pierced the standard that was stationed on Madhava’s chariot. In that battle, he then used another broad-headed arrow with golden tufts to sever the
great-souled Madhava’s bow. At this, maharatha Satyaki became very angry. He discarded that bow. He grasped a
giant club and hurled it at Bharadvaja’s son. It was made completely out of iron and was bound with strips of cloth.
It descended suddenly. However, Drona used many arrows of diverse kinds to counter it. Satyaki, for whom truth
was his valour, then grasped another bow. He pierced Bharadvaja’s brave son with many arrows that had been
sharpened on stone. He pierced Drona in the battle and roared like a lion. But Drona, supreme among the wielders
of all weapons, could not tolerate this. He grasped an iron javelin with a golden handle and swiftly hurled it towards Madhava’s chariot. That javelin was like death, but it did not reach Shini’s descendant. It shattered his chariot and with a terrible noise, ﬁercely penetrated the ground. O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Shini’s
grandson pierced Drona with arrows and struck him on his right arm. O king! In that battle, using an arrow that
was in the shape of a half-moon, Drona severed Madhava’s great bow and struck the charioteer of his chariot with
a javelin. For an instant, he240 sank down senseless on the ﬂoor of the chariot. O king! Satyaki then performed a
superhuman deed there. He grasped the reins himself and fought with Drona. O lord of the earth! In that encounter,
maharatha Yuyudhana pierced the brahmana with a hundred arrows and was delighted. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona released ﬁve arrows at him. In the battle, they penetrated his armour and drank his blood. Pierced
by those terrible arrows, Satyaki became extremely angry. The brave one released arrows towards the one with the
golden chariot. With an arrow, he brought Drona’s charioteer down on the ground. With the great-souled Drona’s
charioteer slain, the horses began to run away. O king! In that battle, the radiant chariot whirled around in a thousand circles, like the sun. ‘Drona’s horses are running away. Grab them.’ These were the sounds that arose from all
the princes and the kings. O king! The maharathas quickly abandoned the battle with Satyaki. All of them swiftly
rushed to the spot where Drona was. On seeing that all of them were running away, afﬂicted by Satvata’s arrows,
your soldiers were again shattered and distressed. Drona went and again stationed himself at the mouth of the
vyuha. He had been borne away by horses that were as ﬂeet as the wind and had been afﬂicted by Vrishni’s arrows.
The valiant one241 saw that the vyuha had been shattered by the Pandus and the Panchalas. Therefore, he devoted
himself to protecting the vyuha and did not follow Shini’s descendant. The ﬁre that was Drona consumed and
countered the Pandus and the Panchalas. The ﬂame of his ire blazed, like the sun that arises at the end of a yuga.”’
CHAPTER 1071(94)

‘Sanjaya said, “O foremost among the bulls of the Kuru lineage! Having vanquished Drona and other foremost
men on your side, with Hardikya at the forefront, the brave one of the Shini lineage laughed and spoke these words
to his charioteer. ‘O charioteer! We are only instruments today. They have been consumed by Keshava and Phalguna. We have slain those whom that bull among men, the son of the lord of the gods, has already killed.’ Having
thus spoken in that great battle, the bull among the Shini lineage, ﬁerce archer and the destroyer of enemies, swiftly showered powerful arrows in every direction, like a hawk in search of ﬂesh. The foremost of brave ones was
borne on horses that had the complexion of the moon, or conch shells. He immersed himself in the soldiers and
though they surrounded him from all sides, no one was capable of withstanding him. That ﬁerce man was like the
rays of the sun. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He was valiant and his spirit was indomitable. Not a single

one from those masses was capable of standing up to him. His prowess was like that of the one with a thousand
eyes.242 He was like the sun in the ﬁrmament, when the rainy season is over.
‘“There was a colourful warrior named Sudarshana and he was full of intolerance. He bore bow and arrows and
sported golden armour. That supreme among kings advanced against Satyaki and sought to counter him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! An extremely terrible encounter took place between them and the warriors on your
side, and the Somakas praised it. The large number of immortals compared it to that between Vritra and Indra. Sudarshana pierced the foremost one of the Satvata lineage with hundreds of extremely sharp arrows. But before
those arrows could reach him, the bull among the Shini lineage struck them down with his own arrows. Sudarshana was stationed on his chariot. In similar fashion, when Satyaki, who was like Shakra, released arrows at him,
Sudarshana severed those supreme arrows into two or three fragments. On seeing that his arrows were destroyed
by the force of Satyaki’s arrows, Sudarshana, whose energy was ﬁerce, became angry. He released golden and
colourful arrows. He drew his bow completely back up to his ear and again released three sharp arrows that had
excellent tufts and were like the ﬁre. These pierced Satyaki’s body armour and penetrated his body. Yet again, the
son of the king afﬁxed another four ﬂaming arrows and struck the four horses that possessed the complexion of silver. Shini’s grandson was like Indra in his valour. Thus afﬂicted, the spirited one quickly released a mass of extremely sharp arrows and killed Sudarshana’s horses, roaring loudly. He released a broad-headed arrow that was
like the vajra or thunder and sliced off the head of his243 charioteer. The brave one from the Shini lineage then
used a kshurapra arrow to sever Sudarshana’s head. It sported earrings and was like the full moon. It possessed a
radiant face and was severed from the body. O king! This was like the battle in ancient times, when the wielder of
the vajra used extreme force to kill Bala. Having slain the son and the grandson of a king in the battle, the spirited
and great-souled bull of the Yadu lineage was overcome by great delight. He was as resplendent as the king of the
gods. He then followed the path that Arjuna had taken, repulsing your soldiers with his mass of arrows. The chariot was borne by well-trained horses and the brave one among men ﬁlled everyone with wonder. All the supreme
warriors who were assembled there honoured him and wondered at his ﬁerce deeds. With his arrows, he was like a
blazing ﬁre that consumed everything that came within the range of the arrows.”’

CHAPTER 1072(95)

‘Sanjaya said, “The great-souled and intelligent Satyaki, the bull of the Vrishni lineage, killed Sudarshana and
spoke these words to his charioteer. ‘O son!244 We have passed through the impenetrable and great ocean that is
Drona’s army. It is full of chariots, horses and elephants. The arrows and javelins are the garlands of waves. The
swords are the ﬁsh and the clubs are the crocodiles. The weapons of the brave ones make a loud roar. This is terrible and is destructive of life. There is a terrible din created by musical instruments. Warriors ﬁnd this pleasant to
the touch. But it is unassailable to those who desire victory. There are the forces of Jalasandha, surrounded by
ﬂesh-eating ones. But I think that the remaining part of the army is like a small river. It only has a little bit of water. Therefore, fearlessly, urge the horses forward. I think that Savyasachi is only the distance of a hand away and
we will reach him. In the battle, we have vanquished the intolerable Drona and his followers and Hardikya,
supreme among warriors. I think that we have reached Dhananjaya. At the sight of innumerable soldiers, no fear is
engendered in me. They are like dried grass during the summer, before a blazing ﬁre. Behold. This is the ground
along which Kiriti, the foremost of the Pandavas, has passed. It has been rendered uneven by large numbers of infantry, horses, chariots and elephants that have fallen. I think that we are close to the one with the white horses,
with Krishna as the charioteer. The sound of the inﬁnitely energetic Gandiva can be heard. From the omens that
manifest themselves before me, Arjuna will kill Saindhava before the sun has set. Go slowly and preserve the
strength of the horses. Proceed towards the army of the enemy. That is where the armoured ones are, with Suyodhana at the forefront. The Kambojas are indomitable in battle. They are armoured and are the performers of cruel
deeds. There are armed Yavanas, wielding bows and arrows. There are Shakas, Kiratas, Daradas, Barbaras and
Tamraliptakas. There are many other mlecchas, with diverse weapons in their hands. All of them are stationed with
their faces towards me, wishing to ﬁght. This is an extremely terrible fortress, with chariots, elephants and infantry.
But consider that we have already passed through this and have slain them.’
‘“The charioteer replied, ‘O Varshneya! O one who has truth as his valour! Know that I have no fear, even if the
extremely enraged son of Jamadagni245 were to be stationed before us now. O mighty-armed one! Even if it were
to be Drona, best among rathas, or Kripa, or the lord of Madra, I have no fear as long as I am under your protection. O destroyer of enemies! You have already vanquished many of them in battle. I have never exhibited any fear
in battle. O brave one! Why should I show it now, in this battle with a triﬂe?246 O one with a long life! Which
route shall I take to reach Dhananjaya? O Varshneya! Whom are you angry with? To whom has death presented
itself? Who have made up their minds to go to Yama’s residence today? You are like death at the end of a yuga and
exhibit your valour in battle. On witnessing this valour, which warriors will run away? O mighty-armed one! Who
are the ones whom King Vaivasvata247 has remembered today?’
‘“Satyaki said, ‘Like Vasava against the danavas, I will slay the ones with the shaved heads and fulﬁl my vow.
Take me towards the Kambojas. Having caused carnage among them today, I will swiftly go to Pandava. The
Kouravas, together with Suyodhana, will witness my valour today. O charioteer! I will afﬂict all the soldiers and
kill the ones with the shaven heads. In the battle today, I will shatter the soldiers of the Kouravas. Having heard
many kinds of lamentations, Suyodhana will be satisﬁed. Today, in the battle, I will show my preceptor, the greatsouled one with the white horses, who is foremost among the Pandavas, the path that he has indicated to me. Thousands of foremost among warriors will be slain by my arrows today. On witnessing this, King Duryodhana will
suffer from repentance. I will release supreme arrows today, using the dexterity of my hands. The Kouravas will
behold my bow, like a circle of ﬁre. My arrows will make copious quantities of blood ﬂow from their limbs. On
witnessing the slaughter of the soldiers, Suyodhana will suffer from repentance. In my angry form, I will slay the
best of the best today. Today, Suyodhana will think that the world has two Arjunas. In the battle today, thousands
of kings will be killed by me. On witnessing this, King Duryodhana will repent the great battle. Today, I will show
my affection and devotion to the great-souled Pandavas. I will kill thousands of kings and show the king.’”248
‘Sanjaya said, “Thus instructed, the charioteer urged Yuyudhana’s supreme horses, which were trained and well
skilled. Those horses had the complexion of the moon and he urged them to their greatest speed. They possessed
the speed of the wind, or of thought, and seemed to devour the sky as they quickly sped to the spot where the Ya-

vanas were. As he reached that army, without retreating, they exhibited the dexterity of their hands and enveloped
Satyaki with many showers of arrows. O king! But before those arrows could reach him, Satyaki used his powerful
arrows with drooping tufts to sever those arrows and other weapons. He then used extremely sharp arrows that
were gold-tufted, with the feathers of vultures, to sever the heads and arms of the Yavanas. Some of those arrows
penetrated the armour made out of steel and brass and passing through the bodies, penetrated the earth in every direction. In the battle, the mlecchas were slaughtered by the brave Satyaki. Hundreds of them lost their lives and
fell down on the ground. The bow was drawn back to its full extent and an incessant stream of arrows was shot. He
afﬂicted and oppressed them and killed ﬁve, six, seven and eight Yavana’s with a single arrow. O lord of the earth!
Thousands of Kambojas, Shakas, Shabaras, Kiratas and Barbaras fell down and the earth was full of mire made out
of ﬂesh and blood. Shini’s descendant caused a great destruction among your forces. The earth was strewn everywhere with the helmets of bandits249 and their severed and shaved heads, which looked like birds without feathers. The ﬁeld of battle was resplendent, with blood and wounds on the limbs of torsos that were strewn in every
direction, like the sky covered with coppery clouds. The arrows had excellent joints and were like the vajra or
thunder to the touch. Horses and carts were destroyed and scattered around on the ground. The few that were left
were scattered. They sought to protect their lives and were bereft of their senses. O great king! In that battle, those
armoured ones were vanquished by Yuyudhana. They used their whips to urge the parshnis and horses to adopt the
greatest speed and run away in different directions. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, he drove
away the invincible Kamboja soldiers, the soldiers of the Yavanas and the great army of Shakas. Thus did Satyaki,
the tiger among men for whom truth was his valour, defeat those on your side. He was delighted and urged his
charioteer to proceed. O lord of the earth! On seeing that he was advancing as the one who was protecting Arjuna’s
rear, the charanas were delighted, and together with those on your side, honoured him.”’
CHAPTER 1073(96)

‘Sanjaya said, “Having defeated the Yavanas and the Kambojas, Yuyudhana, supreme among rathas, passed
through the midst of your soldiers and headed towards Arjuna. That tiger among men possessed arrows as his
teeth. His colourful armour was like a picture. He was like a tiger slaying deer and terriﬁed the soldiers. As he traversed along the path on his chariot, he ﬁercely brandished his bow. It was extremely powerful and had a golden
back. It was decorated with golden moons. His armlets and helmet were golden and he was covered in golden armour. The brave one possessed a supreme golden standard that was as resplendent as Meru’s summit. In the battle,
the circle of his bow had energy like that of the sun with its rays. He was like the sun when it has arisen in the autumn and, among those men, was as resplendent as the sun. The bull among men had the shoulders of a bull. He
was brave and had the eyes of a bull. He penetrated the midst of your soldiers, like a bull in the midst of cattle. He
was like a maddened elephant, advancing against another maddened elephant. He was like an elephant with shattered temples, stationed in the midst of a herd. Those on your side advanced against him in the battle, as if they
wished to be killed by a tiger. He passed through Drona’s army and through the impenetrable army of Bhoja. He
passed through the ocean that was Jalasandha and through the army of the Kambojas. He crossed through that
ocean of soldiers and escaped from the makara that was Hardikya.
‘“Satyaki was then surrounded by extremely enraged rathas from your side. There were Duryodhana, Chitrasena, Duhshasana, Vivimshati, Shakuni, Duhsaha, the youthful Durmarshana, Kratha and many other brave and invincible ones who were armed. As Satyaki proceeded, they angrily followed him from behind. O venerable one! A
great uproar then arose amidst your soldiers. It was like the ocean agitated by the force of the wind during the
night of the full moon or the new moon. The bull among the Shini lineage glanced at all those who were advancing
against him. He laughed and addressed his charioteer, ‘Advance slowly. This army of Dhritarashtra’s son is advancing against me. It is swiftly headed in my direction, with elephants, horses and infantry. O charioteer! All the
directions are resounding with the roar of chariots. The earth, the ﬁrmament and the ocean are trembling. O son! In
this great battle, I will counter this ocean of soldiers, like the shoreline resisting the abode of the waters, when it
swells at the time of the full moon. O charioteer! Behold my valour in this great battle, like that of Indra. I will
pierce the soldiers of the enemy with sharp arrows. Behold. In the battle, I will slay the infantry, horses, rathas and
elephants and pierce their bodies with thousands of my arrows that are like the ﬁre.’ While the inﬁnitely energetic

Satyaki was speaking in this way, the soldiers quickly approached him, wishing to ﬁght. ‘Kill. Attack. Stay. Watch.
See.’ These were the words those brave ones spoke. Satyaki killed three hundred horses and four hundred elephants with his sharp arrows. The encounter that ensued between him and those archers was tumultuous and led to
the destruction of men, like the famous battle between the gods and the asuras. O venerable one! Your son’s soldiers were like a mass of clouds. However, Shini’s grandson received them with arrows that were like venomous
serpents. O great king! Without any fear, in that battle, the valiant one shrouded them with a net of arrows and
killed many on your side. O Indra among kings! The spectacle that I witnessed there was supremely wonderful.
Not a single one of Satyaki’s arrows was unsuccessful. That large ocean of soldiers was full of chariots, elephants
and horses and also full of foot soldiers and was forced to stand still when it encountered Shini’s descendant as the
shoreline. The terriﬁed men, elephants and steeds in your army advanced and were slain in every direction by the
arrows. They roamed around there, like cattle afﬂicted by the winter. We did not see any infantry, chariots, elephants, riders and horses that were not pierced by Yuyudhana’s arrows. O king! Not even Phalguna had caused
such carnage amongst the army, as was caused by Satyaki. O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Shini’s
grandson surpassed Arjuna in the battle.
‘“King Duryodhana pierced Satvata with three arrows, pierced his charioteer and struck his four horses with
four arrows. He then pierced Satyaki with three arrows and again struck him with another eight. Duhshasana
pierced the bull among the Shini lineage with sixteen arrows, Shakuni with twenty-ﬁve, Chitrasena with ﬁve and
Duhsaha pierced Satyaki in the chest with ﬁfteen arrows. O great king! The tiger among the Vrishni lineage was
thus struck by their arrows and pierced each of them back with three arrows. The supremely energetic one severely
pierced them. Shini’s descendant was dexterous and brave and roamed around in that battle, like a hawk. He severed Soubala’s bow and his arm-guard. He pierced Duryodhana between the breasts with three arrows. The bull
among the Shini lineage pierced Chitrasena with a hundred arrows, Duhsaha with ten and Duhshasana with twenty.
O lord of the earth! Your brother-in-law250 picked up another bow and pierced Satyaki with eight arrows, following this up with another ﬁve. O king! Duhshasana pireced Satyaki with ten arrows, Duhsaha with three and Durmukha with twelve. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Duryodhana pierced Madhava with seventy-three arrows
and then used three sharp arrows to pierce his charioteer. All those brave maharathas made their efforts and Satyaki pierced them back with ﬁve arrows each. O lord! He used a broad-headed arrow to kill your son’s charioteer251
and bring him down on the ground from the chariot. O king! O lord of the earth! When the charioteer was killed,
the horses that had the speed of the wind and the soldiers bore the chariot away from the ﬁeld of battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the king’s chariot was running away, hundreds of your soldiers ﬂed.
Satyaki enveloped them with sharp arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone. In every direction, he drove away all your soldiers. O king! Satyaki then advanced towards the chariot of the one with the white
horses. He released arrows and protected himself and his charioteer and those on your side honoured him.”’
CHAPTER 1074(97)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “Shini’s descendant proceeded towards Arjuna, crushing that large army. O Sanjaya! What did
my shameless sons do? When they confronted death in that battle, how did they hold up their spirits? The conduct
of Shini’s descendant is like that of Savyasachi. In the midst of the soldiers, how could the kshatriyas bear to be
defeated? How did the immensely illustrious Satyaki pass through them in that battle? O Sanjaya! As long as my
sons were alive there, how could Shini’s descendant progress in that battle? Tell me everything in detail. O
son!252 What I have heard from you, about the clash between one and many, with maharathas on the side of the
enemy, is extremely wonderful. I think that destiny must be against my sons and they suffer from ill fortune, since
they are being slain in the battle by the great-souled Satvata. O Sanjaya! A single one is sufﬁcient to counter my
entire army. When Yuyudhana is angry, let all the Pandavas remain standing.253 He has vanquished Drona, who is
accomplished and unassailable in ﬁghting, in the battle. Satyaki will kill my sons, like a lion against large numbers
of deer. There were many brave warriors, Kritavarma and the others. But in the battle, they were incapable of ﬁghting with that bull among men and he will kill them. Phalguna himself was incapable of ﬁghting in the way that
Shini’s immensely illustrious grandson fought.”

‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! All this has happened because of Duryodhana’s evil counsel and deeds. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Listen attentively to what I am telling you. On your son’s instructions, the samshaptakas
returned, having made up their minds to ﬁght to their utmost. There were three thousand riders, with Duryodhana
at the forefront—Shakas, Kambojas, Bahlikas, Yavanas, Paradas, Kunindas, Tanganas, Ambashthas, Pishachas and
those from mountainous regions. They attacked Shini’s descendant, like insects towards a ﬂame. They were joined
by rathas from the mountainous regions, those who fought with stones. O king! Five hundred such brave ones attacked Shini’s descendant. There were one thousand rathas and a hundred maharathas. There were one thousand
elephants and two thousand horses. Those maharathas showered many different kinds of arrows. In that battle, infantry attacked Shini’s descendant. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O great king! Duhshasana urged all of
them to surround Satyaki and kill him. We witnessed the great and marvellous conduct of Shini’s descendant.
Without any fear, he single-handedly fought against many. He slew that array of rathas, the army of elephants, all
the riders and all those dasyus. He mangled and routed them with his supreme weapons. Many wheels were shattered and beautiful chariot poles were destroyed. Bumpers were fragmented and standards brought down. The
earth was strewn with armour and whisks. O venerable one! There were garlands, ornaments, garments and yokes.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The earth was littered with these, like the sky with planets. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! The best of elephants, with the forms of mountains, were brought down. They were born in
the lineages of Anjana, Vamana, Supratika, Mahapadma, Airavata and many other lineages.254 O king! The best
of tuskers were slain in large numbers and lay down there. O king! The best of horses, from Vanayu, mountainous
regions, Kamboja and Bahlika breeds, were slain there by Satyaki. There were foot soldiers who had been raised in
many different countries, born in many races. Hundreds and thousands of them were killed there by Shini’s
descendant.
‘“When the soldiers confronted death in this way, Duhshasana spoke to the dasyus. ‘Return. You are not those
who are familiar with dharma.255 Why are you running away without ﬁghting?’ On seeing that they did not listen,
your son, Duhshasana, urged the brave ones from the mountainous regions, the ones who fought with stones. ‘You
are skilled in ﬁghting with stones and Satyaki is not familiar with this. You know about ﬁghting with stones. Use
that mode to kill the one who desires to ﬁght. None of the Kurus are skilled in ﬁghting with stones. Do not be
frightened. Attack. Satyaki will not be able to approach you. Those mountain-dwellers raised boulders that were
like elephant cubs, and desiring death, advanced against Yuyudhana. Others hurled those at him, wishing to kill
Satvata. They were urged by your son and hemmed him in from all directions. On seeing them descend on him,
desiring to ﬁght with boulders, Satyaki fought against them and released three hundred arrows. Those from the
mountainous regions rained down a tumultuous shower of boulders. However, the bull among the Shini lineage
countered these with iron arrows that were like serpents. These shattered the boulders and the fragments shone like
ﬁreﬂies. O venerable one! Some of these slew the soldiers and sounds of lamentation arose. O king! There were
ﬁve hundred brave ones with giant boulders raised. Their arms were severed and fell down on the ground. Other
brave ones who fought with stones were stationed there. Many thousands of these were slain and it was extraordinary. The foremost among them again attacked, showering boulders from every direction. They held iron in
their hands. There were Daradas with spears in their hands and Khasas and Tanganas. There were Ambashthas and
Kunindas. They were enraged and Satyaki was also wrathful. The immensely strong one released iron arrows and
countered them. With his sharp arrows, he shattered those boulders in the sky. O king! This produced a noise that
made elephants, horses, rathas and infantry run away. Struck by shards from those boulders, powerful and armoured men were incapable of remaining there and roamed around. The remaining elephants256 were covered
with blood. Their heads and frontal globes were shattered. They ran away from Yuyudhana’s chariot. O venerable
one! A great noise arose among your soldiers when they were afﬂicted by Madhava, like that of the ﬁerce ocean.
‘“On hearing this tumultuous sound, Drona told his charioteer. ‘O charioteer! In this battle, maharatha Satvata is
angry. As he roams around in the encounter, like Death, he is shattering the soldiers in many ways. O charioteer!
Take the chariot to the spot where the tumultuous sound has arisen. There is no doubt that Yuyudhana is ﬁghting
with the mountain-dwellers. It is there that all the rathas are being destroyed and the horses are running away. The
foot soldiers are bereft of their armour. They are wounded and are falling down. In that melee, the charioteers can
no longer control their horses.’ Having been thus addressed by Bharadvaja’s intelligent son, the charioteer spoke to

Drona, supreme among those who wielded weapons. ‘O one with a long life! The Kourava soldiers are running
away, in every direction. Behold. The warriors have been shattered and are ﬂeeing here and there. The brave Panchalas and Pandavas have united. They are attacking us from every direction, wishing to kill you. O destroyer of
enemies! The time has come for you to decide what must be done. Should we remain here, or should we advance
further, towards where Satyaki is proceeding?’ O venerable one! Thus did he speak to Bharadvaja’s son. At that
time, Shini’s descendant was seen, killing many different kinds of rathas. In the encounter, those on your side were
killed by Yuyudhana. They abandoned Yuyudhana’s chariot and ﬂed towards Drona’s army. All of them were terriﬁed and ﬂed towards Drona’s chariot. With other rathas, Duhshasana had already retreated there earlier.”’
CHAPTER 1075(98)

‘Sanjaya said, “On seeing that Duhshasana’s chariot was stationed near his, Bharadvaja’s son spoke these words to
Duhshasana. ‘O Duhshasana! Why are all these rathas running away? Is the king well and is Saindhava still alive?
You are a prince and your brother is a maharatha. Why are you running away from the battle? Accept the status of
heir apparent.257 You have yourself brought on this great enmity with the Panchalas and Pandavas. In the battle,
how can you be frightened of the single-handed Satyaki? In the gambling match in earlier times, when you grasped
the dice, did you not know that they would become terrible arrows in the future, like venomous serpents? Your
words towards the Pandavas were especially hateful. You were the cause of the hardships that Droupadi faced in
earlier times. Where is that insolence, pride and swagger about valour now? You enraged the Parthas, who are like
venomous serpents. Why are you running away now? The army of the Bharatas is sorrowing now, as is King Suyodhana. He has a harsh brother, who is now intent on running away. O brave one! The army is shattered and is afﬂicted by terror. There is no doubt that you should resort to the strength of your arms and protect it now. But you
are abandoning the ﬁght in fright now and are delighting the enemy. O destroyer of enemies! You are the leader of
your army and are ﬂeeing. When the refuge is itself frightened, which other terriﬁed person will remain stationed
in the battle? O unblemished one! You are ﬁghting with the single-handed Satvata now. Even then, your mind turns
towards ﬂying from the ﬁeld of battle. O Kourava! What will you do when you behold the wielder of Gandiva,
Bhimasena and the twins in the battle? In a battle, Phalguna’s arrows are like the sun and the ﬁre in their energy.
Satyaki’s arrows are equal to those and you are terriﬁed and are running away from those. In that event, let there be
peace and hand over the earth to Dharmaraja. Have peace with the Pandavas before Phalguna’s iron arrows, which
are like snakes that have cast off their skins, penetrate your body. Have peace with the Pandavas before the greatsouled Parthas kill one hundred of your brothers in battle and ﬂing them down on the ground.258 Have peace with
the Pandavas before King Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, and Krishna, who prides himself in battle, are enraged.
Have peace with the Pandavas before the mighty-armed Bhima penetrates the large army and grasps your brothers.
This is what Bhishma told your brother Suyodhana earlier. “O amiable one! The Pandavas cannot be vanquished in
battle. Have peace with the Pandavas.” But your wicked brother, Suyodhana, did not act accordingly. Therefore,
resolve to ﬁght and endeavour to battle with the Pandavas. Swiftly go on your chariot to the spot where Satyaki is
stationed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Without your presence, the army will be driven away. Truth is
Satyaki’s valour. For your own sake, ﬁght with him in the battle.’ Having been thus addressed, your son did not
say anything in reply. He pretended not to have heard what had been said and went to the spot where Satyaki was.
‘“He was accompanied by a large army of mlecchas who did not retreat. Having approached Yuyudhana in the
battle, he sought to ﬁght with him. Drona, foremost among rathas, angrily advanced against the Panchalas and the
Pandavas, using a medium speed. In that battle, Drona penetrated the Panchala array. He drove away those warriors, in hundreds and thousands. O great king! Drona proclaimed his name in the battle and caused great carnage
among the Pandus, Panchalas and Matsyas. The radiant Viraketu, the son of Panchala, attacked him. He pierced
Drona with ﬁve arrows that had drooping tufts. He pierced his standard with one and his charioteer with another
seven. O great king! What I witnessed in that encounter was extraordinary. Despite his violence, Drona could not
approach Panchala in that battle. O venerable one! O king! On seeing that Drona had been checked in that battle,
all the Panchalas259 desired the victory of Dharma’s son and surrounded him from all sides. O king! They enveloped Drona with arrows that were like ﬁre, extremely thick javelins and many kinds of weapons. O king! But in

every direction, Drona destroyed those masses of arrows, like a giant cloud in the sky, driven away by the wind.
The destroyer of enemy heroes then released an extremely terrible arrow, which was like the sun and the ﬁre, towards Viraketu’s chariot. O king! That arrow penetrated the descendant of the Panchala lineage and quickly entered the earth, like a ﬂaming and red mountain.260 The descendant of the Panchala lineage swiftly fell down from
the chariot, like a giant champaka tree that has been shattered by the wind and has fallen from a mountain top.
When that prince, immensely strong and a great archer, was killed, the Panchalas quickly surrounded Drona from
every direction. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Chitraketu, Sudhanva, Chitravarma and Chitraratha were
stricken with grief on account of their brother. They attacked and unitedly fought against Bharadvaja’s son. They
released showers of arrows, like clouds at the end of the summer. He was struck in many ways by these maharatha
princes. Those princes were angry in the battle. But he deprived them of their horses, charioteers and chariots. The
immensely illustrious one then used other extremely sharp and broad-headed arrows to sever and bring down their
heads, as if he was plucking ﬂowers. O extremely radiant king! Slain, they fell down on the ground from their
chariots. They were like daityas and danavas, in the ancient battle between the gods and the asuras.
‘“Those maharatha Panchalas were like the gods. On seeing that they had been killed, Dhrishtadyumna became
extremely angry and tears ﬂowed from his eyes. In that battle, he angrily advanced towards Drona’s chariot. O
king! In that battle, Drona was enveloped by Panchala’s261 arrows and on seeing this, great sounds of lamentation
suddenly arose. But though he was enveloped in many ways by the great-souled Parshata, Drona was not distressed and smilingly, continued to ﬁght. O great king! Panchala became senseless with rage and wrathfully struck
Drona in the chest with ninety arrows with drooping tufts. Bharadvaja’s powerful and immensely illustrious son
was severely wounded. He lost his senses and sat down on the ﬂoor of his chariot. On seeing him in that state, the
valiant Dhrishtadyumna cast aside his bow. The brave one quickly grasped a sword. O venerable one! The maharatha quickly descended from his chariot and swiftly ascended the chariot of Bharadvaja’s son. His eyes were
red with rage and he wished to sever his262 head from his body. Meanwhile, the immensely strong Drona regained
his senses and grasped a bow. O king! He pierced him with vaitastika arrows263 that were meant to be used for
ﬁghting at close quarters. O king! In that battle, maharatha Dhrishtadyumna was struck by vaitastika arrows that
are meant for ﬁghting at close quarters. These were known to Drona and they weakened Dhrishtadyumna. Having
been struck by many such arrows, the immensely strong one quickly descended from the chariot. The brave one’s
speed had been bafﬂed. The brave one ascended his own chariot and grasped a giant bow. In that encounter, maharatha Dhrishtadyumna pierced Drona. O great king! The clash between them was marvellous and large numbers
of beings applauded it, the kshatriyas, as well as other soldiers present there. O king! The Panchalas loudly exclaimed, ‘There is no doubt that, having engaged in this encounter, Drona will be subjugated by Dhrishtadyumna.’
In that battle, Drona quickly brought down the head of Dhrishtadyumna’s charioteer, like a ripe fruit from a tree. O
king! The great-souled one’s horses ran away. When they had run away in the battle,264 the powerful one drove
away the Panchalas and the Srinjayas. Bharadvaja’s powerful son defeated the Pandus and the Panchalas. The
scorcher of enemies re-established his vyuha and stationed himself there. O lord! The Pandavas evinced no interest
in defeating him in the battle.”’
CHAPTER 1076(99)

‘Sanjaya said, “O king! Meanwhile, Duhshasana attacked Shini’s descendant. He showered thousands of arrows,
like a cloud pouring down rain. He pierced Satyaki with sixty arrows, and yet again with sixteen. But in that battle,
he could not make him tremble. He265 was like Mount Mainaka. The brave one covered Duhshasana with a severe
storm of arrows. It was as if a spider had got a mosquito266 within its strands. On seeing that Duhshasana was afﬂicted by hundreds of arrows, the king267 urged the Trigartas to advance towards Yuyudhana’s chariot. Those performers of evil deeds approached near Yuyudhana. There were three thousand Trigartas, skilled in ﬁghting. They
surrounded him with a large army of chariots. They had resolved to ﬁght and had sworn to be samshaptakas.268
They advanced in that battle and released showers of arrows. Five hundred foremost warriors were stationed at the
forefront of that array. But the supreme one of the Shini lineage quickly uprooted, brought down and killed them

with his arrows. They were like giant trees that had been shattered by the force of a violent wind. O lord of the
earth! Many chariots and standards were shattered. Horses with golden harnesses fell down on the ground. O great
king! The arrows released by Shini’s descendant made them ﬂow with blood and they were as beautiful as ﬂowering kimshukas. In that battle, those on your side were slaughtered by Yuyudhana. They could not ﬁnd a protector,
like elephants that have sunk into a swamp. All of them ﬂed towards Drona’s chariot. They were like giant serpents, penetrating a hole, because of fear of the king of the birds.269 The brave one killed ﬁve hundred warriors
with arrows that were like venomous serpents and then slowly advanced towards Dhananjaya’s chariot.
‘“As that best of men was advancing, your son, Duhshasana, quickly pierced him with nine arrows that had
drooping tufts. The great archer270 pierced him back with ﬁve sharp arrows that were gold-tufted and had the
feathers of vultures. O great king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Duhshasana laughed and pierced Satyaki
with three arrows, and yet again with ﬁve. Shini’s descendant pierced your son with ﬁve arrows. In that battle, he
severed his bow and while smiling, proceeded towards Arjuna. Duhshasana became angry. As the brave one from
the Vrishni lineage was proceeding, he wished to kill him and hurled a javelin that was entirely made out of iron at
him. O king! Your son hurled that terrible javelin. But Satyaki used sharp arrows tufted with heron feathers to shatter it into a hundred fragments. O lord of men! Your son then grasped another bow. He pierced Satyaki with ten arrows and roared like a lion. In that encounter, Satyaki became enraged and confounded your son. He struck him
between the breasts with arrows that were like the ﬂames of ﬁres. He again pierced him with ten sharp and pointed
arrows that were completely made out of iron. Duhshasana pierced Satyaki back with twenty arrows. O great king!
Satvata pierced him between the breasts with three arrows that were extremely powerful and had drooping tufts.
The maharatha used some sharp arrows to kill his mounts and extremely angry, slew his charioteer with arrows
with drooping tufts. He severed his bow with a broad-headed arrow and his arm-guard with another ﬁve. The one
who was skilled in the use of supreme weapons then used a couple of broad-headed arrows to sever his standard
and the pole of his chariot. He then used sharp arrows to bring down the two parshnis. His271 bow was severed.
He was without a chariot. His horses were slain. His charioteer was killed. The general of the Trigartas then picked
him up on his own chariot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Shini’s descendant followed him for some time.
But remembering Bhimasena’s words, the mighty-armed one did not kill him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the assembly hall and in everyone’s presence, Bhimasena had sworn to kill your sons in battle. O lord! O
king! Thus did Satyaki vanquish Duhshasana in that encounter and quickly proceeded along Dhananjaya’s route.”’
CHAPTER 1077(100)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “Were there no maharathas among my soldiers who could kill or stop Satyaki on his journey?
Truth is his valour. In that battle, he single-handedly accomplished deeds that were like those of the great Indra
against the danavas. In a battle, he was Shakra’s equal in strength. Or is it the case that Satyaki’s route was empty?
Single-handedly, the bull among men drove away many soldiers. How did Shini’s great-souled descendant singlehandedly overcome the many who attacked him and wished to ﬁght with him? O Sanjaya! Tell me all this.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! The soldiers prepared themselves, with chariots, elephants, horses and infantry. Your
soldiers were tremendous and it was like the end of a yuga. O one who gives honours! Your entire army was assembled. It is my view that an assemblage like this has never been seen in the world. O lord of the earth! The gods
and the assembled charanas said, ‘A vyuha like the one Drona has formed at the time of Jayadratha’s death will
never again be seen.’ There was a terrible roar, like that of the oceans. In that battle, those large numbers of soldiers rushed against each other in waves. O supreme among men! There were many kings, hundreds and thousands, who had assembled on your side and that of the Pandavas. Those brave ones were angry. They were the performers of ﬁrm deeds in battle. A great and tumultuous sound arose and it made the body hair stand up. O venerable one! Bhimasena, Dhrishtadyumna, Nakula, Sahadeva and Pandava Dharmaraja exclaimed, ‘Come. Strike. Attack with force. The brave Madhava and Pandava have penetrated into the forces of the enemy. Swiftly act, so that
they can advance towards Jayadratha’s death with ease.’ Thus did they urge the soldiers. ‘If they are vanquished,
the Kurus will have succeeded in their objective and we will have been been defeated. Unite and quickly agitate
this ocean of soldiers, like extremely forceful winds against the ocean.’ O king! They were goaded by Bhimasena

and Panchala.272 In the battle, they killed the Kouravas, ready to give up their beloved lives. They were greatly
energetic and desired death from weapons in that battle, for the sake of heaven and for the sake of their friends.
They were not interested in protecting their lives. O king! In similar fashion, those on your side desired great fame.
The noble ones desired to ﬁght and remained stationed in the battle. A tumultuous battle commenced and it gave
rise to great fear. Having killed all the soldiers, Satyaki proceeded towards Arjuna. In every direction in that battle,
the colourful rays of the sun illuminated the armour and rebuffed the sight of the soldiers who sought to strike
back. O great king! In similar fashion, without any fear, Duryodhana made efforts to immerse himself in the great
army of the Pandaveyas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There was a ﬁerce clash between them and him.
There was a great destruction among all the soldiers.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “O charioteer! When he advanced against those soldiers, he must himself have confronted
great hardships. I hope he did not turn his back on the battle. It seems to me that the encounter between the one and
the many must have been unequal, especially because the single one was a king.273 Duryodhana has been reared
in great happiness. He is also the lord of prosperity and of men. When he single-handedly confronted many, I hope
he did not retreat.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen to the extraordinary battle that your son
fought, one against many. Listen. I will describe it. In that battle, Duryodhana suddenly descended on the Pandava
soldiers and agitated them like an elephant, as if he was an elephant among lotuses. O Kourava! On seeing that
your son was acting in this way against the army, the Panchalas, with Bhimasena at the forefront, attacked. He274
pierced Bhimasena with ten arrows, each of Madri’s sons with three, Virata and Drupada with six each and
Shikhandi with one hundred. He pierced Dhrishtadyumna with twenty, Dharma’s son with seven, the Kekayas with
ten and each of Droupadi’s sons with three arrows. In that battle, like an angry Yama against beings, he used his
ﬁerce arrows to bring down hundreds of other warriors, elephants and rathas. As he afﬁxed and released arrows,
his bow was seen to be stretched into a continuous circle. He killed the enemy with the skill and strength of his
weapons. He killed the foes with his giant bow that possessed a golden back. O venerable one! The eldest of the
Pandavas275 used a couple of broad-headed arrows to sever his bow into three fragments and pierced him with
many sharp and excellent arrows. But having touched the armour, they shattered and penetrated the earth. The delighted Parthas surrounded Yudhishthira, like the rejoicing gods and maharshis around Shakra, when Vritra had
been killed. At this, King Duryodhana picked up a ﬁrmer bow and asked the Pandava king to wait. When your maharatha son spoke and advanced against the king, the Panchalas, desiring victory, cheerfully counter-attacked.
Wishing to protect him,276 Drona received the warring Pandavas. He was like a mountain receiving rain from a
cloud that has been stirred up by a violent wind. O king! There was a loud noise in that battle and it rose above
everything else. It was as if Rudra was sporting, when he destroys all living beings.”’
CHAPTER 1078(101)

‘Sanjaya said, “O great king! In the afternoon, there was again an encounter between Drona and the Somakas. It
was accompanied by a sound that was like that of clouds thundering. The foremost among men277 was stationed
on a chariot with red horses. He attacked the Pandus in that battle, resorting to a medium speed. The immensely
strong and great archer was engaged in what would bring you pleasure. He was born from a supreme pot.278 O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! He used sharp arrows with colourful tufts and struck down the best of warriors.
O king! Bharadvaja’s powerful son seemed to be sporting in that battle.
‘“Maharatha Brihatkshatra from Kekaya, the eldest of ﬁve brothers and brave and indomitable in battle, advanced against him. He released sharp arrows and severely shrouded the preceptor. He was like a mighty cloud
that releases rain on Gandhamadana. O great king! At this, Drona became extremely angry. He released seventeen
arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone. Those terrible arrows were released from Drona’s
bow and were like venomous serpents. However, in the battle, he cheerfully sliced down each of them with ten of
his own arrows. On beholding his dexterity, the best of the brahmanas laughed and dispatched eight arrows that
had drooping tufts. On seeing these arrows released from Drona’s bow swiftly descend on him, he severed those
arrows with ﬁrm and sharp arrows of his own. O great king! Your soldiers were astounded at this. They beheld Bri-

hatkshatra perform an extremely difﬁcult deed. O great king! Drona also applauded Kekaya’s special act. In that
battle, the greatly ascetic one then invoked the divine and invincible brahmastra. O king! But in that battle, the
mighty-armed Kekaya released his own brahmastra and countered it. Having destroyed the weapon of Bharadvaja’s son in that encounter, he pierced the brahmana with sixty arrows with gold tufts that had been sharpened on
stone. At this, Drona, best among men, released an iron arrow. O supreme among kings! This penetrated his armour and entered the ground, like a cobra penetrating a termite hill when it is released. In that battle, the arrow
penetrated Kekaya and entered the earth. O great king! He was thus severely pierced by Drona, knowledgeable
about weapons, and became overcome by great rage. He dilated his beautiful eyes and pierced Drona with seventy
arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone. With a broad-headed arrow, he struck the charioteer
in the arms and the chest. O venerable one! Pierced by Brihatkshatra in many ways, Drona released many sharp
arrows towards Kekaya’s chariot. Drona made maharatha Brihatkshatra anxious. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O great king! He released sharp arrows towards Kekaya and quickly struck him severely between the
breasts. The heart of that tiger among men was shattered and he fell down from his chariot.
‘“O king! On the death of the maharatha from Kekaya, Shishupala’s son became extremely angry and spoke to
his charioteer. ‘O charioteer! Go to the spot where the armoured Drona is stationed and is slaughtering all the
Kekayas and the Panchalas and their armies.’ On hearing his words, the charioteer took the supreme of rathas to
Drona, on swift horses that hailed from Kamboja. Dhrishtaketu, bull among the Chedi lineage was extremely
proud of his strength and suddenly attacked Drona, like an insect towards a ﬂame. Having attacked, he pierced
Drona, his horses, his chariot and his standard with sixty arrows. He again used other sharp arrows, as if against a
sleeping tiger. As the powerful king endeavoured in the battle, Drona used a sharp kshurapra arrow to sever his
bow in the middle. Shishupala’s maharatha son picked up another bow. He again pierced Drona with extremely
sharp and ﬁrm arrows. The immensely strong Drona killed his horses and his charioteer and pierced him with
twenty-ﬁve arrows. In that battle, the king of the Chedis was without a chariot and without his bow. He angrily
hurled a club towards the chariot of Bharadvaja’s son. It was terrible in form and fearsome. It was heavy, completely made out of stone and embellished with gold. On seeing it suddenly descend, Bharadvaja’s son brought it
down with many thousands of arrows. Bharadvaja’s son used arrows to bring the club down onto the ground, like a
star with a red garland of clouds falling down from the sky. On seeing that the club had been destroyed, the intolerant Dhrishtaketu quickly hurled a javelin and a spear that was as bright as gold. In that great battle, Drona used his
arrows to shatter the javelin into three pieces. Using his lightness of hand, the immensely strong one also violently
severed the spear. He279 was trying to kill him. In that encounter, Bharadvaja’s powerful son wished to kill him
instead and released an extremely sharp arrow. The arrow penetrated the armour and the heart of the inﬁnitely energetic one and then penetrated the ground, like a swan entering a pond full of lotuses. O king! Just as an insect is
grasped by a hungry blue jay, in that great battle, the brave Drona devoured Dhrishtaketu. When the king of Chedi
was killed, his son wished to take up his father’s burden. The son was supreme in the knowledge of weapons and
was overcome by intolerance. But Drona laughed at him and used his arrows to dispatch him to Yama’s eternal
abode. The powerful one was like a huge tiger in a large forest, against a young deer.
‘“O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Pandavas were thus being decimated. Jarasandha’s brave son himself attacked Drona. O great king! He enveloped Drona with his sharp arrows and swiftly made him invisible, like
the sun by clouds. On seeing his dexterity, Drona, the destroyer of kshatriyas, quickly released hundreds and thousands of arrows. In that encounter, Drona, supreme among rathas, remained stationed on his chariot. While all the
enemy archers looked on, he enveloped and killed Jarasandha’s son.
‘“Drona was like Death and devoured whoever dared to approach Drona. He was like death, which grasps all
beings when the right time has come. Drona, the great archer, proclaimed his name in that battle. He released many
thousands of arrows and stupeﬁed the Pandaveyas. These arrows were gold-tufted, sharpened on stone and were
marked with Drona’s name. In that battle, in every direction, he slew men, elephants and horses. They were
slaughtered by Drona, like Shakra against the great asuras. The Panchalas trembled, like cows afﬂicted by the cold.
O bull among the Bharata lineage! When the soldiers were thus slaughtered by Drona, a terrible uproar arose
among the Pandavas. In that encounter, they were confounded by the shower of arrows released by Bharadvaja’s
son. The maharatha Panchalas were like those whose thighs had been grasped by crocodiles. O great king! The

Chedis, the Srinjayas and the Somakas sought to cheerfully ﬁght against Bharadvaja’s son and attacked, shouting,
‘Drona has been slain. Drona has been slain.’ Those tigers among men used their utmost strength against the immensely radiant one. In that encounter, they wished to dispatch Drona to Yama’s abode. While those brave ones
strove, Bharadvaja’s son used arrows that had been sharpened on stone to send them, especially the foremost
among the Chedis, to Yama. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing what had become to the foremost
among the Chedis, the Panchalas trembled and were oppressed by Drona’s arrows. O venerable one! On witnessing Drona’s form and deeds, they loudly called out, in the direction of Bhimasena and Dhrishtadyumna’s chariots,
‘There is no doubt that this brahmana has performed austerities that are difﬁcult to perform and his conduct is
great. He is valiant in the battle and is consuming the bulls among the kshatriyas. Fighting is the dharma of kshatriyas and supreme austerities that of brahmanas. But an ascetic who is accomplished in learning can burn with his
sight. Drona’s weapons are like ﬁre to the touch and are penetrating the bulls among the kshatriyas. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage!280 There are many who have approached this unassailable and terrible one and have been
consumed. The immensely radiant one is using the utmost of his strength, the utmost of his endeavour and the utmost of his spirits. Drona is killing our soldiers and is confounding all the beings.’ Kshatradharma was stationed
there and heard these words.
‘“He used an arrow that was in the shape of a half-moon to sever Drona’s bow, with an arrow afﬁxed to it.
Drona, the crusher of kshatriyas, became even more enraged. He grasped another radiant bow that was even more
forceful. He afﬁxed a sharp arrow to it, one that sparkled, was ﬁrm and was capable of destroying a great load. The
powerful preceptor pulled the bow back up to his ear and released it. This killed Kshatradharma and penetrated the
earth. His heart was shattered and he fell down from the chariot, onto the ground. On the death of Dhrishtadyumna’s son, the other soldiers trembled.
‘“Maharatha Chekitana then attacked Drona and pierced Drona between the breasts with ten arrows. He used
four more to strike his charioteer and four arrows to strike the four horses. The preceptor then pierced his right arm
with sixteen arrows, his standard with sixteen arrows and his charioteer with seven. When his charioteer was slain,
the horses ﬂed, dragging the chariot away, since in that encounter, they were covered with the arrows of Bharadvaja’s son. O venerable one! On seeing that Chekitana’s chariot had ﬂed and that his charioteer had been slain, the
Panchalas and the Pandavas were overcome by a great fear. O venerable one! In every direction of that battle,
Drona drove away the assemblage of brave Chedis, Panchalas and Srinjayas and looked extremely beautiful. His
grey hair descended up to his ears. He was dark. He was more than eighty years old. But in that battle, the aged
Drona roamed around like one who was only sixteen years old. O great king. As Drona, the destroyer of enemies,
fearlessly roamed around in that battle, the enemy regarded him as the one with the vajra in his hand.281
‘“O great king! O king! The intelligent Drupada spoke. ‘This hunter is killing kshatriyas like a tiger against
small animals. The evil-minded Duryodhana will obtain the world of the wicked and face hardships there. It is because of his avarice that the bulls among the kshatriyas are being killed in this battle. Hundreds of them are lying
down on the ground, like wounded bulls. Their limbs are covered with blood and they have become food for dogs
and jackals.’ O great king! Having said this, Drupada, the leader of an akshouhini, attacked Drona in that battle,
placing the Parthas in front of him.”’
CHAPTER 1079(102)

‘Sanjaya said, “The vyuha of the Pandavas was thus being agitated in every direction. The Parthas, the Panchalas
and the Somakas retreated a great distance away. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A terrible encounter commenced and it made the body hair stand up, like the ﬁerce one that causes the destruction of the universe at the end
of a yuga. The powerful Drona roared repeatedly in that battle. When the Panchalas and the Pandus were being
slaughtered and decimated in that encounter, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira could not see what should be done. O Indra
among kings! He began to think about what might transpire. He looked in all the directions, in the hope of seeing
Savyasachi. But Yudhishthira could not see either Partha or Madhava. He could not see that tiger among men, the
one with the bull among apes on his banner. Nor could he hear Gandiva’s roar and his senses were overcome with
dejection. Nor did he see Satyaki, the foremost of rathas among the Vrishnis. Because of these thoughts, Dhar-

maraja Yudhishthira’s limbs became weak. Not being able to see those two bulls among men,282 he could not ﬁnd
any peace. The immensely illustrious Dharmaraja was afraid that the world would censure him. The mighty-armed
one began to think about the chariot of Shini’s descendant. ‘In the battle, I sent him to follow Phalguna’s footsteps.
Satyaki, Shini’s descendant, is truly someone who dispels the fears of his friends. Earlier, I only had one reason for
anxiety and now there are two. I should have news about both Satyaki and Pandava Dhananjaya. I sent Satyaki to
follow Pandava’s footsteps. In this battle, whom will I send to follow in Satvata’s footsteps? If I make efforts to
only obtain tidings of my brother and ignore Yuyudhana, the worlds will censure me and say that Dharmaraja Yudhishthira acted only to search for his brother and abandoned Varshneya Satyaki, for whom truth is valour. I am
scared of the censure of the world. Therefore, I will send Partha Vrikodara in the footsteps of the great-souled
Madhava. The love that I have for Arjuna, the destroyer of enemies, is the same as the one I bear towards Satvata,
the brave one from the Vrishni lineage, who is invincible in battle. I have imposed an extremely heavy burden on
Shini’s descendant. Because of a friend’s request, and to enhance his glory, the immensely strong one has penetrated the army of the Bharatas, like a makara in an ocean. I hear a loud noise from the brave ones, who have not retreated and have united to ﬁght against the intelligent and brave one from the Vrishni lineage. It is certain that they
are too many and too strong. It seems to me that the time has come for the archer, Pandava Bhimasena, to go to the
spot where those two maharathas are. There is nothing on this earth that Bhima cannot withstand. In a battle, he
can make efforts and stand up to all the archers on earth. Resorting to the strength of his own arms, he can stand up
to all enemies. All of us have resorted to that great-souled one’s strength of arms and have returned from the exile
in the forest, without being vanquished in a battle. If Bhimasena goes towards Satvata and Pandava, both Satvata
and Phalguna will ﬁnd a protector in the battle. They have Vasudeva himself as a protector and are skilled in the
use of weapons. However, I must be certain and dispel the anxiety. Therefore, I will appoint Bhimasena to follow
in Satvata’s footsteps. Having done this, I think that I will have made arrangements for Satyaki’s protection.’ O
king! Having thus made up his mind, Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, asked his charioteer to take him to Bhima.
‘“On hearing Dharmaraja’s words, the charioteer, who was skilled in the handling of horses, drove the chariot,
which was decorated with gold, towards Bhima. Having reached Bhimasena, the king remembered the occasion
and overcome by dejection, entreated him in many ways. ‘He conquered the gods, the gandharvas and the daityas
on a single chariot. O Bhimasena! But I do not see the standard of your younger brother.’ Bhimasena spoke to
Dharmaraja, who had arrived there. ‘Never before have I seen, or heard, you overcome by such grief. In earlier
times, when we were afﬂicted by dejection, you were the one who assured us. O Indra among king! Arise! Arise
and instruct me about what should be done. O one who gives honours! There is no task that I cannot accomplish. O
foremost among the Kuru lineage! Command me and do not have this sorrow in your mind.’ The king’s face was
cheerless.
‘“He sighed like a cobra and spoke these words to Bhimasena, his voice choking with tears. ‘The blare of the
conch shell Panchajanya can be heard, as it is being sounded by an angry and illustrious Vasudeva. It is certain that
Dhananjaya, your brother, has now been killed and is lying down. With him slain, it is certain that Janardana is
ﬁghting now. The Pandavas obtain their lives on his spirit and his valour.283 When we are in fear, we turn towards
him, like the immortals towards the one with the thousand eyes.284 The brave one has gone in search of Saindhava
and has penetrated the army of the Bharatas. O Bhima! We know about his going and he will not return. Gudakesha is dark and youthful. He is handsome and mighty-armed. He has a broad chest and giant shoulders. He is like a
crazy elephant in his valour. His eyes are coppery, like those of a partridge,285 and extend the fear of the enemies.
O fortunate one! O destroyer of enemies! That is the reason for my sorrow. O mighty-armed one! It is because of
Arjuna and because of Satvata that my anxiety increases, like a blazing ﬁre into which oblations are repeatedly
poured. I cannot see his standard and that is the reason I am afﬂicted by misery. Know maharatha Satvata to be a
tiger among men. That maharatha has followed in the footsteps of your younger brother. O mighty-armed one! I
cannot see him and that is the reason I am afﬂicted by misery. That is the reason Krishna, skilled in ﬁghting, is certainly ﬁghting in this encounter, because that brave one and the valiant Pandava, are no longer alive. O Kounteya!
Therefore, if you think this to be your duty, go where Dhananjaya and the immensely valorous Satyaki have gone.
O one who knows about dharma! These are my words and I am your elder brother. Know what should be known,

that Satyaki is just like Arjuna to you. O Partha! To do that which will bring me pleasure, he has followed
Savyasachi. Those tracks are difﬁcult to traverse and terrible. They cannot be followed by those who have not
cleansed their souls.’
‘“Bhimasena replied, ‘There is a chariot that bore Brahma, Ishana,286 Indra and Varuna earlier. The two Krishnas have departed on that and they have no reason for fear. But I will bear your words on my head and go. Do not
grieve. I will meet those tigers among men and give them your message.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “Having spoken those words, he prepared to depart. He repeatedly handed over Yudhishthira to
Dhrishtadyumna and the other powerful well-wishers. The greatly powerful Bhimasena spoke to Dhrishtadyumna.
‘O mighty-armed one! You know that maharatha Drona will use every means at his disposal to seize Dharmaraja.
O Parshata! Once I am gone, there is no task as important to you, and to all of us, as that of protecting the king.
Partha has spoken to me in this way and I cannot venture to contradict him. I will therefore go to the spot where
Saindhava, who is about to face death, is stationed. It is my duty to unhesitatingly follow Dharmaraja’s words. In
the battle today, make every effort to protect Partha Yudhishthira. In the encounter, this is the most important of all
your tasks.’ O great king! Thus addressed by Vrikodara, Dhrishtadyumna replied, ‘O Partha! I will do as you desire. Go without any hesitation. Without killing Dhrishtadyumna in the battle, Drona will not be able to seize Dharmaraja, regardless of what efforts he makes in the encounter.’ Pandava thus handed over the king to Dhrishtadyumna. He showed his obeisance to his elder and his senior and went towards Phalguna. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Kounteya was embraced by Dharmaraja, who inhaled the fragrance of his head and pronounced
sacred benedictions over him. The mighty-armed Bhimasena was attired in armour and beautiful earrings. The
supreme of rathas had armlets and body-armour and arrows. The immensely intelligent one had armour that was
made out of black iron and was decorated with gold. He was as beautiful as a cloud tinged with lightning, adorning
a mountain. He was well decorated in garments that were yellow, red and white. There was armour around his
neck. He was as beautiful as a cloud adorned with Indra’s weapon.287 O lord of the earth! As Bhimasena was
about to set out, to ﬁght with your soldiers, Panchajanya’s terrible blare was heard again. On hearing that terrible
roar, the three worlds were struck with great fear. Dharma’s mighty-armed son again spoke to Bhima. ‘The foremost one from the Vrishni lineage is blowing ﬁercely on his conch shell. The king of conch shells is resounding on
earth and in heaven. There is no doubt that Savyasachi confronts a great hardship and the wielder of the chakra and
the club288 is ﬁghting with all the Kurus. There is no doubt that the immensely noble Kunti, Droupadi and Subhadra, together with their relatives, are witnessing evil omens now. O Bhima! Swiftly go to the spot where
Dhananjaya is. O Partha! I wish to see Dhananjaya and all the directions and the sub-directions are benumbed because of that, and on Satvata’s account. Go. Leave!’ Thus did he again address Bhimasena. Severely urged by the
brother, the brother who always had the brother’s welfare in mind,289 caused battle drums to be sounded. Bhima
blew on his conch shell. He roared like a lion and repeatedly stretched his bow. He displayed his terrible self and
suddenly dashed against the enemy.
‘“The supreme horses were obedient and fast. They were controlled by Vishoka290 and possessed the speed of
the mind and the wind. They bore him instantly. With his hands, Partha rubbed the string of his bow and stretched
it. He crushed and agitated the head of that army. As the mighty-armed one advanced, the brave Panchalas and the
Somakas followed him with their soldiers, like the immortals after Maghavan. O great king! The brothers Duhshala, Chitrasena, Kundabhedi, Vivimshati, Durmukha, Duhsaha, Vikarna, Shala, Vinda, Anuvinda,291 Sumukha,
Dirghabahu, Sudarshana, Vrindaraka, Suhasta, Sushena, Dirghalochana, Abhaya, Roudrakarma, Suvarma, Durvimochana and many foremost among rathas, with their soldiers and followers, united and attacked the brave Bhimasena in that battle. On seeing them, the powerful Kounteya Bhimasena forcefully advanced against them, like a
lion against small animals. The brave ones there exhibited great and divine weapons and countered Bhima with
their arrows, like clouds shrouding a sun that has arisen. But he forcefully passed through them and attacked
Drona’s array. He showered down arrows on the array of elephants that was in front of him. In a short while, the
son of the wind god swiftly drove away that army of elephants in all the directions and pierced them. Terriﬁed by
those arrows, they roared, like deer in a forest. All the elephants ﬂed, shrieking in ﬁerce tones. He forcefully
passed through them, and again attacked Drona’s array.

‘“The preceptor checked him, like the shoreline against an advancing ocean. He smiled and struck him on the
forehead with an iron arrow. Pandava was resplendent there, like the sun when it casts its rays upwards. The preceptor thought that Bhima would show him reverence and worship him, as Phalguna had done earlier and spoke to
Vrikodara. ‘O Bhimasena! O immensely strong one! In the midst of the enemy, without vanquishing me in battle,
you are incapable of penetrating into the hostile forces. With my permission, your younger brother and Krishna
penetrated earlier. But you are incapable of penetrating into this array.’ On hearing the words of his preceptor, Bhima was not scared and sighing, spoke to Drona, his eyes coppery red with anger. ‘O blind brahmana! In this ﬁeld
of battle, it cannot be that Arjuna has penetrated with your permission. He is invincible, even against one of
Shakra’s special army. If he showed you supreme worship, that was only for the sake of honouring you. But I am
not Arjuna. O Drona! I am the angry Bhimasena, your enemy. We look upon you as our father, our preceptor and
our relative, and ourselves as your sons. Thinking in this way, all of us have always bowed down before you. But it
is evident that you have uttered contrary words against us today. If you think of yourself as our enemy, let it be that
way. If you are like an enemy, Bhima will perform the task that he has to do.’ O king! Saying this, Bhima whirled
a club that was like Yama’s staff and hurled it towards Drona, who leapt down from his chariot. It uprooted
Drona’s horses, charioteer, standard and chariot and crushed many other warriors with its energy, like the wind
among the trees. The supreme ratha was again surrounded by your sons. Drona, supreme among warriors, ascended another chariot. O great king! The powerful Bhimasena became angry and enveloped the array of chariots that
was in front of him with a shower of arrows. Your maharatha sons were struck in that battle. Bhima, whose
strength was terrible, fought with the warriors who were desirous of victory.
‘“Wishing to kill the descendant of the Pandu lineage, Duhshasana angrily grasped a javelin and hurled it.292 It
was sharp and was completely made out of iron. Thus released by your son, that giant javelin descended. Bhima
sliced it into two fragments and it was wonderful. The angry and powerful one then used three arrows to kill Kundabhedi, Sushena and Dirghanetra. Among your brave sons who were ﬁghting, he again slew the valiant Vrindaraka,
the extender of the deeds of the Kuru lineage. Bhima again killed three of your sons with three arrows, Abhaya,
Roudrakarma and Durvimochana. O great king! Your sons were thus slaughtered by the powerful Bhima, supreme
among strikers, and surrounded him from all sides. Kounteya laughed and used other arrows to send your sons,
Vinda, Anuvinda and Survarmana to Yama’s abode. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Your valiant son, Sudarshana, was quickly pierced in that battle and fell down dead. Within a short period of time, the descendant of the
Pandu lineage quickly shattered that army of chariots and drove it away in all the directions. O lord of the earth!
They were like deer frightened at the roar of the chariot. Your sons were slaughtered in that battle. All those rathas
were afﬂicted by their fear of Bhimasena and ran away. Kounteya followed that large army of your sons. O king!
In that encounter, he pierced the Kouravas from every direction. O great king! Those on your side were killed by
Bhimasena. They abandoned Bhima and urging their supreme horses, ﬂed from the battle. The immensely strong
Bhimasena vanquished them in that encounter. Pandava roared like a lion and slapped his arms. The immensely
strong Bhima made a loud noise with his palms. He passed through those rathas and attacked Drona’s array.”’
CHAPTER 1080(103)

‘Sanjaya said, “He passed through that array of rathas, like the sun through darkness. The preceptor poured down
arrows on him and obstructed him with a shower of arrows. He seemed to drink up that torrent of arrows released
from Drona’s bow, as if through maya. He attacked the brothers293 and confounded them with his strength. In that
battle, those supreme archers were urged to adopt the greatest force by your sons and surrounded him from all
sides. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having been thus surrounded, Bhima laughed. He raised a terrible
club, and roaring like a lion, hurled it at them. The powerful one released it with force and it crushed them. It was
as if Indra’s vajra had been hurled by Indra and struck them ﬁrmly. O king! Its loud noise seemed to ﬁll up the
earth. Its terrible and ﬂaming energy frightened your sons. On seeing that it was descending with great force, covered in energy, all those on your side ﬂed, roaring in lamentation. O venerable one! Its sound was impossible to
tolerate. Many men fell down where they stood and so did rathas on chariots. Kounteya, unassailable to enemies,

drove them away in that encounter. His force against that army was like that of Suparna,294 the king of the birds.
Such was the action of that leader of leaders of rathas.
‘“O great king! Bharadvaja’s son attacked Bhimasena. In that battle, Drona checked Bhima with his arrows and
suddenly emitted a loud roar, terrifying the Pandus. O great king! An extremely terrible battle commenced between
Drona and the great-souled Bhima, like that between the gods and the asuras. Sharp arrows were released from
Drona’s bow and in that encounter, these slew brave ones in hundreds and thousands. Pandava descended from his
chariot with great force. O king! He closed his eyes and attacked Drona on foot, like a bull receiving rain with
ease. Thus did Bhima, tiger among men, receive that shower of arrows. The immensely strong one grasped the
pole295 with his hands and hurled it. O king! Drona was quickly thrown down by Bhima in that battle. He mounted another chariot and stationed himself at the mouth of the vyuha. At that time, his charioteer quickly urged the
horses. O Kouravya! Bhimasena’s act was extraordinary. The immensely strong Bhimasena mounted his own chariot and powerfully attacked your son’s army. He crushed the kshatriyas, like a gale uprooting trees. He advanced
against the enemy soldiers like a mountain against the force of the waters. He encountered the army of the Bhojas,
protected by Hardikya. O king! Bhimasena crushed it in many ways and advanced. O venerable one! He frightened
the enemy soldiers by slapping his palms. He could not be defeated by any of those soldiers, like a tiger by a herd
of bulls. He passed through the army of Bhojas and also through the army of Kambojas, large numbers of mlecchas and many others who were skilled in ﬁghting.
‘“He then saw Satyaki, the bull among men, ﬁghting. On his chariot, Kounteya went there with great force. O
great king! Bhimasena wished to see Dhananjaya. In that battle, the descendant of the Pandu lineage passed
through all your warriors. He then saw Arjuna, bull among men, ﬁghting there bravely. The valiant one was striving for Saindhava’s death. Having seen Arjuna there, he let out a mighty roar. O Kouravya! That mighty roar was
heard by Partha. Partha296 also let out a mighty roar and so did Madhava. O great king! They attacked like bulls.
Wishing to see Vrikodara and hearing the roar of the wind god’s son, Vasudeva and Arjuna repeatedly roared. O
great king! Having heard Bhimasena’s roar and that of the archer Phalguna, Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, rejoiced.
On hearing those loud roars, the king’s sorrow was dispelled. The lord became assured about Dhananjaya’s victory
in the battle. While Bhimasena, ﬁerce in battle, was roaring, the mighty-armed Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son,
smiled.
‘“In his heart and in his mind, the supreme among upholders of dharma said the following. ‘O Bhima! You have
sent me a message and have followed the words of your superior. O Pandava! Someone who is your enemy can
never be victorious in a battle. It is through good fortune that Savyasachi Dhananjaya is alive in the battle. It is
through good fortune that the brave Satyaki, for whom truth is his valour, is well. It is through good fortune that I
have heard the roars of Vasudeva and Dhananjaya. It is through good fortune that Phalguna is alive in this battle,
having slain the enemies. He defeated Shakra in an encounter and satisﬁed the ﬁre god.297 All of us are alive because of the strength of his arms. It is through good fortune that Phalguna has killed the enemy soldiers and is
alive. On a single chariot, he vanquished the nivatakavachas, who were extremely difﬁcult for the gods to
defeat.298 It is through good fortune that Partha is alive. When all the Kouravas assembled to seize the cattle in
the capital of Matsya, he defeated them.299 It is through good fortune that Partha is alive. Through the valour of
his arms, he killed fourteen thousand kalakeyas in a great battle.300 It is through good fortune that Partha is alive.
When the powerful king of the gandharvas captured Duryodhana, he defeated him through the valour of his
arms.301 It is through good fortune that Partha is alive. He wears a diadem and garlands. He is powerful and possesses white horses. Krishna is his charioteer. He has always been dear to me. It is through good fortune that Phalguna is alive. Tormented by sorrow over his son, he wished to perform an extremely difﬁcult deed. Wishing to kill
Jayadratha, he undertook a pledge. Will Dhananjaya be able to kill Saindhava in the battle? Protected by Vasudeva,
will he be able to fulﬁl his promise? Will I meet Arjuna before the sun has set? Saindhava has always been engaged in ensuring King Duryodhana’s welfare. Will he be brought down by Phalguna and delight his enemies?
Will King Duryodhana be brought down by Phalguna? Having seen Saindhava in the battle,302 will his mind turn
towards peace? Having seen his brothers killed by Bhimasena in the battle, will the wicked Duryodhana’s mind

turn towards peace? Having seen many other warriors brought down on the face of the earth, will the wicked
Duryodhana suffer from repentance? Will we not obtain peace because of Bhishma alone? Will Suyodhana not
have peace to preserve what is left?’ O king! He thought about many such things. He was overcome by compassion. However, the terrible battle continued.”’
CHAPTER 1081(104)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “The immensely strong Bhimasena was roaring and the sound was like that of thundering
clouds. Which brave ones surrounded him? O Sanjaya! I do not see anyone in the three worlds who is capable of
standing before an enraged Bhimasena in battle. When he raises his club in a great battle, he is like Death. O
son!303 I do not see anyone who can stay in the ﬁeld of battle. Who will remain stationed in a battle, with the exception of Shatakratu? The wrathful Bhimasena wishes to kill my sons. They have united for Duryodhana’s welfare and are stationed in front of him. In front of the conﬂagaration that is Bhimasena, my sons are like grass.
Which brave ones stationed themselves at the forefront of that battle? In that encounter, my sons must have looked
upon him as Death. When he acted like Death against all the beings, who surrounded him? When the ﬁre of Bhima
raged and consumed my sons, who were the brave ones who attacked him? O Sanjaya! Tell me that.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “When maharatha Bhimasena was roaring, the powerful Karna emitted a tremendous sound
and rushed against him. The powerful one became extremely intolerant and stretched his bow. The powerful Karna
wished to exhibit his strength in battle. At the clash between Karna and Bhima, everyone’s limbs began to tremble.
Both rathas and riders heard the slapping of the palms. In the ﬁeld of the battle, they heard Bhimasena’s terrible
roar. The bulls among the kshatriyas thought that the sky and the earth were covered with this sound. The greatsouled Pandava roared ﬁercely again. In that battle, the bows of all the warriors fell down on the ground. O great
king! The mounts were extremely distressed and in terror, repeatedly discharged urine and excrement. There were
many terrible omens that could be seen. O king! There was a tumultuous clash between Bhima and Karna. Karna
struck Bhima with twenty arrows and swiftly pierced his charioteer with ﬁve arrows. The immensely strong and
swift Bhimasena laughed and pierced Karna back in that battle with sixty-four arrows. Karna, the great archer, shot
four more arrows. O king! But before they could reach him Bhima displayed the dexterity of his hands and used
arrows with drooping tufts to slice them down into many fragments. At this, Karna enveloped him with many torrents of arrows. The descendant of Pandu’s lineage was shrouded by Karna in many ways. However, the maharatha
severed Karna’s bow in his hand and pierced him with many arrows with drooping tufts. The son of the suta picked
up another bow and strung it. The maharatha, the performer of terrible deeds, pierced Bhima in that encounter.
Bhima became extremely angry. He powerfully struck the son of the suta in the chest with three arrows with
drooping tufts. With those arrows stuck to his breast, Karna looked beautiful. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
He was like a mountain with three peaks. Pierced by those supreme arrows, blood began to ﬂow from him, like
minerals and red chalk ﬂowing from the slope of a mountain. Severely struck, Karna wavered a little. O venerable
one! He then ﬁxed an arrow to his bow and pierced Bhima. He again shot hundreds and thousands of arrows. He
was suddenly enveloped by Karna, the one with the ﬁrm bow. However, the descendant of the Pandu lineage
smiled and quickly severed the string of his304 bow. With a broad-headed arrow, he dispatched the charioteer to
Yama’s abode. In that battle, the maharatha deprived the four horses of their lives. O lord of the earth! With the
horses slain, Karna descended from the chariot. The maharatha ascended Vrishasena’s chariot. Having vanquished
Karna in the battle, the powerful Bhimasena let out a mighty roar that was like the thunder of rain clouds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing this roar, Yudhishthira was delighted, since he deduced that Karna had
been defeated by Bhimasena.
‘“In every direction, the Pandu soldiers blew on their conch shells. On hearing the noises made by the enemy
soldiers, those on your side also roared. Partha stretched Gandiva and Krishna blew on his conch shell. But surpassing all this noise, there were the roars emitted by Bhima. O great king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
All the soldiers heard this. Then those two scorchers of enemies305 struck each other separately with arrows.
However, Radheya struck mildly and Pandava struck powerfully.”’306

CHAPTER 1082(105)

‘Sanjaya said, “When the soldiers had been routed and Arjuna, Satvata and Bhimasena had proceeded towards
Saindhava, your son went to Drona. He went on a single chariot and thought about many things. That chariot of
your son was fast and was speedily driven. It was as swift as thought and the wind and quickly reached Drona.
With eyes that were red with anger, your son spoke these words. ‘Arjuna, Bhimasena, the unvanquished Satyaki
and many other great maharathas have defeated the soldiers. Those destroyers of enemies are approaching near the
king of Sindhu. None of them have been defeated and all of them are proceeding there. O one who gives honours!
Even if maharatha Partha has passed by you in the battle, how could Satyaki and Bhima cross you? This is a miracle in this world, like that of the ocean drying up. O foremost among brahmanas! You have been vanquished by
Satvata and Arjuna and by Bhimasena. The people are repeatedly talking about this. “How could Drona, skilled in
knowledge of war, be defeated?” My ill fortune and destruction in this battle are certain. You, a tiger among men,
have been passed by three rathas. This having happened, tell me about what should be done now. O one who gives
honours! Think about what should be done about what is left. The time has come. What should we do about the
king of Sindhu next? Tell me this and let what you decide be carried out properly and fast.’
‘“Drona replied, ‘O great king! I have thought a lot about what should be done. Listen to me. Only three Pandava maharathas have passed by us. We should be frightened of those who are at the rear, as well as those who are
ahead, but I think it is greater at the place where Krishna and Dhananjaya are. The army of the Bharatas has been
attacked both from the front and from the rear. I think that our most important task is to protect Saindhava. O
son!307 He is terriﬁed of Dhananjaya and our task should be to protect him. The brave Yuyudhana and Vrikodara
have also gone after Saindhava. All of this is the outcome of the gambling match, the result of Shakuni’s intelligence. In that assembly hall, there was no victory, nor was there a defeat.308 O son! Now that we are immersed in
this gambling match today, there will be victory, or there will be defeat. In the assembly of the Kurus, Shakuni indulged in a gambling match with the terrible dice. O son! But those were actually unassailable arrows and they
have surrounded the Kurus in many ways now. O lord of the earth! Know the soldiers to be the players and the arrows to be the dice. O king! In this gambling match, Saindhava is certainly the stake. With Saindhava as the stake,
you have embarked on a great gambling match with the enemy. O great king! All of us here are ready to give up
our lives. In this battle, it should be our task to properly protect Saindhava. O son! In this gambling match, it is
certain that there will be victory or defeat. That is the spot where the great archers are protecting Saindhava.
Quickly go there yourself and protect the ones who are doing the protecting. I will remain here and send others
there. I will restrain the assembled Panchalas, Pandus and Srinjayas.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “On the instructions of the preceptor, Duryodhana quickly left with his followers, to accomplish
an extremely difﬁcult task.309 The two Panchalas, Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja, the protectors of the chariot
wheels,310 were passing through the periphery of the army and advancing towards Savyasachi. O great king!
Those two had earlier been contained by Kritavarma. O king! They were in search of Arjuna, who had penetrated
your army in a desire to ﬁght. Duryodhana engaged in a supreme battle with those two. The powerful descendant
of the Bharata lineage quickly engaged with those two spirited brothers. Those foremost of kshatriyas were known
as maharathas. They raised their bows and attacked him. Yudhamanyu was extremely angry.311 He quickly released arrows and pierced your son between the breasts with thirty arrows. O Indra among kings! Duryodhana
killed the four horses of the inﬁnitely energetic Panchala and also his two parshnis. With his horses and his charioteer slain in that battle, Yudhamanyu climbed onto his brother’s chariot. When he had ascended his brother’s chariot, he struck Duryodhana’s horses with many arrows. They were killed and fell down on the ground. In that encounter, when the horses were killed, Yudhamanyu quickly used a supreme arrow to sever his312 bow and armguard. When the horses and charioteer were slain, your maharatha son descended from the chariot. He grasped a
club and attacked the Panchalas. On seeing that enraged destroyer of enemy cities descend, Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja jumped down from the terrace of the chariot. That supreme chariot was decorated in gold. In that encounter,
he313 used the club to smash the chariot down onto the ground, with its horses, charioteer and standard. Though
he killed them, your son’s horses had also been killed. His charioteer had been slain. The scorcher of enemies

swiftly ascended the chariot of the king of Madra. Those two immensely strong princes, the foremost among the
Panchalas, also climbed onto another chariot and advanced towards Dhananjaya.”’
CHAPTER 1083(106)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “How was the battle between Karna and Bhima, both of whom were immensely strong? In
the vicinity of Arjuna’s chariot, what was its nature? In the earlier encounter, Karna had been defeated by Bhimasena. How could maharatha Radheya progress against Bhima? In the battle, how did Bhima face the son of the
suta, regarded as a maharatha and the foremost among all rathas on earth? Having surpassed Bhishma and Drona,
Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, did not fear anyone as much as he did the archer Karna. Thinking of the maharatha,
he314 always lay down in fear. How did Bhima ﬁght with the son of the suta in battle? He never retreated in a battle. He was full of valour and devoted to brahmanas. How did Bhima ﬁght with Karna, foremost among warriors,
in the battle? In the encounter near Arjuna’s chariot, how did the son of the suta and Vrikodara, ﬁght with each other? Since the son of the suta had earlier been told about the fraternal relationship,315 he was compassionate. Remembering the word that he had given to Kunti, how did he ﬁght with Bhima?316 Bhima must have remembered
the earlier enmity caused by the suta’s son? In the battle, how did the brave one ﬁght with Karna? My son, Duryodhana, was always assured that Karna, the son of the suta, would defeat the united Pandavas in a battle. In the battle, for my wicked son, he was the hope for victory. How did he ﬁght with Bhimasena, the performer of terrible
deeds? Using him as a refuge, my sons engendered the enmity with those maharathas. O son! How did Bhima ﬁght
with that son of a suta? Having remembered the many hardships that the son of the suta had caused, how did Bhima ﬁght with the son of the suta? The valiant son of a suta conquered the entire world on a single chariot. How did
Bhima ﬁght with him? He was born with earrings and armour. How did Bhima ﬁght with that son of a suta in battle? Tell me in detail about the battle that raged between those two and which of the two was victorious. O Sanjaya! You are skilled in narrating.”
‘Sanjaya said, “Abandoning Radheya, supreme among rathas, Bhimasena attempted to go where the brave
Krishna and Dhananjaya were. O great king! As he was leaving, Radheya attacked him and showered down arrows
tufted with feathers of herons on him, like a cloud raining on a mountain. The face of Adhiratha’s powerful son
was as beautiful as a blooming lotus and he challenged the departing Bhima to do battle. Bhimasena could not tolerate Karna’s summons to do battle. He did a semicircle317 and began to ﬁght with the son of the suta. Armoured
for the duel, the supreme among all wielders of weapons sought to bring down a great shower of iron arrows that
travelled straight. Wishing to kill Karna, he began to tire him out, thinking that this was a means for bringing the
quarrel to an end. O venerable one! The angry and intolerant Pandava, scorcher of enemies, showered down many
kinds of ﬁerce arrows. His gait was like that of a mad elephant and he showered down those arrows. However, the
suta’s greatly illustrious son used the maya of his own weapons to devour them. Karna, the great archer, was greatly honoured because of his knowledge and began to roam around in that battle like a preceptor. As Bhimasena angrily fought, Radheya seemed to smile and taunt the furious and intolerant Vrikodara. In the battle, Kounteya could
not tolerate Karna’s smile, since all the brave ones were ﬁghting and watching them in every direction. Having approached him, the powerful and angry Bhimasena pierced him between the breasts with vatsadanta arrows, like a
giant elephant being goaded. He pierced the charioteer of the son of the suta with well-tufted and sharp arrows and
then used seventy-three well-directed arrows to pierce his318 colourful armour. The brave one enveloped the brave
Karna’s horses, which were as swift as the wind and were clad in golden harnesses, and pierced each of them with
ﬁve arrows. O king! Karna released a net of arrows towards Bhimasena’s chariot and in a short instant, made Pandava disappear, with his chariot, his standard and his charioteer. O great king! Karna completely covered them
with arrows released from his bow. Then Karna used sixty-four arrows to ﬁrmly pierce his armour and angrily
struck him in the sides with iron arrows that could penetrate the inner organs. But Vrikodara ignored the extremely
forceful arrows released from Karna’s bow and without any fear, struck the son of the suta. O great king! The arrows released from Karna’s bow were like venomous serpents. Though Bhima bore them in that battle, he suffered
from no pain. In that encounter, the powerful Bhimasena struck Karna with thirty-two sharp and broad-headed arrows that were extremely energetic. However, Karna paid no attention to them. The mighty-armed Bhimasena

wished to kill Saindhava and he covered him319 with arrows. Radheya fought mildly with Bhima. However, remembering the earlier enmity, Bhima, the conqueror of enemies, fought with anger and quickly released a shower
of arrows. O king! The arrows released by Bhimasena in that battle descended all over him, like warbling
birds.320 O great king! The arrows released from Bhima’s bow were gold-tufted. They dashed towards Radheya,
like a wolf towards small deer. O king! Karna was foremost among rathas and in that encounter, released showers
of ﬁerce arrows that shrouded all the directions. He was the ornament of any battle and his arrows were like the
vajra. However, before they could reach him, Vrikodara sliced them down with many broad-headed arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, Vaikartana Karna again enveloped maharatha Bhimasena with a
shower of arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, we saw Bhima covered with those arrows
and his body looked like that of a porcupine, with its quills jutting out. Those arrows released from Karna’s bow
were gold-tufted and sharpened on stone. In that encounter, the brave one bore them, like the sun withstanding its
own rays. Bhimasena looked beautiful, with blood ﬂowing from all his limbs. He was as golden as a ﬂowering
palasha tree in a grove. O great king! Bhima could not tolerate Karna’s conduct in that encounter. The great archer
dilated his eyes in rage and struck Karna with twenty-ﬁve iron arrows. Karna looked like a white mountain, with
the foothills covered with poisonous snakes.321 In that great battle, Bhima again pierced the son of the suta, who
was as valorous as an immortal, with sixty-eight arrows in his inner organs. The powerful and enraged Bhimasena
quickly severed Karna’s bow and all his implements. He used swift arrows to slay the four horses and the charioteer. With iron arrows as radiant as the sun’s rays, he struck Karna in the chest. O venerable one! After having
pierced Karna, all of them penetrated the earth. O king! It was as if the sun’s rays were penetrating the clouds.
He322 was proud of his manliness. But his bow had been severed and he was afﬂicted with arrows. He was overcome by great despondency and went to another chariot.”’
CHAPTER 1084(107)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O Sanjaya! The hopes of my sons being victorious have always been vested in him. On seeing him retreat in the battle, what did Duryodhana say? O son! In that encounter, what did Karna do after that?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “On seeing Bhimasena in that battle, blazing like a ﬁre, Karna resorted to another chariot that
had been properly prepared and again attacked Pandava, like an ocean agitated by the wind. O lord of the earth!
On seeing that Adhiratha’s son was enraged, your sons thought that Bhimasena was like oblation being poured into
the mouth of a ﬁre. Radheya created a great sound with the twang of his bow and a ﬁerce sound with the slapping
of his palms. He advanced towards Bhimasena’s chariot. O king! O lord of the earth! A great and extremely terrible sound arose again, in the conﬂict between the son of the suta and Bhima. The mighty-armed ones were wrathful and wished to kill each other. They glanced at each other and seemed to burn each other down with their eyes.
The eyes of the maharathas were red with rage and they sighed. Both of them were scorchers of enemies and they
attacked and mangled each other. They fought against each other like angry tigers, or swift hawks, or wrathful
sharabhas.323
‘“Bhima remembered the hardships due to the gambling match and in the forest. The scorcher of enemies
thought of the difﬁculties in Virata’s city. Their prosperous and bejewelled kingdom had been robbed by your sons.
You and your sons have always caused them difﬁculties and tried to burn down the innocent Kunti and her sons.
The evil-souled ones mistreated Krishna324 in the assembly hall. ‘Accept another husband, since your husbands
no longer remain. All the Parthas have descended into hell, like sesamum seeds that have no kernel.’325 O
Kouravya! In your presence, these were the words the Kurus spoke then. Your sons wished to enjoy Krishna, as
they would enjoy a servant maid. They were later banished, attired in black antelope skin. In your presence, in the
assembly hall, Karna then spoke harsh words to them. Your son thought that the Parthas were no more than mere
straws. They were in desperate straits and he, deluded of his senses, was insolent. The slayer of enemies326
thought about these and other miseries suffered since childhood. Vrikodara, with dharma in his soul, no longer
cared about remaining alive. He stretched his giant and invincible bow, with a golden back. Ready to give up his
life, the tiger among the Bharata lineage attacked Karna. Bhima released a net of arrows, sharpened on stone, to-

wards Karna’s chariot and shrouded him and the rays of the sun. Adhiratha’s son laughed at this. He swiftly used
his own net of arrows, sharpened on stone, to counter these and pierce Bhimasena. Adhiratha’s son was a maharatha. He was mighty-armed, immensely forceful and greatly strong. He pierced Bhima with nine sharp arrows.
It was as if an elephant had been goaded. Vrikodara countered those arrows and without any fear, attacked the son
of the suta. On seeing that the bull among the Pandava lineage was descending on him, with great ferocity and
force, Karna countered him in that battle, like an elephant against a maddened elephant. He blew on his conch
shell, with a sound that was like that of a hundred drums beating. Like a turbulent ocean, he agitated the army.327
That army was full of chariots, elephants, horses and infantry. On beholding the extraordinary sight,328 Bhima attacked Karna and covered him with arrows.
‘“In that battle, Karna covered Pandava, and the horses and the men, with arrows. His supreme horses possessed
the complexion of swans and he mixed these up with the horses of his opponent, which had the complexion of
bears and were as swift as the wind or thought. On seeing that the horses had been mixed up, great lamentations
issued from your sons. As swift as the wind, those horses were mixed up and looked extremely beautiful. O great
king! They looked like black and white clouds that were mingled in the sky. Karna and Vrikodara were angry and
their eyes were coppery red in rage. On seeing this, the maharathas on your side trembled in fright. The terrain
where those warriors fought became as terrible as Yama’s kingdom. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! It was
dreadful to look at, like the capital of the king of the dead. The maharathas seemed to look at a painted assembly,
where, in warding off each other, they could see neither destruction, nor victory. O king! O lord of the earth! They
only saw the clash of mighty weapons being released, a consequence of the evil counsels of you and your son.
‘“Wishing to kill the enemy, those two329 shrouded each other with sharp arrows. They showered down arrows
and covered the sky with nets of arrows. Those maharathas wished to kill each other and used sharp arrows. They
were beautiful to see, like two clouds showering down rain. O lord! The scorchers of enemies released arrows decorated with gold and made the sky look radiant, as if with ﬂaming meteors. They shot arrows tufted with the feathers of herons and peacocks and these looked like arrays of excited cranes in the autumn sky.
‘“On seeing that the son of the suta was engaged with Bhima, the scorcher of enemies, Krishna and Dhananjaya
thought that an extremely heavy burden had been imposed on Bhima. However, ﬁrm in the use of their hands, Adhiratha’s son and Bhima shot arrows at each other and brought down horses, men and elephants with those arrows.
There were many that were falling and those that had fallen, devoid of their lives. O great king! There was a great
destruction of men amongst your sons. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In a short instant, men, horses and elephants lost their lives and their lifeless bodies were strewn around on the ground.”’
CHAPTER 1085(108)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “I think Bhimasena’s valour is extraordinary, since he fought with Karna, who is brave and
dexterous, in that battle. In an encounter, Karna is capable of repulsing the gods, the yakshas, the asuras and men,
even if they are united and armed with every kind of weapon. O son! O Sanjaya! Pandava is blazing in his prosperity. But how could he not be vanquished? Tell me that. How did the battle between them continue, in which, each
of them wagered their lives? I think that either of them was capable of being victorious, or being defeated. O suta!
Having obtained Karna in the battle, my son, Suyodhana, was conﬁdent of defeating the Parthas, with Govinda and
the Satvatas. But having heard that Karna was repeatedly defeated in the battle by Bhimasena, terrible in his deeds,
I have lost my senses. Because of the wicked policies of my son, I think that the Kouravas have already been destroyed. O Sanjaya! Karna will not be able to defeat those great archers, the Parthas. Whenever Karna has fought
with the sons of Pandu, the Pandavas have always defeated him in the ﬁeld of battle. O son! The Pandavas are incapable of being vanquished, even by the gods, with Vasava. My wicked son, Duryodhana, does not comprehend
this. Partha330 is like the lord of riches. Having robbed him of his riches, my son, whose intelligence is limited, is
like a searcher of honey and does not know about the downfall.331 He is wise about deceit and used deceit to rob
the great-souled ones of their kingdom. He thinks that it332 belongs to him and disregards the Pandavas. My soul
is also unclean. I have been overcome by affection for my son and have maltreated the sons of Pandu, who are
great-souled and have been established in dharma. Partha Yudhishthira is far-sighted and has always desired peace.

But my sons thought that he was incapable and maltreated him. The mighty-armed Bhima bears all the assorted
hardships and diverse ill-treatment in his heart and has fought with the son of the suta. O Sanjaya! Karna and Bhima are foremost among warriors and wished to kill each other. In that battle, tell me how they fought.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! Listen to the account of the battle between Karna and Bhima. They wished to kill
each other and were like elephants in a forest. O king! Vaikartana was enraged and used his valour to pierce the
brave and angry Bhima, the scorcher of enemies, with thirty arrows. These were extremely powerful, sharp at the
tip and embellished with gold. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Bhima was struck by Vaikartana’s arrows.
However, while he was attacking, Bhima used three sharp arrows to sever his bow and used a broad-headed arrow
to bring his charioteer down from the seat of the chariot onto the ground. Vaikartana Vrisha333 wished to kill Bhimasena. He grasped a giant javelin, which was like a javelin used by Death. The shaft and handle of that javelin
was colourfully decorated with gold and lapis lazuli. The immensely strong Radheya hurled it at Bhimasena and it
was capable of robbing him of his life. Having released the javelin, like Purandara with his vajra, the powerful son
of the suta emitted an extremely loud roar. On hearing that roar, your sons were delighted. That javelin was released from Karna’s hands and was as radiant as the sun or the ﬁre. However, while it was still traversing, Bhima
severed it with seven arrows. O venerable one! Thus severed by Bhima as it was travelling through the air, the
javelin looked like a snake that has cast off its skin. Wishing to rob the son of the suta of his life, he then angrily
released many arrows shafted with the feathers of peacocks. They were gold-tufted and sharpened on stone and in
that battle, each of them was like Yama’s staff. Karna took up another bow that possessed a golden back and was
unassailable. The immensely energetic one drew it and shot many arrows. However, Pandu’s son severed these
with nine arrows with drooping tufts. O king! Having severed those great arrows shot by Vasushena,334 Bhima
roared like a lion. O great king! Those two powerful ones roared like bulls desiring to ﬁnd an opportunity, or like
roaring tigers that attacked each other. They sought to strike each other and looked for each other’s weakness.
They glanced towards each other, like giant bulls in a pen. They were like giant elephants, striking each other with
their tusks. They drew their bows back to the full extent and struck each other with arrows. O great king! They
scorched each other with showers of arrows. They glanced towards each other, with eyes dilated with rage. They
laughed at each other and repeatedly censured each other. As they fought with each other, they blew on their conch
shells. O venerable one! Bhima again severed the bow in his hand and with his arrows, dispatched his horses,
which had the complexion of conch shells, to Yama’s abode.
‘“On seeing that Karna was confronting difﬁculties, King Duryodhana trembled with anger and instructed Durjaya,335 ‘O Durjaya! Go to that spot in front, where Radheya is about to be devoured by Pandava. Quickly slay
that eunuch and give Karna strength.’ Having been thus addressed there by your son, your son336 agreed and attacking Bhimasena, covered him with arrows. He struck Bhima with nine arrows, his charioteer with six, his standard with three and struck him again with seven arrows. Bhimasena became extremely angry. With his arrows, he
pierced Durjaya, his horses and his charioteer in the inner organs and dispatched them to Yama’s abode. His ornamented body lay down on the ground, mangled like a writhing snake. Karna wept and circumambulated your son.
Having deprived him337 of his chariot, he338 laughed at the enemy and covered him with a mass of arrows, making him look like a shataghni339 with spikes sticking out. Atiratha Karna, scorcher of enemies, was pierced by
those arrows. However, he did not avoid Bhima in that battle.”’
CHAPTER 1086(109)

‘Sanjaya said, “Karna was without a chariot and was again defeated by Bhima. He ascended another chariot and
again began to pierce Pandava. They were like giant elephants, goring each other with their tusks. They drew their
bows back to the full extent and struck each other with arrows. Karna powerfully struck Bhima with a storm of arrows. He roared loudly and again struck him on the chest. Bhima pierced him back with ten arrows and again
struck him with twenty arrows with drooping tufts. O king! Karna pierced Bhima between the breasts with nine
arrows and pierced his standard with a sharp arrow. Partha pierced him back with sixty-three arrows, like a giant
elephant struck by a goad or a horse with a whip. O great king! Having been thus pierced by the illustrious Pandava, he licked the corners of his mouth and his eyes became red with rage. O great king! He shot an arrow that was

capable of penetrating all bodies towards Bhimasena, like Indra hurling his vajra towards Bala. That arrow had a
colourful tuft and was sharpened on stone. Released from the bow of the suta’s son, it pierced Partha in that battle
and penetrated the earth. The mighty-armed Bhima grasped a heavy club that was completely made out of iron.
This had six sides and was decorated with gold. It was four kishkus long.340 Without reﬂecting, he hurled this at
the son of the suta. The wrathful descendant of the Bharata lineage hurled this club, like Indra with the vajra
against the asuras. The horses of Adhiratha’s son were well trained and well controlled and it slew them. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! He then used a couple of razor-sharp arrows to bring down the standard of Adhiratha’s
son and kill his charioteer. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With his horses and charioteer slain and his standard brought down, Karna was extremely distressed. But he drew his bow and we witnessed Radheya’s extraordinary valour. Though he was without a chariot, the foremost among rathas countered his enemy.
‘“O king! On seeing that Adhiratha’s son, the best of rathas, was without a chariot in that battle, Duryodhana addressed Durmukha.341 ‘O Durmukha! Radheya has been deprived of his chariot by Bhimasena. Provide a chariot
to that maharatha, who is the best among men.’ O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing Duryodhana’s
words, Durmukha swiftly advanced towards Karna and enveloped Bhima with arrows. On beholding Durmukha in
that battle, following in the footsteps of the son of the suta, Vayu’s son was delighted and licked the corners of his
mouth. O great king! Pandava repulsed Karna with arrows that had stone heads and quickly drove his chariot towards Durmukha. O great king! At that moment, Bhima used nine other arrows with drooping and excellent tufts
to dispatch Durmukha to Yama’s abode. O king! On seeing that Durmukha had been killed, Adhiratha’s son
mounted his342 chariot and stationed there, was as radiant as the blazing sun. Durmukha’s inner organs were shattered and he lay down, blood ﬂowing from his wounds. On seeing this, Karna’s eyes were full of tears and he
paused for a while. The brave Karna circumambulated the one who had lost his life and left him there. His sighs
were deep and warm and he did not know what to do. O king! Using that gap, Bhimasena shot fourteen iron arrows
that were shafted with the feathers of vultures at the son of the suta. These were colourful, gold-tufted and extremely energetic and were the drinkers of blood. O great king! These illuminated the ten directions and penetrated
his armour, drinking the blood of the son of the suta. O Indra among kings! Those arrows were like angry serpents,
urged by destiny, as they penetrated the earth, after having passed through his body. They were like large and angry serpents, half-inserted into their holes.343 Without any reﬂection, Radheya pierced him back with fourteen extremely sharp and iron arrows that were decorated with gold. Those arrows penetrated Bhimasena’s left arm and
penetrated the earth, like ﬁerce curlews entering a tree. On having penetrated the ground, those iron arrows were
resplendent. They were like the blazing rays of the sun, as it heads towards setting. In that battle, Bhima was mangled by those iron arrows that penetrated the inner organs. He shed a great deal of blood, like water ﬂowing out of
a mountain. In turn, Bhima pierced the son of the suta with three arrows and used another seven arrows, with the
force of Suparna,344 to pierce his charioteer. O great king! Afﬂicted by Bhima’s strength, Karna was agitated. The
immensely illustrious one gave up the battle and ﬂed on his swift horses. Bhimasena stretched his bow, embellished in gold. In that battle, the atiratha was stationed like a blazing ﬁre.”’
CHAPTER 1087(110)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “I think that destiny is supreme. Since Adhiratha’s son strove and could not overcome Pandava
in the battle, shame on manliness. Karna is capable of vanquishing the Parthas, with Govinda, in an encounter. The
world has never seen a warrior who is Karna’s equal. I have repeatedly heard Duryodhana speak in this vein. ‘Karna is powerful and brave. He wields a ﬁrm bow and has conquered exhaustion. O king!345 If I have Vasushena as
my aide, even the gods will not be able to withstand me in battle, not to speak of the sons of Pandu, who have lost
their spirits and their endeavour.’ On seeing this Karna defeated in the battle, like a snake that has lost its poison
and has run away, what did Duryodhana say? Alas! Durmukha was not skilled in ﬁghting. But he346 sent him
alone and he entered the ﬁerce battle, like a deluded insect. O Sanjaya! There is no doubt that Ashvatthama, the
king of Madra and Kripa, united with Karna, cannot stand before Bhima. He is extremely terrible and possesses the
strength of ten thousand elephants. They know this and the cruelty and energy of Maruta’s347 son. Why did they

anger the performer of cruel deeds, who is proud of his strength and valour and is like Yama at the end of a yuga,
in the battle? It seems that Karna, the mighty-armed son of the suta, has depended on the strength of his arms alone
and disregarding this,348 has chosen to ﬁght with Bhimasena in the battle. Pandu’s son defeated Karna in the encounter, like Purandara against the asuras. Who is capable of vanquishing him in a ﬁght? In his search for Dhananjaya, he shattered Drona and penetrated my army. Who is capable of approaching Bhima and remaining alive? O
Sanjaya! He is like the great Indra, with the thunderous vajra raised against the danavas. Who has the enterprise to
station himself in front of Bhima? Having reached the capital of the king of the dead, a man may return. But having approached Bhimasena, no one can ever return. Those with limited intelligence will enter and advance against
the wrathful Bhimasena, like insects advancing towards a ﬂame, bereft of their senses. In the assembly hall and in
the hearing of the Kurus, Bhima took a pledge about killing my sons. Having seen Karna defeated, Duhshasana
and his brothers must be thinking about that and, out of fear, must have retreated from attacking Bhima. O Sanjaya! That evil-minded son349 of mine repeatedly said in the assembly, ‘In the battle, Karna, Duhshasana and I
will conquer the Pandavas.’ O Sanjaya! On seeing Karna deprived of his chariot and defeated by Bhima, there is
no doubt that he must be severely repenting his refusal of Krishna.350 On seeing his armoured brothers killed in
the battle by Bhimasena, there is no doubt that my son is greatly tormented by his own crimes. No one who wishes
to live will advance against Pandava Bhima. His weapons are terrible and he is enraged. He is stationed like Death
himself. A man can escape from the mouth and midst of the vadava ﬁre.351 But it is my view that no one can escape, having approached Bhima’s mouth. When they are enraged in battle, the Pandavas, the Panchalas, Keshava
and Satyaki, do not know how to protect their own lives.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O Kourava! You are sorrowing because of the destruction of men that is occurring. But there
is no doubt that you are the root behind this destruction of the earth. Devoted to the words of your sons, you are
yourself the cause of this great enmity. Though you were urged, like a dying man, you did not accept the diet and
the medicines. O great king! You have yourself drunk kalakuta, which is impossible to digest.352 O supreme
among men! You are now suffering the fruits of that action. The warriors on your side are ﬁghting to the utmost of
their strength, but you are censuring them. Let me describe to you the raging battle.
‘“O venerable one! On seeing that Karna had been defeated by Bhimasena, ﬁve brothers who are your sons,
Durmarshana, Duhsaha, Durmada, Durdhara and Jaya, could not tolerate this. Clad in colourful armour, they advanced against Pandava. They surrounded the mighty-armed Vrikodara from all directions and covered him with
arrows that were like ﬂying locusts. On seeing those princes, who were like the gods in their beauty, suddenly advance against him in that battle, Bhimasena smiled and received them. On seeing your sons approach Bhimasena,
Radheya attacked the immensely strong Bhimasena. O king! He showered arrows that were gold-tufted and sharpened on stone. However, Bhima attacked quickly and repulsed your sons. The Kurus surrounded Karna from all
directions and countered Bhimasena with arrows with straight tufts. O king! But Bhima used his terrible bow to
shoot twenty-ﬁve arrows and dispatched those bulls among men,353 with their charioteers, to Yama’s eternal
abode. With their charioteers, they lost their lives and fell down from their chariots. They were like giant trees with
colourful blossoms, uprooted by a storm. We witnessed Bhimasena’s extraordinary valour. He countered Adhiratha’s son and killed your sons with his arrows. O great king! In every direction, the son of the suta was checked
by Bhima’s sharp arrows and he could only look at Bhimasena. Bhimasena was angry and his eyes were red with
rage. He repeatedly stretched his giant bow and glanced at Karna.”’
CHAPTER 1088(111)

‘Sanjaya said, “On seeing that your sons had fallen down, the powerful Karna was overcome by great rage and lost
all hope of remaining alive. Adhiratha’s son censured himself.354 Without any fear, he angrily attacked Bhimasena. Radheya smiled and pierced Bhima with ﬁve arrows. He again pierced him with seventy arrows that were goldtufted and sharpened on stone. Partha Vrikodara laughed at them and intolerantly, pierced Radheya with a hundred
arrows with drooping tufts. He again pierced him with ﬁve sharp and swift arrows. O venerable one! With a broadheaded arrow, he severed the bow of the son of the suta. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Karna was distressed and took up another bow. In every direction, he enveloped Bhimasena with arrows. However, Bhima

smiled and killed his horses and his charioteer. Having done this, he laughed out loudly. O great king! The bull
among men severed his bow,355 with a golden back, with arrows and it fell down with a loud noise. At this, maharatha Karna descended from his chariot. In that battle, he grasped a club and hurled it at Bhimasena. O king! On
seeing that club suddenly descend, Vrikodara countered it with his arrows, while all your soldiers looked on. Wishing to kill the son of the suta, the brave and spirited Pandava shot a thousand arrows at him. In that great battle,
Karna countered these arrows with arrows of his own and with his arrows, brought down Bhimasena’s armour.
While all the beings looked on, he then struck him with twenty-ﬁve kshudraka arrows and it was extraordinary. O
great king! O venerable one! Bhima became angry. In that battle, he dispatched nine sharp arrows with drooping
tufts towards the son of the suta. They pierced his armour and his right arm and penetrated the ground, like snakes
entering a termite hill. In that encounter, on seeing that Radheya was on foot and was agitated by Bhimasena, King
Duryodhana said, ‘All of you hasten towards Radheya’s chariot.’ O king! On hearing the words of their brother,
your sons advanced against Pandava in the battle and shot sharp arrows. They were Chitra, Upachitra, Chitraksha,
Charuchitra, Sharasana, Chitrayudha, Chitravarma and Chitrayodhina. O king! In that battle, these maharathas suddenly advanced against Bhima. In that encounter, he killed them and their horses, charioteers, standards and
brought them down on the ground, like trees uprooted by a storm. O king! On beholding that your maharatha sons
had been killed, Karna’s eyes were ﬁlled with tears and his face was full of dejection. He again mounted a chariot
that had been properly prepared. In that encounter, the brave one spiritedly attacked Pandava. They pierced each
other with gold-tufted arrows that were sharpened on stone. O great king! They looked as beautiful as blossoming
kimshukas. Pandava angrily struck the armour of the son of the suta with thirty six sharp and broad-headed arrows
that were ﬁerce in their energy. They had deep wounds on their bodies, caused by the arrows, and they smeared red
sandalwood paste on these. They were covered with blood and were as resplendent as the sun that arises at the time
of destruction. Blood ﬂowed from the wounds on their bodies. Their armour was shattered by arrows. Bereft of armour, they were as beautiful as snakes that had cast off their skins. Like tigers attacking each other with their teeth,
those tigers among men mangled each other with arrows that were like teeth. Those scorchers of enemies were resplendent in that arena, like clashing elephants. They were like crazy elephants in their valour and persecuted each
other with sharp arrows. In that battle, they enveloped each other with nets of arrows. O great king! As they
roamed around, their chariots roared in all the directions. Those chariots executed circular motions. Those greatsouled ones roamed around like Vritra and the wielder of the vajra. As he stretched his bow with his arms, with
arm-guards on them, Bhima roamed around in that battle like a cloud tinged with lightning. The twang of his bow
was like thunder and there was a shower of arrows from that great cloud. O great king! The cloud that was Bhima
rained down on the mountain that was Karna. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Pandava shot a thousand arrows from his bow and shrouded Karna with that dense shower, like rain on a mountain. Your sons witnessed Bhimasena’s valour there. He enveloped Karna with arrows that were well-tufted with the feathers of herons. As Bhima fought with Karna in that battle, he delighted Partha,356 the illustrious Keshava, Satyaki and the two who
guarded the chariot wheels.357 O great king! Pandava knew about his own valour, strength of arms and fortitude.
But your sons witnessed it.”’
CHAPTER 1089(112)

‘Sanjaya said, “On hearing the slap of Bhimasena’s bowstring against his palms, Radheya could not tolerate it and
advanced like a mad elephant against another elephant. He had moved away from the reach of Bhima’s arrows for
only an instant. Adhiratha’s son saw that your sons had been brought down from their chariots and had been killed
by Bhimasena. He was distressed and miserable. He sighed long and warm sighs and again attacked Pandava. His
eyes were coppery red in anger and he sighed like a giant serpent. As he released his arrows, Karna was as resplendent as the sun with its rays. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Vrikodara was shrouded by the arrows released
from Karna’s bow, which were like the rays of the sun. The colourful arrows released from Karna’s bow were tufted with the feathers of peacocks. They penetrated all over Partha, like birds entering a tree. The arrows released
from Karna’s bow descended incessantly. They were gold-tufted and looked like a continuous array of swans. O
king! Such was the power of the arrows shot by Adhiratha’s son that it seemed as if they were issuing not only

from the bow, but also the standard, the seat, the umbrella, the yoke and the ﬂoor.358 The arrows released by Adhiratha’s son ﬁlled the sky with their great force and were tufted with the feathers of birds. They were colourful
and decorated with gold. Vrikodara saw that they were descending towards him, like Death. He became ready to
give up his life and angrily pierced him359 with nine arrows. The brave Pandava saw the great force of Karna’s
storm of arrows, but did not waver. Pandava shot a net of arrows towards Adhiratha’s son and again pierced Karna
with another twenty sharp arrows. In that encounter, just as Partha enveloped the son of the suta with arrows, Karna also shrouded Pandava. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On witnessing Bhimasena’s valour in that ﬁght,
those on your side were delighted and praised him, as did the charanas. Ten of the foremost of rathas among the
Kurus and the Pandavas—Bhurishrava, Kripa, Drona’s son, the king of Madra, Jayadratha, Uttamouja, Yudhamanyu, Satyaki, Keshava and Arjuna—uttered words of praise and roared loudly, like lions. There was a tumultuous sound and it made the body hair stand up.
‘“O king! Your son, Duryodhana, quickly spoke to the kings and the princes, and especially to his brothers. ‘O
fortunate ones! Advance towards Karna and save him from Vrikodara. Ahead of us, the arrows released by Bhima
are striking Radheya. All of you great archers should make efforts to protect the son of the suta.’ O venerable one!
Having been instructed by Duryodhana, seven of his brothers angrily attacked Bhimasena and surrounded him
from all sides. They approached Kounteya and covered him with showers of arrows. This was like the slayer of
Bala showering down rain on a mountain. O king! Bhimasena was oppressed by those seven angry maharathas,
like seven planets afﬂicting the moon at the time of destruction. O king! Pandava Kounteya drew the well-decorated and ﬁrm bow with his left hand and held it in his hand.360 Knowing that they were only men,361 the lord afﬁxed and released seven arrows that were as bright as the rays of the sun. O great king! Bhimasena remembered
the earlier enmity and took away the lives from the bodies of your sons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhimasena shot arrows at those descendants of the Bharata lineage. These were gold-tufted and sharpened on stone
and coursed through the sky. Those arrows were decorated with gold and pierced through their hearts. O great
king! They were as resplendent as Suparna362 travelling through the sky. O Indra among kings! They were ﬁerce
and decorated with gold and now had blood on their tips. They drank the blood of your sons. Those arrows penetrated their inner organs and brought them down from the chariots onto the ground. They were like giant trees on
mountain tops, shattered by an elephant. Shatrunjaya, Shatrusaha, Chitra, Chitrayudha, Dridha, Chitrasena and
Vikarna—these seven were brought down.
‘“Having killed them, the mighty-armed one saw Radheya. The descendant of the Pandu lineage roared terribly,
like the roar of a lion. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The brave one’s roar resounded in the sky and informed Dharmaraja about his victory in the battle. On hearing the great roar emitted by the archer Bhimasena in
the battle, Dharmaraja was supremely delighted. O great king! In joy, musical instruments were played in loud
tones. Having heard Bhimasena’s roar, Partha363 attacked Drona, supreme among the wielders of weapons, from
every direction. On receiving the sign from Vrikodara, he was ﬁlled with great delight. O great king! On seeing
that thirty-one of your maharatha sons had been killed, Duryodhana remembered the words of Kshatta,364 which
had been spoken at the time of the gambling match to your evil-minded son, when Karna had spoken harsh words
to Krishna365 in the assembly hall. O lord of the earth! This was in your presence and in that of the sons of Pandu
and in the presence of all the Kouravas and the preceptor. ‘O Krishna!366 The Pandavas have been destroyed and
have gone to eternal hell. Accept someone else as a husband.’ Those harsh words spoken to Droupadi in the assembly hall are now bearing fruit. Thinking of this, the king367 did not know what to do next. The Pandavas wield
ﬁerce bows and will kill your sons in their anger. O Kourava! The ﬁre of Bhimasena’s anger has been restrained
for thirteen years. It is now being released and will convey your sons towards destruction. Having lamented a lot,
Kshatta failed to obtain peace from you. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! With your sons, enjoy the fruits of
that now. O Indra among kings! Vikarna and the valiant Chitrasena, foremost among your sons, have been killed
and so have other maharatha sons, all those who have come within the range of Bhima’s sight. O mighty-armed
one! He swiftly slew your sons. It is only because of your deeds that I saw our arrays being scorched, as a result of
the thousands of arrows released by Pandava and Vrisha.”’368

CHAPTER 1090(113)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O suta! O Sanjaya! Though I sorrow, I think that this great calamity that has now confronted
us is especially because of what I did. But so far, I had the belief that what has happened, has happened. O Sanjaya! What should I do now? Tell me about the destruction of heroes that is going on. O Sanjaya! I have paciﬁed
myself. Tell me about it.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O great king! Karna and Bhima were both valorous. In that great battle, they showered down
arrows, like rain pouring down from clouds. There were gold-tufted arrows that were sharpened on stone and
marked with Bhima’s name. These pierced Karna, as if penetrating his life. In that fashion, Bhima was struck in
that battle by hundreds and thousands of arrows released by Karna and these were like venomous serpents. O great
king! Those arrows descended in every direction and agitated the armies, which were like oceans. O scorcher of
enemies! The arrows released from Bhima’s bow were as terrible as virulent serpents and killed your soldiers in
the midst of the army. O king! Elephants fell down and mixed with horses and men. They were seen to be strewn
around on the ground, like trees shattered by a storm. In that battle, they were slain by the arrows released from
Bhima’s bow. Your warriors were driven away, exclaiming, ‘What is this?’ The great force of arrows released by
Karna and Pandava made the soldiers from Sindhus, Souviras and Kouravas move a great distance away. Many
horses, men and mounts were afﬂicted and slain by the arrows. They abandoned Karna and Bhima and ﬂed in all
the directions, saying, ‘There is no doubt that, for the sake of the Parthas, the residents of heaven are confounding
us, since the force of Karna and Bhima’s arrows are killing our troops.’ Having said this, the warriors on your side
were afﬂicted by fear. They moved away from the range of the arrows and stationed themselves, wishing to see the
encounter. In that great battle, a river, terrible in form, began to ﬂow. It was beautiful and in particular, increased
the fear of cowards. This was created from the blood of elephants, horses and men. It covered the bodies of men,
elephants and horses, who had lost their lives. Housings, ﬂags, elephants, horses and chariots were like ornaments.
There were shattered chariots and fragmented wheels, axles and yokes. There were extremely expensive bows that
were decorated with gold. There were gold-tufted arrows and thousands of iron arrows. These were released by
Karna and Pandava and were like snakes that had cast off their skins. There were masses of lances, spears, swords,
battleaxes, clubs, maces, spikes, vajras of different types, javelins, bludgeons and shataghnis. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! They were decorated with gold and made the ground beautiful. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were golden bracelets, armlets, sparkling and bejewelled earrings, body armour, palm-guards and
golden necklaces. There were garments and umbrellas and shattered whisks and fans. There were elephants, horses
and men who were mangled by weapons and ornaments from chariots. Shattered and broken, they were strewn
around here and there on the ground, making it as beautiful as the sky with the planets. These superhuman deeds
were extraordinary and could not be thought of. On beholding these, the charanas and the siddhas were overcome
by wonder. A ﬁre, when aided by the wind, burns down dry grass. Like that, aided by Bhima and engaging with
him, Adhiratha’s son ﬁercely brought down standards and chariots and slew horses, elephants and men. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As they engaged with each other in that battle, they were like a couple of elephants
amidst a clump of reeds. As they clashed in that supreme battle, Karna and Bhima, caused carnage in that great
army.”’
CHAPTER 1091(114)

‘Sanjaya said, “O great king! Karna pierced Bhima with three arrows. He released many showers of colourful arrows. O great king! Pandava was struck by the son of the suta. But Bhimasena was not distressed and was like a
shattered mountain. O Indra among kings! In that battle, Bhimasena pierced Karna with a sharp, yellow and barbed
arrow. O great king! He brought down Karna’s great and golden earring on the ground, as if a ﬂaming stellar body
had been dislodged from the sky. The immensely strong Bhima seemed to be smiling. With another broad-headed
arrow, he grievously struck the son of the suta between the breasts. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that
battle, Bhima again dispatched ten iron arrows. These were extremely forceful and were like Yama’s staff. O venerable one! They struck the son of the suta on his forehead and thus released, penetrated like snakes entering a termite hill. With those arrows on his forehead, the son of the suta looked dazzling, as he had done earlier, when he
had donned a garland of blue lotuses.369 In that battle, Karna, the wielder of a ﬁrm bow, was afﬂicted and en-

raged. Wishing to kill Bhimasena, he advanced with great force and speed. O king! O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! The intolerant and powerful Karna angrily dispatched one hundred arrows tufted with the feathers of vultures. However, in that encounter, the brave Pandava did not think about these. He ignored them and released a
ﬁerce shower of arrows. O great king! Karna, the scorcher of enemies, adopted a ﬁerce form and angrily struck
Pandava in the chest with sharp arrows. In that encounter, they showered down on each other, like clouds. They
terriﬁed each other with the slapping of their palms. In that encounter, they enveloped each other with diverse nets
of arrows. In that battle, they wrathfully acted so as to counteract the other. The mighty-armed and great-souled
Bhima severed Karna’s bow with a kshurapra arrow and pierced him with arrows.
‘“The great-minded son of the suta discarded the severed bow and picked up another bow that was more forceful and was capable of bearing a great load. The son of the suta saw that the destruction of the forces of the Kurus,
Souviras and Saindhavas and that the earth was strewn with armour, standards and weapons that had fallen down.
In every direction, he saw bodies of elephants, horses and men that had lost their lives. A great and blazing anger
was generated in his body. He stretched his great bow, which was decorated with gold. O king! Radheya glanced at
Bhima with ﬁerce eyes. As he angrily released his arrows, the son of the suta was beautiful, like the rays of the autumn sun when it has attained midday. O king! Adhiratha’s370 body was covered with hundreds of ﬁerce arrows
and it looked like the body of the sun, with all its rays. He picked up arrows in his hand and afﬁxed them. He
stretched his bow and released them. In that battle, no gap could be seen between these. O great king! Karna shot
arrows to the right and to the left and his bow was like a terrible circle of ﬁre. The arrows released from Karna’s
bow were extremely sharp and gold-tufted. O great king! They shrouded the directions and the radiance of the sun.
Those gold-tufted arrows with drooping tufts were released from the bow and were seen to traverse in the sky in
many ways. O kings! The arrows released from the bow of Adhiratha’s son were as beautiful as an array of cranes
in the sky. They were tufted with the feathers of vultures. They were sharpened on stone. They were decorated
with gold and were extremely forceful. Those arrows released by Adhiratha’s son ﬂamed at the tip. They were decorated with gold and were released by the force of the bow. Many such arrows descended towards Partha’s chariot.
There were thousands of them in the sky, decorated with jewels. Those arrows shot by Karna were like a storm of
locusts. As those arrows were continuously released from the bow of Adhiratha’s son, they seemed to form a single long arrow in the sky. Like a cloud pouring down torrents of rain on a mountain, Karna angrily enveloped Bhima with a shower of arrows.
‘“O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Your sons, together with the Kurus, then witnessed Bhima’s strength,
valour and prowess. That shower of arrows created by Karna was like an ocean. But he disregarded it and angrily
attacked him. O lord of the earth! Bhima had a large bow with a golden back. He stretched it in a circle and it
looked like Shakra’s bow. The arrows released from it covered up the sky. Bhima’s arrows were gold-tufted, with
drooping tufts. They were as beautiful as a golden garland that has been created in the sky. That net of arrows that
was spread out in the sky371 was struck and shattered by Bhimasena’s arrows. In that battle, both Karna and Bhimasena created nets of straight-ﬂying arrows that clashed against each other and produced sparks of ﬁre. These
were gold-tufted and covered the sky, as they traversed through it. Disregarding the valour of the great-minded
one, the son of the suta used other arrows to envelope Bhima. O venerable one! Those nets of arrows created there
seemed to be like two storms of wind clashing against each other. Wishing to kill him, Karna used sharp arrows
that had been crafted by artisans and were decorated with gold and angrily shot these. But asking the son of the
suta to wait, Bhima used his own arrows to sever each of these into three fragments in the sky. Once again, Pandava showered down ﬁerce arrows. He was intolerant, powerful and angry. He was like a ﬁre that destroys everything. However, Karna showed no fear and received all these weapons with his own. As he fought with Pandu’s
son, the son of the suta used the maya of his weapons and severed his quivers and his bowstring with arrows that
had drooping tufts. Vaikartana Karna then severed the harnesses of the horses. He killed his horses and pierced his
charioteer with three arrows. Descending, the charioteer swiftly ﬂed towards Yuyudhana’s chariot. Radheya was
angry and his radiance was like the ﬁre at the time of destruction. He smiled and severed Bhima’s standard and
brought down his ﬂag.
‘“O great king! Without a bow, he grasped a spear and angrily hurled it towards Karna’s chariot.372 As that
spear, embellished with gold and like a giant meteor, descended towards him, Adhiratha’s son severed it with ten

arrows. O king! Having been shattered into ten fragments by Karna’s arrows, it fell down. The son of the suta was
wonderful in ﬁghting and was acting for the sake of his friends. Kounteya then grasped a shield that was embellished with gold and a sword, wishing for either death or victory, and advanced suddenly. O great king! But Karna
smiled and severed the shield. He was without a chariot and was senseless with anger. He hurled the sword towards Karna’s chariot. The extremely sharp sword severed the bow and the bowstring of the son of the suta and
then fell down on the ground, like a snake that has fallen from the sky. Adhiratha’s son laughed and wrathfully
took up another bow that was capable of killing enemies in battle and was more ﬁrm and more powerful. The angry Bhimasena was powerful and truth was his valour. He distressed Karna by leaping up into the sky. On witnessing the conduct on the part of the one who wished to be victorious in the battle, Radheya deceived Bhimasena by
hiding. His senses were benumbed and he hid on the ﬂoor of his chariot. On seeing this, he grasped his ﬂagpole
and remained stationed on the ground.373 All the Kurus and the charanas applauded this attempt of snatching Karna from his chariot, like Tarkshya374 grabbing a serpent. His bow was severed and he was without a chariot. But
he was devoted to following his own dharma. Turning his back towards his own chariot, he remained stationed on
the ﬁeld of battle.
‘“Wishing to kill him, Radheya again angrily attacked Pandava, who was waiting to ﬁght in the battle. Those
two immensely strong ones encountered each other and challenged each other in that great arena. They roared like
clouds in the sky at the end of summer. Those two lions among men were excited and enraged. They were intolerant towards each other in the battle, like the gods and the danavas. Though his weapons were exhausted, Kounteya
was attacked by Karna. He saw the elephants that had been slain by Arjuna and they were as large as a mountain.
To create an obstruction in the path of the chariot,375 he entered into their midst. He entered those elephants,
which were difﬁcult for a chariot to penetrate. Wishing to save his own life, Pandava did not strike Radheya. Instead, Partha, the destroyer of enemy cities, raised an elephant that had been killed by Dhananjaya’s arrows and
remained stationed there. However, Karna used his arrows to strike down that elephant. Pandava roared and hurled
the limbs of the elephant towards Karna. He also hurled wheels, horses, mounts and anything else that he could see
on the ground. Pandava grabbed these and angrily hurled them towards Karna. Karna used sharp arrows to sever
everything that was repeatedly hurled at him. However, remembering Kunti’s words, he did not kill him.376 Instead, Karna approached him and touched him with the tip of his bow.
‘“Radheya laughed and repeatedly spoke these words to Bhimasena. ‘Eunuch! Idiot! Glutton! You have no skill
in weapons, but wish to ﬁght with me. You are only a child and become distressed in battle. O Pandava! You
should be where there are many kinds of food and things to eat and drink. O evil-minded one! You should be there
and should never ﬁght. O Bhima! O extremely evil-minded one! You should become a hermit and live on fruit. O
Kounteya! Go to the forest. You have no skills in ﬁghting. You should subsist on fruits and roots and in tending to
guests. O Vrikodara! I do not think that you are ﬁt to raise weapons. You should collect ﬂowers and live on roots
and fruits and attend to vows and rites. O Bhima! You should be in the forest. You are not skilled in ﬁghting. O
son! You should not be in a battle. You should be exiled to the forest. O Vrikodara! In a household, you can only
urge cooks, servants, men and slaves to hasten in their tasks and are capable of reproaching them for the sake of
food.’ O lord of the earth! In harsh words, he also reminded him about all the unpleasant things that were earlier
done to him during his childhood. As he weakly stood there, he again touched him with his bow and laughed. Vrisha again spoke these words to Bhima. ‘Fight with others. Do not ﬁght with the likes of me. Those who ﬁght with
the likes of me have to face this and many other things. Go where the two Krishnas are and they will protect you in
this battle. O Kounteya! Otherwise, go home. O child! Why do you wish to ﬁght?’ O king! Having deprived him of
his chariot, Karna spoke these words to him, in the presence of the lion among the Vrishni lineage and the greatminded Partha.377
‘“O king! The one with the ape on his banner was urged by Keshava and shot arrows that had been sharpened on
stone at the son of the suta. Those arrows released by Partha were embellished with gold. They were shot from the
force of Gandiva and penetrated Karna, like swans into Mount Krouncha. Those arrows released from Gandiva
penetrated like snakes. Dhananjaya drove the son of the suta away from Bhimasena. His bow had been severed by
Bhima and he was afﬂicted by Dhananjaya’s arrows. Karna mounted his giant chariot and quickly ﬂed from Bhi-

ma. Bhima, bull among men, mounted Satyaki’s chariot and followed his brother, Pandava Savyasachi, in that battle. His eyes coppery red in anger, Dhananjaya swiftly dispatched an iron arrow towards Karna and it was like Destroyer urging Death. That iron arrow, released from Gandiva, swiftly sped towards Karna, like Garuda descending
from the sky in search of a supreme serpent. Using his own arrow, Drona’s son severed the iron arrow in the air.
The maharatha wished to free Karna from his fear of Dhananjaya. O great king! Arjuna angrily pierced Drona’s
son with sixty-four arrows that were sharpened on stone. He asked him to wait and not run away. However,
Drona’s son was afﬂicted by Dhananjaya’s arrows. He quickly penetrated an array that was full of crazy elephants
and chariots. In the battle, the powerful Kounteya used the roar of Gandiva to drown the noises of all the other
gold-backed bows. Dhananjaya followed Drona’s son, who had only gone a short distance away, and terriﬁed him
with the strength of his arrows. He mangled the bodies of men, elephants and horses with his iron arrows, which
were tufted with the feathers of herons and peacocks. Arjuna crushed that army. O best of the Bharata lineage!
Partha, the son of the chastiser of Paka, slaughtered that force, with its horses, elephants and men.”’
CHAPTER 1092(115)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! From one day to another, my blazing fame is being destroyed. Many of my warriors have been killed and I think that this is because of destiny. The enraged Dhananjaya has penetrated into my
army. It is protected by Drona and Karna and is incapable of being penetrated by the gods. Krishna and Bhima, the
two with blazing energy, are with him and have increased his valour. There is also the bull among the Shini lineage. Ever since I have heard about his entry, my sorrow is consuming me, like a ﬁre on dry grass. I can see all the
lords of the earth, with Saindhava, being devoured. The king of Sindhu has done an extremely great injury to Kiriti
and if he comes within his sight, how can he escape with his life? O Sanjaya! From the signs, I do not see Saindhava remaining alive. But I am asking you to tell me about how the battle raged. How did the angry one penetrate my
large army single-handed and agitate and trouble it, like an elephant amidst lotuses? Tell me exactly about the battle that the brave one from the Vrishni lineage fought, for Dhananjaya’s sake. O Sanjaya! You are skilled in
narration.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! On seeing that Bhima, foremost among men, was oppressed by Vaikartana in the
midst of those brave men, the foremost of the Shini lineage followed him on his chariot. He roared, like the wielder of the vajra at the end of summer. He blazed, like the sun at the end of the monsoon. With his ﬁrm bow, he killed
the enemies and made the army of your son tremble. The brave one among men fought and roamed around, drawn
on mounts that were silvery in complexion. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! No one among the rathas on your
side was capable of countering the ﬁerce Madhava. Alambusa, foremost among kings, became intolerant.378 He
was clad in golden armour, wielded a bow and arrow and never retreated from the ﬁeld of battle. He attacked
Satyaki, foremost among the Madhava lineage. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The likes of the encounter
between them has never been seen before. All the warriors, on your side and that of the enemy, became spectators
in that clash between those two ornaments of battle. Alambusa, supreme among kings, shot ten arrows at him.
However, the bull among the Shini lineage, struck those arrows down with his own arrows, before they could
reach him. He379 drew his bow back up to his ears and again struck him with three well-tufted and sharp arrows
that were like the ﬁre. These shattered Satyaki’s armour and penetrated his body. Having pierced his body with
those arrows that had the force of the ﬁre and the wind, he again struck his four horses, with the complexion of silver, with four other arrows. Shini’s grandson was as spirited and powerful as the wielder of the chakra himself.380
Though he was struck, he used four forceful arrows to kill Alambusa’s four horses. With a broad-headed arrow, he
severed his charioteer’s head and used other arrows that were like the ﬁre of destruction to sever his too. It381 was
beautiful, with a face like the full moon, and was adorned with earrings. It was severed from the body. O king!
Having killed that son and grandson of a king in that battle, the brave bull among the Madhu lineage tormented
and countered your soldiers and went towards Arjuna. The supreme among the Vrishni lineage was seen to circle
around in the midst of the enemy. As he proceeded, he repeatedly slaughtered the Kuru forces with his arrows, like
the wind dispelling a mass of clouds. He was borne on well-trained and controlled horses from the Sindhu region.

They were as white as cow’s milk, the kunda ﬂower, the moon or snow. They were well-trained horses and had
harnesses that were golden in complexion. They bore the lion among men wherever he desired.
‘“O Ajamidha!382 Your sons united with the other warriors on your side and swiftly attacked him. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! They made your son, Duhshasana, chief among warriors, their leader. In that battle, those
leaders of battle formations surrounded Shini’s descendant from all sides and struck him. The brave one, supreme
among the Satvata lineage, countered them with his net of arrows. Shini’s grandson, the slayer of enemies, used
arrows that were like the ﬁre and quickly countered them. O Ajamidha! He raised his bow and slew Duhshasana’s
mounts.”’
CHAPTER 1093(116)

‘Sanjaya said, “Desiring that Dhananjaya might obtain victory quickly, the mighty-armed one was swiftly advancing towards Duhshasana’s chariot. The great archers from Trigarta, their standards decorated with gold, surrounded
him from all sides and he was immersed in an ocean of soldiers. They surrounded him from all sides with an army
of chariots. They angrily released a storm of arrows towards that supreme archer. But in that great battle, Satyaki,
with truth as his valour, single-handedly defeated ﬁfty enemy princes who had advanced against him. He penetrated the midst of the Bharata soldiers, which resounded with the noise of the slapping of palms. It was like an ocean,
with the many swords, lances and clubs as boats. In that battle, we then witnessed the extraordinary conduct of
Shini’s descendant. We saw him in the western direction and then in the east. We beheld his dexterity. He seemed
to extend in the north, the south, the east and the west. The brave one seemed to be dancing around, as if he was
one hundred rathas alone. On witnessing the conduct of the one whose gait was like that of a brave lion, the Trigartas were tormented and retreated towards their own kin. The brave Shurasenas then strove to counter him in that
battle. They released a storm of arrows on him, like a crazy elephant being urged with a goad. Satyaki took only a
short instant to counter all of them and then began to ﬁght with the Kalingas. His strength and valour were unthinkable. He passed that army of Kalingas, which was incapable of being crossed.
‘“The mighty-armed one then reached Partha Dhananjaya. He was exhausted, like one who has swum through
the waters and has reached land. On seeing that tiger among men, Yuyudhana was reassured. Having seen him approach, Keshava spoke to Arjuna. ‘O Partha! Shini’s descendant is arriving, following in your footsteps. O one
who has truth as his valour! He is your disciple and your friend. The bull among men has conquered all the warriors, regarding them as grass. He has created terrible carnage among the Kourava warriors. O Kiriti! Satyaki is approaching and he is dearer to you than your own life. O Phalguna! Satyaki is approaching and he has used his arrows to crush Drona and Bhoja Kritavarma. He is devoted to ensuring Dharmaraja’s welfare and has killed the
supreme among the best of warriors. O Phalguna! Satyaki is approaching. He is brave and skilled in the use of
weapons. The immensely strong one has performed extremely difﬁcult deeds in the midst of the soldiers. O Pandava! Satyaki is approaching, wishing to see you. He has fought with many maharathas, with the preceptor at the
forefront, on a single chariot. O Partha! Satyaki is arriving. Depending on the strength of his own arms, he has
shattered the army. He has been sent by the son of Dharma. O Partha! Satyaki is approaching. Among the
Kouravas, there is no warrior who is equal to him. O Kounteya! Satyaki, for whom truth is his valour, is arriving.
He has been freed from the Kuru soldiers, like a lion from amidst cattle. He has killed many soldiers. O Partha!
Satyaki is approaching. He has strewn the earth with the faces, as beautiful as lotuses, of a thousand kings. O
Partha! Satyaki is swiftly approaching. He has defeated Duryodhana and his brothers in the battle and has killed
Jalasandha. Satyaki is swiftly arriving. He has created a river of blood, with blood as the mud, and has regarded
the Kouravyas as grass. Satyaki is arriving.’ However, Kounteya was not happy and spoke these words to Keshava. ‘O mighty-armed one! I do not ﬁnd this arrival of Satyaki’s to be pleasant. O Keshava! I do not know about the
state Dharmaraja is in. Without Satvata, I do not know whether he is alive or not. O mighty-armed one! He should
have protected the king. O Krishna! Why has he abandoned him and followed in my footsteps? The king has been
left to Drona and Saindhava has not yet been brought down. In the battle, Bhurishrava is advancing against Shini’s
descendant. A greater burden than that of Saindhava has now been imposed on me. I should ﬁnd out about the king
and I should also protect Satyaki. I must also kill Jayadratha and the sun is low. The mighty-armed one383 is exhausted and he has only a little bit of spirit left. O Madhava! His horses are tired and so is his charioteer. O Kesha-

va! Bhurishrava is not tired and he has aides. How will Satyaki, for whom truth is his valour, be successful in this
encounter? He has crossed an ocean. Will the immensely energetic bull of the Shini lineage now succumb before a
triﬂe?384 He will clash against the great-minded Bhurishrava, who is foremost among the Kurus and is skilled in
the use of weapons. How will Satyaki be safe? O Keshava! I think that Dharmaraja committed an error. He should
not have given up his fear of the preceptor and sent Satyaki. Drona has always sought to seize Dharmaraja, like a
hawk in the sky, in search of meat. Will the king be safe?”’
CHAPTER 1094(117)

‘Sanjaya said, “O king! On seeing that Satvata, invincible in battle, was descending, Bhurishrava became angry
and suddenly attacked him. The mighty-armed Kouravya spoke to the bull among the Shini lineage. ‘It is good fortune that you have arrived within my range of vision today. In this battle today, I will obtain what I have always
desired. Unless you abandon the battle, you will not escape with your life. You have always been proud of your
bravery and I will kill you in today’s encounter. O Dasharha! I will delight Suyodhana, the king of the Kurus. You
will be scorched by my arrows and fall down on the face of the earth today. All the brave ones in the battle will
witness this, together with Keshava and Arjuna. Today, the king who is Dharma’s son will hear that you have been
killed by me. Having sent you, he will today be overcome with shame. Today, Partha Dhananjaya will get to know
about my valour. He will see you slain, lying down on the ground and covered with blood. Today, you will clash
with me and I have always desired this for a long time. In the ancient battle between the gods and the asuras, this
will be like the one between Shakra and Bali. O Satvata! I will grant you an extremely terrible encounter today.
You will get to know the true nature of my valour, strength and manliness. Having been killed by me in the battle,
you will go to Yama’s residence, just as Ravana’s son385 was slain by Lakshmana, Rama’s younger brother. O
Madhava! Today, Krishna, Partha and Dharmaraja will witness your death and there is no doubt that they will lose
all enthusiasm and give up the battle. O Madhava! Today, I will cause your death with sharp arrows and delight the
wives of those who have been killed by you in the battle. O Madhava! Now that you have come within the range of
my vision, you will not escape, like a small deer that has approached a lion.’ O king! Yuyudhana laughed and
replied, ‘O Kouraveya! I am never frightened in a battle. A person who disarms me is the only one who is capable
of killing me in an encounter. He who kills me in battle today, will continue to kill for a long time to come.386
What is the point of talking a lot? Do what you have spoken about. You are as fruitless as the roar of clouds during
the autumn. O brave one! On hearing your roars, laughter is generated in me. O Kourava! In this world, you have
desired this encounter for a long time. Let it commence. O father!387 In my heart, I also wish to ﬁght with you and
let us act swiftly. O wretch among men! I will not retreat without killing you today.’ Those bulls among men castigated each other with those words. Each of them wished to kill the other and in that battle, struck each other in
great anger. Those two tigers among men challenged each other and clashed against each other in the encounter,
striking strongly. They were like crazy and angry elephants, ﬁghting for the sake of a she-elephant.
‘“Bhurishrava and Satyaki, scorchers of enemies, were like clouds and showered down terrible torrents of arrows on each other. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Having shrouded Shini’s descendant with arrows, Somadatta’s son wished to kill him and pierced him with sharp arrows. Somadatta’s son pierced Satyaki with ten arrows and wishing to kill the bull of the Shini lineage, released many other sharp arrows at him. O lord of the earth!
O lord! But before those sharp arrows could reach him, Satyaki used the maya of his weapons to slice them down
in the air. Those two supreme and brave ones, born in noble lineages and the extenders of the fame of the Kurus
and the Vrishnis, brought down separate showers of arrows on each other. They were like tigers ﬁghting with their
claws, or giant elephants with their tusks. They used spears388 and arrows released from bows to mangle each other. They mangled each other’s bodies and made blood ﬂow from the wounds. They confounded each other in a
gambling match in which their lives were the stake. Those two, the extenders of the fame of the Kuru and Vrishni
lineages, fought against each other in this way and performed supreme deeds. They were like the leaders of elephant herds. Placing the world of Brahma in front of them,389 they fought for a long time there, seeking to defeat
each other and kill each other. Satyaki and Somadatta’s son showered down arrows on each other. And these show-

ers delighted the sons of Dhritarashtra, who were looking on. The people who were there also witnessed the ﬁght
between these two supreme warriors. They fought like elephants seeking a she-elephant in the herd.
‘“They slew each other’s horses and severed each other’s bows. Devoid of their chariots in the great battle, they
clashed and fought with swords. They took up large, beautiful and colourful shields made out of the hides of bulls.
They unsheathed their swords and roamed around in that encounter. They traversed various paths and executed circular motions. Those two scorchers of enemies were angry and repeatedly struck each other. They possessed
swords and were clad in colourful armour. They had golden armlets and ornaments. O king! In the battle, they
were intoxicated with the encounter and made thrusts at each other. O Indra among kings! In a short instant, they
tired each other out. While all the soldiers looked on, those brave ones again regained their composure. They severed those large and beautiful shields with the swords. When those were severed, the tigers among men engaged in
a bout of wrestling. They had broad chests and long arms. They were skilled in ﬁghting at close quarters.390 They
attacked each other with arms that were like iron clubs. They struck each other with those arms, grabbed each other and seized each other. They had obtained strength through learning and delighted all the other warriors. O king!
As those supreme men fought on in that battle, a terrible and loud sound arose, as if thunder was striking against a
mountain. They were like elephants goring each other with the tips of their tusks, or giant bulls with their horns.
Those great-souled ones, bulls among the Kuru and Satvata lineages, fought on.
‘“While Satvata was ﬁghting and his weapons were exhausted, Vasudeva spoke to Arjuna. ‘Behold. The foremost among all those who wield the bow is ﬁghting in this encounter, though he is without a chariot. O Pandava!
Following you, he penetrated the army of the Bharatas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!391 The immensely
brave one fought with all the Bharatas. The best of warriors is exhausted and has now confronted
Bhuridakshina,392 who is advancing with a desire to ﬁght. O Arjuna! This is not fair. Bhurishrava is invincible in
battle and is angry with Satyaki.’ O king! Like maddened elephants, those two got ready to kill each other. O king!
Those two foremost among warriors were enraged and rushed against each other in their chariots, while Keshava
and Arjuna were spectators to the encounter. Krishna spoke to the mighty-armed Arjuna. ‘Behold. The tiger of the
Vrishni and Andhaka lineages has succumbed to Somadatta’s son. Having performed an extremely difﬁcult task,
he is now lying down on the ground. O Arjuna! The brave one is tired and you should protect Satyaki. O supreme
among those who slay enemies! Let him not succumb to the performer of sacriﬁces.393 O tiger among men! O
lord! Quickly do what must be done.’ Having been thus addressed by Vasudeva, Dhananjaya cheerfully replied,
‘Look. The brave one among the Vrishnis and the bull of the Kuru lineage are sporting. They are like giant and
crazy elephants in the forest, playing with herds of lions.’
‘“O bull among the Bharata lineage! At that time, a giant lamentation arose among the soldiers. The mightyarmed one394 struck and brought Satyaki down on the ground. Bhuridakshina, the best of the Kurus, dragged the
foremost of the Satvata lineage, like a lion dragging an elephant and looked beautiful in the battle. In that encounter, Bhurishrava unsheathed his sword and grasping him by the hair, struck him in the chest with his foot. O
king! On seeing that Satvata was thus being dragged in the battle, Vasudeva again spoke to Arjuna. ‘Behold. The
tiger among the Vrishnis and the Andhakas has succumbed to Somadatta’s son. O mighty-armed one! He is your
student and he is not inferior to you in archery. O Partha! Truth is Satyaki’s valour. But in this battle, Varshneya’s
valour has been rendered false by Bhurishrava.’ Having been thus addressed by Vasudeva in the battle, the mightyarmed Pandava mentally worshipped Bhurishrava and said, ‘I am glad that the extender of the deeds of the Kuru
lineage is only dragging the best of the Satvata lineage in this battle and sporting with him. He has not killed
Satyaki, the foremost among the brave ones of the Vrishni lineage. He is dragging him, like the king of deer dragging a giant elephant in the forest.’ O king! Having thus worshipped Kourava in his mind, the mighty-armed
Partha Arjuna replied to Vasudeva, ‘O Madhava! Since my sight was ﬁxed on Saindhava, I did not see anything
else. For the sake of the Yadava, I will perform an extremely difﬁcult task.’ Having spoken these words to Vasudeva, Pandava used an arrow to sever the arm, which held the sword, of the one who was devoted to sacriﬁces.”’395
CHAPTER 1095(118)

‘Sanjaya said, “The arm, with the sword and with a beautiful armlet, fell down on the ground and this caused
supreme grief in the world of living beings. Kiriti severed the arm while he was still unseen and it fell down on the
ground with great force, like a ﬁve-headed serpent. Having seen that he had been rendered unsuccessful by Partha,
Kourava let go of Satyaki and angrily censured Pandava. ‘O Kounteya! You have performed an extremely cruel
deed. While unseen by me and without engaging with me, you have severed my arm. What will you tell King Yudhishthira, the son of dharma? “I killed Bhurishrava in the battle, though he was not ﬁghting with me.” Is this what
the great-minded Indra instructed you himself? O Partha! Are these the weapons you learnt from Rudra, Drona and
Kripa? It is said that you know more about dharma than anyone else in this world. How did you strike someone
who was not engaged with you in battle? Learned ones do not strike someone who is distracted, frightened and
without a chariot, or someone who seeks mercy or confronts a hardship. This is inferior conduct and is practised by
men who are wicked. O Partha! How did you then perpetrate this extremely difﬁcult deed? O Dhananjaya! Noble
ones can easily perform deeds that are noble. But on this earth, noble ones ﬁnd it extremely difﬁcult to perform an
ignoble act. O Partha! Men quickly pick up the deeds and conduct of those they consort with. This can be seen in
you. You have been born in a lineage of kings and in particular, you are a Kouraveya. You were good in conduct
and observed good vows. How could you have transgressed the dharma of kshatriyas? You have performed this
wicked deed for the sake of Varshneya.396 This is no doubt because of Vasudeva’s counsel, though this is not worthy of you. Other than someone who is Krishna’s friend, which person can inﬂict such a hardship on someone who
is distracted and is ﬁghting with another person? The Vrishnis and the Andhakas are vile.397 They are naturally
addicted to deeds that should be censured. O Partha! Why have you accepted them as a model?’ Having thus spoken, the mighty-armed and immensely illustrious one, who had a sacriﬁcial altar on his banner, abandoned Satyaki
in the battle. He decided to fast to death.398 The one with auspicious signs spread a bed of arrows with his left
hand. He wished to go to Brahma’s world and offered his breath of life to the lord of the senses as an oblation. He
ﬁxed his eye on the sun and his mind on pure water. He meditated on the great Upanishad and united with yoga,
became silent.
‘“All the soldiers and all the men censured Krishna and Dhananjaya and applauded that bull among men.
Though censured, the two Krishnas did not say anything unpleasant in reply. Though praised, the one with the sacriﬁcial altar on his standard, was not pleased either. O king! Dhananjaya could not mentally tolerate that your sons
should have uttered such words and spoke to them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! His words were not angry, but he wished to remind them. Phalguna, Pandu’s son, spoke these words. ‘All the kings know about my great
vow. No one who is within the range of my arrows will be able to kill anyone on our side. O one with the sacriﬁcial altar on your banner! Knowing this, you should not censure me. Without knowing about the nature of dharma,
one should not censure someone else. You possessed weapons and you were about to kill the brave one from the
Vrishni lineage in the battle. If I have severed your arm then, that is not against dharma. O father!399 Which virtuous one will not condemn the slaughter of Abhimanyu, when he was without a weapon, without a chariot and without armour? He was only a child.’ Thus addressed by Partha, he400 touched the ground with his head. With his left
arm, he offered his severed right arm. O great king! Having heard Partha’s words, the immensely radiant one, with
the sacriﬁcial altar on his standard, remained silent and hung his head down. Arjuna said, ‘O Shala’s elder
brother!401 The affection that I bear towards you is the same as the one I bear towards Dharmaraja, Bhima, Nakula, supreme among eloquent ones, and Sahadeva. Having taken my leave and also that of the great-souled Krishna,
go to the sacred worlds, where Shibi, the son of Ushinara, is.’402 Having been freed by Somadatta’s son, Shini’s
descendant arose.
‘“Desiring to sever the head of the great-souled one, he grasped his sword. Bhuridakshina, Shala’s elder brother,
had already been slain by Pandu’s son and was distracted. Satyaki wished to kill such an unblemished one. He was
seated with his arm lopped off, like an elephant with a severed trunk. All the soldiers censured the extremely evilminded one loudly. He was restrained by Krishna, the great-souled Partha, Bhima, the two protectors of the chariot
wheels,403 Ashvatthama, Kripa, Karna, Vrishasena and Saindhava. The soldiers loudly asked him not to kill the
one who was devoted to his vows. However, Satyaki severed the head of the Indra among the Kouravas with his
sword, though his arm had been severed in the battle by Partha and he was fasting to death. The soldiers did not

applaud Satyaki’s deed. The extender of the Kuru lineage had already been slain by Arjuna. The siddhas, the charanas and men saw Bhurishrava, who was an equal of the thousand-eyed one, being killed in the battle, though he
was fasting to death. Amazed at his deeds, the gods honoured him. The soldiers also took sides and debated in
many ways. ‘This is not Varshneya’s crime. This is destiny. Therefore, we should not fall prey to anger. Anger
causes misery for men. It was destined that the brave one would be killed and it is not for us to debate this. The
creator has ordained that in this battle, he will meet his death through Satyaki.’
‘“Satyaki said, ‘You tell me that one should not kill someone who should not be killed. You speak about dharma
and seem to be established in dharma. You wear the garments of dharma. Subhadra’s son was a child. He was
bereft of weapons. When you slew him in the battle, where was your dharma then? At some time, I had insolently
taken a pledge. While I was still alive, if someone ﬂung me down in battle and kicked me with his feet in anger, I
would slay that enemy, even if he were to adopt the vow of a sage. O ones with limited intelligence! I was struggling to counter him, with my arms and eyes intact. But you thought that I was already dead. O bulls among the
Kurus! It is very proper that I should have countered him in this way. Out of affection towards me, Partha protected his pledge.404 But having severed his arm with the sword, he has deprived me. That which is ordained will
happen. Destiny works in this way. He has been killed while he was ﬁghting. What adharma has been committed
by me? In ancient times, Valmiki sung this shloka on earth. “Men must always act so as to cause pain to their enemies.”’”
‘Sanjaya said, “O great king! When he had spoken in this way, no one among the Kouravas and the Pandavas
said anything. They worshipped him405 in their minds. He was sanctiﬁed with mantras. He was great in granting
boons. He was illustrious. He had given away thousands of donations. He was like a sage who had gone to the forest. No one was happy at his death. He had dark blue eyes. He was a benefactor. He was brave. His eyes were red,
like those of a pigeon. His head was severed, like that of a horse at a sacriﬁce and was then placed at the spot for
oblations. In the great battle, his energy sanctiﬁed the weapon that had severed his head. He was the granter of
boons. He was the recipient of boons. Because of his supreme dharma, he ﬁlled heaven and earth406 and ascended
above.”’
CHAPTER 1096(119)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “He was undefeated by Drona, Radheya, Vikarna and Kritavarma. Fulﬁlling his promise to
Yudhishthira, the brave one passed through that ocean of soldiers. How was he checked and humiliated in the battle by Kouraveya Bhurishrava and forcibly thrown down by him on the ground?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! Listen to the ancient account about the origin of Shini’s descendant and also that of
Bhurishrava. O king! You are uncertain on that account. Atri had a son named Soma and Soma’s son was known as
Budha. Budha had a single son named Pururava and his splendour was like that of the great Indra. Pururava’s son
was Ayu and Ayu’s son was known as Nahusha. Nahusha’s son was Yayati, revered by the gods as a rajarshi.
Through Devayani, Yayati had an eldest son named Yadu. A son named Devamidha was born in Yadu’s lineage.
His son Shura was born in the Yadava lineage and was honoured in the three worlds. Shura’s descendant was the
immensely illustrious Shouri407 Vasudeva, foremost among men. Shura was a supreme archer and was equal to
Kartavirya408 in battle. In his lineage, and equal to him in valour, was born a king named Shini. O king! At this
time, a svayamvara was organized for the great-minded Devaka’s daughter.409 All the kshatriyas assembled there.
Wishing to obtain her for Vasudeva, he410 defeated all the kings there and placed the princess Devaki on his chariot. O king! On seeing Devaki on Shouri Shini’s chariot, the immensely energetic Somadatta, bull among men,
could not tolerate this. O king! There was a wonderful and extraordinary battle between them and it lasted for half
a day. Those two extremely strong ones engaged in a wrestling match, like that between Shakra and Prahlada. Somadatta was forcibly thrown down on the ground by Shini. He411 raised his sword, grasped him by the hair and
kicked him with the foot, in the midst of thousands of kings who looked on in every direction. Then, overcome by
compassion, he let him go and said, ‘Live.’ O venerable one! Having been reduced to that state, Somadatta was
overcome by intolerance and sought the favours of Mahadeva. The lord Mahadeva, supreme among the granters of

boons, was satisﬁed. He wished to gratify him with a boon and the king asked for the following boon. ‘O lord! I
ask for a son who will strike down Shini’s descendant in the midst of thousands of kings and kick him with the
foot in a battle.’ Having heard the words of King Somadatta, the god agreed that it would be this way and disappeared. It was because of the boon that he obtained Bhuridakshina, and Somadatta’s son brought down Shini’s descendant in the battle. O king! I have told you what you asked me. Satvata, bull among men, cannot be vanquished
in an encounter.
‘“The Vrishnis are successful in attaining their objective in battle. They ﬁght in diverse colourful ways. They
can even defeat the gods, the danavas and the gandharvas. They obtain victory through their own valour and do not
have to depend on the help of others. O lord! O bull among the Bharata lineage! No one equal to them in strength
can be seen. There is no one like that. There has been no one like that. Nor will there be anyone like that. They do
not disrespect their kin and are devoted to the commands of the elders. In a battle, the gods, the asuras, the gandharvas, the yakshas, the serpents and the rakshasas cannot vanquish the brave ones of the Vrishni lineage, not to
speak of men. They do not covet the possessions of brahmanas, the possessions of their elders or the possessions of
their kin. They never covet the possessions of those who have protected them in times of distress. Though prosperous, they are not excessively attached.412 They are devoted to brahmanas and are truthful in speech. They regard
even the strong as weak and save them. They are always devoted to the gods. They are self-controlled, generous
and free from insolence. It is because of this that the foremost ones among the Vrishnis can never be thwarted. O
king! One can bear Mount Meru or swim across the abode of makaras, but one cannot stand up in an encounter
with the foremost among the Vrishnis. O lord! I have told you everything that you had doubts about. O king of the
Kurus! O best of men! All this is because of your grave errors.”’
CHAPTER 1097(120)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O Sanjaya! In that situation, after Kourava Bhurishrava had been killed, how did the battle
proceed? Tell me that.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After Bhurishrava had left for the world of the hereafter,
mighty-armed Arjuna urged Vasudeva. ‘O Krishna! Urge the horses speedily to where King Jayadratha is. O
mighty-armed one! The sun is hanging low, towards Mount Asta.413 O tiger among men! An extremely great task
has been undertaken by me. But he is protected by maharathas among the Kuru soldiers. O Krishna! Urge the horses so that I am able to kill Jayadratha before the sun sets and am able to make my words come true.’ At this, the
mighty-armed Krishna, who was skilled about horses, goaded the horses, with complexions of silver, towards
Jayadratha’s chariot. As they left, he414 shot swift arrows that always found their mark. O great king! The foremost among the soldiers attacked swiftly—Duryodhana, Karna, Vrishasena, the king of Madra, Ashvatthama, Kripa and Saindhava himself. Having encountered and stationed himself before Saindhava, Bibhatsu glanced at him
with eyes that blazed with rage and seemed to burn him down with his sight.
‘“On seeing Arjuna advance and glance towards Jayadratha’s chariot, King Duryodhana quickly spoke to Radheya. ‘O Vaikartana! This is the time for battle. O great-souled one! Exhibit your valour now. O Karna! Act so that
Arjuna cannot kill Jayadratha in the battle. O brave one among men! There is only a little bit of the day left. Strike
the enemy with torrents of arrows. O foremost among men! O Karna! Once the day is over, it is certain that victory
will be ours. If Saindhava can be protected until the time when the sun sets, Kounteya’s pledge will be falsiﬁed and
he will enter the ﬁre. O one who grants honours! Without Arjuna on this earth, his brothers and their followers will
have no interest in remaining alive, even for an instant. O Karna! When the Pandaveyas are destroyed, we will enjoy the entire earth, with its mountains, forests and groves, bereft of thorns. O one who grants honours! It seems
that destiny is against Partha. Without knowing about what should be done and what should not be done, he has
taken a pledge in this battle. O Karna! There is no doubt that Kiriti Pandava has taken this vow about killing
Jayadratha for the sake of his own destruction. O Radheya! When an invincible one like you is alive, how will
Phalguna be able to kill King Saindhava before the sun has set? He is protected by the king of Madra and the
great-souled Kripa. How will Dhananjaya be able to kill Jayadratha in the forefront of the battle? He is protected
by Drona’s son, me and Duhshasana. Driven by destiny, how will Bibhatsu be able to approach Saindhava? There

are many brave ones who are ﬁghting and the sun is hanging low. O one who grants honours! There is no doubt
that Partha will not be able to approach Jayadratha. O Karna! With me and the other brave maharathas, ﬁght
against Partha in the battle and carefully make supreme efforts.’ O venerable one! Having been thus addressed by
your son, Radheya spoke these words to Duryodhana, supreme among the Kuru lineage. ‘The brave archer Bhimasena is ﬁrm in his aim. In the battle, he has wounded me grievously with many nets of arrows. O one who
grants honours! I have nevertheless been stationed in this battle. There is not a single limb of mine that has not
been tormented by arrows in the encounter. O king! I will however ﬁght in this battle, to the utmost of my capacity,
so that the foremost among the Pandavas cannot kill Saindhava. As long as I am ﬁghting and am shooting my
sharp arrows, the brave Savyasachi Dhananjaya will not be able to obtain Saindhava. O Kouravya! I will do everything that a strong person, always devoted to your welfare, can do. Victory depends on destiny. O best among the
Kuru lineage! Today, all the beings will witness the terrible battle between me and Partha and it will make the
body hair stand up.’ While Karna and Kouraveya were thus conversing on the ﬁeld of battle, Arjuna struck your
army with sharp arrows.
‘“With sharp arrows that were pointed at the tip, in that battle, he severed the arms of the brave ones who would
not retreat. They415 were like clubs and like the trunks of elephants. The mighty-armed one severed heads with
his sharp arrows. The trunks of elephants, the necks of horses and the wheels of chariots were strewn around.
Horse-riders, with lances and spears, were steeped in blood. Bibhatsu sliced them down into two and three pieces
with his razor-sharp arrows. Thousands of supreme horses and elephants fell down. There were standards, umbrellas, bows, whisks and heads. He consumed your army, like a rising ﬁre against dry wood. Partha soon caused the
earth to be covered with blood. The mighty one killed many warriors in your army. The invincible one, with truth
as his valour, approached Saindhava. Bibhatsu was protected by Bhimasena and Satvata. O best of the Bharata lineage! He was as resplendent as a blazing ﬁre. On seeing Phalguna stationed there, those on your side who were
great archers and honoured as brave ones, bulls among men, could not tolerate this.
‘“Duryodhana, Karna, Vrishasena, the king of Madra, Ashvatthama, Kripa and Saindhava himself were enraged.
For Saindhava’s sake, they surrounded Kiriti from all sides. He seemed to be dancing around along the path of his
chariot, with a roar from his bowstring and from the clapping of arms. But all of them were skilled in ﬁghting and
fearlessly surrounded Partha, who was skilled in war and was like Death with a gaping mouth. They placed Saindhava behind them and wished to kill Arjuna and Achyuta. The sun had a reddish tint and they desired that it might
set fast. They stretched their bows with their arms and released hundreds of arrows, which were like serpents and
the sun’s rays, towards Phalguna. In that battle, Kiriti, invincible in battle, struck them and severed them416 into
two, three and eight fragments.
‘“The one with the lion’s tail on his standard417 then displayed his own strength. O king! The son of Sharadvata’s daughter countered Arjuna.418 He pierced Partha with ten arrows and Vasudeva with seven. He remained stationed in the path of the chariot419 and protected Saindhava. All the other maharathas, foremost among the
Kouravas, surrounded him from every side with a great array of chariots. They stretched their bows and released
arrows. On the instructions of your son, they sought to protect Saindhava. The strength of Partha’s arms, the inexhaustible arrows420 and the bow Gandiva were then seen. He repulsed all the arrows of Drona’s son and Sharadvata’s son421 and struck all of them with nine arrows each. Drona’s son pierced him with twenty-ﬁve arrows, Vrishasena with seven, Duryodhana with twenty and Karna and Shalya with three each. They roared and pierced him
repeatedly. They brandished their bows and surrounded him from all sides. They quickly drew their chariots in a
circle all around him. The maharathas desired that the sun might set fast. They roared and brandished their bows.
They covered him with sharp arrows, like clouds pouring rain on the slope of a mountain. O king! Those brave
ones, with arms like clubs, showed their great and divine weapons and released them on Dhananjaya’s body. The
powerful one killed many warriors in your army. The invincible one, with truth as his valour, approached
Saindhava.
‘“O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, while Bhimasena and Satvata looked on, Karna
countered him with arrows. But in that encounter, while all the soldiers looked on, the mighty-armed Partha
pierced the son of the suta back with ten arrows. O venerable one! Satvata pierced Karna with three arrows, Bhi-

masena with three and Partha again pierced him with seven arrows. Maharatha Karna pierced each of them back
with sixty arrows. O king! That encounter between Karna and many was extraordinary. O venerable one! We witnessed the son of the suta’s wonderful act, since he single-handedly and angrily countered three rathas. In that battle, the mighty-armed Phalguna struck Vaikartana Karna with one hundred arrows that penetrated all the inner organs. The powerful son of a suta had blood ﬂowing from all his limbs. However, the brave one pierced Phalguna
back with ﬁfty arrows. On witnessing his dexterity in battle, Arjuna could not tolerate it. The brave Partha Dhananjaya severed his bow and quickly struck him between the breasts with nine arrows. It was a time when speed was
of the essence. Wishing to kill him in the battle, Dhananjaya then quickly shot an arrow that was as radiant as the
sun. But as that arrow descended forcefully, Drona’s son severed it with a sharp arrow that was in the shape of a
half-moon. Severed, it fell down on the ground. The powerful son of the suta then took up another bow. Wishing to
kill his enemy and perform deeds that would counter his, Karna enveloped Phalguna with many thousands of arrows. Those maharathas, lions among men, roared like bulls. They covered the sky with straight-ﬂying arrows.
Wishing to strike each other, they became invisible because of that storm of arrows. ‘I am Partha. Stay there. I am
Partha. O Phalguna! Stay there.’ They roared and tormented each other with these words as stakes. Those brave
ones fought colourfully in that battle, showing dexterity and skill. All the warriors became spectators to this encounter. O great king! Wishing to kill each other in the battle, they fought on and were praised by the siddhas, the
charanas and other applauders.
‘“O king! Duryodhana addressed those on your side. ‘Make efforts to protect Radheya. Vrisha Radheya has told
me that he will not retreat without killing Arjuna in this battle.’ O king! At this time, on witnessing Karna’s valour,
he422 drew his bow back up to his ears and dispatched Karna’s four horses to the land of the dead with four
supreme arrows. With another broad-headed arrow, he brought down his charioteer from the seat of the chariot.
While your son looked on, he covered him with arrows. In that encounter, he423 was thus shrouded. His horses
were slain. His charioteer was killed. Confounded by that net of arrows, he did not know what he should do. O
great king! On seeing that he was without a chariot, Ashvatthama took him on his own chariot and continued to
ﬁght with Arjuna. The king of Madra pierced Kounteya with thirty arrows. Sharadvata’s son struck Vasudeva with
twenty and struck Dhananjaya with twelve arrows that had been sharpened on stone. O great king! The king of
Sindhu struck Krishna and Partha separately with four arrows and Vrishasena struck them separately with seven. In
that fashion, Kunti’s son, Dhananjaya, pierced them back. He pierced Drona’s son with sixty-four and the king of
Madra with one hundred. He struck Saindhava with ten broad-headed arrows and Vrishasena with three arrows.
Partha struck Sharadvata’s son with twenty arrows and roared. Desiring to render Savyasachi’s pledge unsuccessful, all those on your side united and quickly attacked Dhananjaya. At this, Arjuna used a weapon that was sharp
on all sides and created terror among the sons of Dhritarashtra. The Kurus were on extremely expensive chariots.
They advanced against Pandu’s son and showered down torrents of arrows.
‘“O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A tumultuous and extremely terrible encounter commenced and it caused
confusion. But the prince,424 with a diadem and a garland, did not lose his senses and continued to shoot arrows.
Desiring the kingdom and remembering the twelve years of hardship suffered because of the Kurus, the greatsouled and immeasurable Savyasachi released arrows from Gandiva and covered all the directions. The sky
seemed to be covered with ﬂaming meteors. Many crows descended on the dead bodies. The one with the diadem
and the garland angrily killed his enemies, like the one with the tawny bowstring using Ajagava.425 The great one
with the diadem and the garland was immensely illustrious. With his bow and arrows, he was the conqueror of
armies. With his arrows, he brought down the brave ones among the Kurus, astride their supreme horses and elephants. In that encounter, many kings picked up heavy clubs, iron bludgeons, swords and spears. They grasped
those large weapons and assuming ﬁerce forms, suddenly attacked Partha. But the great archer destroyed them,
with their chariots, horses, elephants and masses of foot soldiers. In that encounter, the brave one deprived them of
their weapons and their lives and extended Yama’s kingdom.”’
CHAPTER 1098(121)

‘Sanjaya said, “Dhananjaya was seen to roam around in that battle and he seemed to be simultaneously everywhere. He exhibited his wonderful weapons. He was like the midday sun, scorching everything from the sky. None
of the beings were capable of glancing at Pandava. A torrent of arrows issued from the great-souled one’s Gandiva.
In that battle, they seemed to be like an array of swans in the sky. He countered all those brave ones with his
weapons. Through his ﬁerce deeds, he exhibited his terrible self. O king! Arjuna passed all those rathas and confounded them with his iron arrows, wishing to kill Jayadratha. With his charioteer, Dhananjaya was seen to swiftly
course around in that ﬁeld of battle, releasing arrows in all the directions. Hundreds and thousands of arrows were
shot by the brave and great-souled one and these torrents traversed the sky and made it invisible. The great archer
picked up an arrow, afﬁxed it and shot it. But we did not notice any gap between Kounteya Pandava doing these. O
king! Having covered all the directions and having afﬂicted all the rathas in that battle, Kounteya attacked
Jayadratha. He pierced him with sixty-four arrows with straight tufts. Saindhava was thus pierced by arrows shot
by the wielder of Gandiva. He became extremely enraged, like an elephant struck by a goad, and could not tolerate
this. The one with the boar on his banner426 used arrows that were tufted with the feathers of vultures. They were
like venomous serpents and had been prepared by artisans. In that battle, he released these sharp arrows towards
Savyasachi. He pierced Gandiva with three arrows and struck Arjuna with six iron arrows. He pierced his horses
with eight arrows and his standard with one. Arjuna countered the arrows shot by Saindhava with his own sharp
arrows. Simultaneously, with a couple of arrows, he severed the head of Saindhava’s charioteer from his body and
brought down the well-ornamented standard. The king of Sindhu’s standard was marked with the sign of a boar
and was extremely large. Its pole was broken and it was shattered by those arrows. It fell down, like a ﬁery ﬂame.
‘“Meanwhile, the sun was descending quickly. Janardana hastily spoke to Pandava. ‘O Dhananjaya! Cut off the
head of the evil-souled Saindhava. The sun is about to set on Asta, the best of mountains. But listen to the words I
have to say about killing Jayadratha. Saindhava’s father, Vriddhakshatra, is famous in the world. He obtained
Jayadratha Saindhava, the scorcher of enemies, as his son after a long period of time and an invisible voice, with a
rumbling tone like that of the clouds, spoke to the king then. “O lord! In this world, your son will possess lineage,
conduct and qualities that are equal to those of two lineages.427 He will be foremost among kshatriyas in the
world and will be revered by brave ones. But when he is ﬁghting against an enemy in a battle, that enemy archer,
famous on earth, will sever his head.” Having heard this, the king of Sindhu, the scorcher of enemies, reﬂected for
a long time. Afﬂicted by affection towards his son, he summoned all his relatives and told them, “The person who
ﬁghts with my son in an encounter and brings his head down on the ground will bear a great burden. There is no
doubt that his head will shatter into a hundred fragments.” Having said this, he established Jayadratha on the
throne. Vriddhakshatra went to the forest and immersed himself in austerities. The energetic one is still tormenting
himself with terrible and extremely difﬁcult austerities. O one with the ape on your banner! He is just outside
Samantapanchaka.428 O slayer of enemies! Therefore, once you have severed Jayadratha’s head in this great battle, use your divine weapons that are terrible and perform wonderful deeds. O younger brother of the son of the
wind god! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With its earrings, quickly convey the head of the king of Sindhu to
Vriddhakshatra’s lap and bring it down there. If you bring his head down on the ground, there is no doubt about the
consequence that your head will shatter into a hundred fragments. O best of the Kurus! Resort to your divine
weapons and do this, so that the king,429 the lord of the earth, does not know. O son of Vasava! There is no deed
in the three worlds that you cannot perform.’ Having heard these words, he430 licked the corners of his mouth.
‘“He used mantras to invoke a divine weapon that was like Indra’s vajra to the touch. He used an arrow that was
capable of bearing a great load and had always been worshipped with fragrances and garlands. To bring about
Jayadratha’s death, Arjuna quickly released it. Released from Gandiva, that arrow was as swift as a hawk snatching a bird from the top of a tree. It severed Saindhava’s head. With other arrows, Dhananjaya bore it up again,431
thus causing grief to his ill-wishers and delight to his well-wishers. At that time, Pandava made the head look like
a kadamba ﬂower and used arrows to convey it to Samantapanchaka. O venerable one! The energetic King Vriddhakshatra, with whom you have a matrimonial alliance,432 was engaged in his evening prayers then. He was
seated. The head of the king of Sindhu, with dark hair and earrings, was thrown down on his lap. The head, with its
beautiful earrings, was brought down on his lap. O scorcher of enemies! But King Vriddhakshatra did not notice it.

When the intelligent Vriddhakshatra stood up, after having ﬁnished his meditation, the head was suddenly ﬂung
down on the ground. O scorcher of enemies! As soon as his son’s head fell down on the ground, the king’s head
shattered into a hundred fragments. At this, all the beings were overcome by supreme wonder. All of them praised
Vasudeva and maharatha Bibhatsu.
‘“On seeing that Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, had been killed, your sons were miserable and their eyes ﬁlled
with tears. So that Pandava433 might know, in that battle, Bhimasena roared loudly like a lion and ﬁlled up heaven
and earth.434 On hearing that loud roar, Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, understood that Saindhava had been killed by
the great-souled Phalguna. He sounded musical instruments and delighted his warriors. Wishing to ﬁght, he advanced in the battle against Bharadvaja’s son. O king! After the sun had set, a battle commenced between Drona
and the Somakas and it made the body hair stand up. O king! After Saindhava was slain, those maharathas made
every effort to kill Bharadvaja’s son. When Saindhava was slain, the Pandavas obtained victory. Intoxicated with
victory, they fought with Drona. O great king! Having killed King Saindhava, in that encounter, Arjuna also fought
with the supreme of rathas and warriors on your side. The one with the diadem and the garland was like the king of
the gods, ﬁghting with the enemies of the gods and slaughtered them, like the rising sun destroying darkness. The
brave one fulﬁlled the pledge he had taken earlier.”’

Section Seventy
Ghatotkacha-Vadha Parva
This parva has 1642 shlokas and thirty-three chapters.
Chapter 1099(122): 88 shlokas
Chapter 1100(123): 41 shlokas
Chapter 1101(124): 33 shlokas
Chapter 1102(125): 33 shlokas
Chapter 1103(126): 39 shlokas
Chapter 1104(127): 26 shlokas
Chapter 1105(128): 34 shlokas
Chapter 1106(129): 35 shlokas
Chapter 1107(130): 40 shlokas
Chapter 1108(131): 135 shlokas
Chapter 1109(132): 42 shlokas
Chapter 1110(133): 64 shlokas
Chapter 1111(134): 81 shlokas
Chapter 1112(135): 54 shlokas
Chapter 1113(136): 19 shlokas
Chapter 1114(137): 51 shlokas
Chapter 1115(138): 34 shlokas
Chapter 1116(139): 33 shlokas
Chapter 1117(140): 41 shlokas
Chapter 1118(141): 61 shlokas
Chapter 1119(142): 44 shlokas
Chapter 1120(143): 42 shlokas
Chapter 1121(144): 42 shlokas
Chapter 1122(145): 68 shlokas
Chapter 1123(146): 51 shlokas
Chapter 1124(147): 38 shlokas
Chapter 1125(148): 62 shlokas
Chapter 1126(149): 37 shlokas
Chapter 1127(150): 103 shlokas
Chapter 1128(151): 21 shlokas
Chapter 1129(152): 47 shlokas
Chapter 1130(153): 40 shlokas
Chapter 1131(154): 63 shlokas
This section is named after the death or killing of Ghatotkacha by Karna. When Jayadratha is killed on the fourteenth day of the war, the battle continues to rage through the night. Drona kills King Shibi of Kashi, Bhima kills the princes of Kalinga and some of Duryodhana’s brothers, Ashvatthama kills Anjanaparva (Ghatotkacha’s son) and several warriors on the Pandava side, Bhima kills Bahlika, Karna’s brother and
Shakuni’s brothers, Ashvatthama kills many Panchalas, Satyaki kills Somadatta and Bhuri, Shalya kills Shatanika (Virata’s brother), Dhrishtadyumna kills Drumasena, Ghatotkacha kills Alambala (Jatasura’s son) and the rakshasa Alayudha and ﬁnally, Karna kills Ghatotkacha
with the spear that he has saved for Arjuna.
CHAPTER 1099(122)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O Sanjaya! After the brave Saindhava was killed by Savyasachi, what did those on my side
do? Tell me that.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O venerable one! On seeing that Saindhava had been killed in the battle by Partha, Kripa,
Sharadvata’s son, was overcome by great intolerance. He covered Pandava with a great shower of arrows. Drona’s
son also stationed himself on his chariot and attacked Partha Phalguna. Those two best of rathas were stationed on
two chariots that were supreme among chariots. They showered down sharp arrows from both sides. The mightyarmed one, supreme among rathas, was afﬂicted by that great shower of arrows and felt extreme pain. But in that

battle, he did not wish to slay his preceptor or his preceptor’s son.1 Kunti’s son, Dhananjaya, then began to act like
a preceptor there.2 He countered the weapons of Drona’s son and Sharadvata’s son with his weapons. However,
since he did not wish to kill them, he released arrows at them that were only mild in speed. But though he did not
shoot them powerfully, the many arrows shot by Jaya caused supreme difﬁculties and they were overcome by
those arrows. O king! Oppressed by Kounteya’s arrows, Sharadvata’s son sat down on the ﬂoor of his chariot and
lost his consciousness. On seeing that his master was unconscious and was afﬂicted by arrows, his charioteer
thought that he was dead and bore him away. O great king! After Kripa, Sharadvata’s son, had been taken away
from the ﬁeld of battle, Ashvatthama also took to his chariot and ﬂed from Pandaveya.
‘“Seeing that Sharadvata’s son was unconscious and afﬂicted by arrows, the great archer, Partha, lamented miserably on his chariot. ‘The immensely wise Kshatta3 had foreseen this and had spoken to the king, as soon as the
wicked Suyodhana, the exterminator of his lineage, was born. “Let this destroyer of the lineage be conveyed to the
world of the hereafter. Because of him, the foremost ones of the Kuru lineage will confront a great calamity.”
Those words, spoken by the one who tells the truth, have come true. It is because of his deeds that I see Kripa lying on a bed of arrows. Shame on the dharma of kshatriyas! Shame on strength and manliness! Is there anyone like
me, raising his weapons against a brahmana, especially one who is a preceptor? He is the son of a rishi. He is the
beloved friend of my preceptor, Drona. He is lying down on the ﬂoor of his chariot, afﬂicted by my arrows.
Though I did not desire it, my arrows have severely wounded him. He has sunk down on the ﬂoor of his chariot
and this causes pain to my heart. Even though he afﬂicted me with arrows, I should only have looked at that immensely radiant one.4 Struck by my numerous arrows, he has attained the state that everyone must duly obtain.5 I
am overcome by greater sorrow than from the death of my son. O Krishna! Behold the miserable state he has been
reduced to on his chariot. Those bulls among men, who obtain knowledge from their preceptors, and then give
them what they desire, attain divinity. But the worst of men, who obtain knowledge from their preceptors, and then
strike them, are of evil conduct and go to hell. There is no doubt that my deed today will take me to hell, since my
preceptor, Kripa, was on his chariot and I have covered him with arrows. When he had instructed me about
weapons earlier, Kripa had said, “O Kouravya! Do not ever strike your preceptor.” I have not obeyed the words of
my great-souled preceptor. I have struck him with a shower of arrows. I bow down and worship Goutama, who
does not retreat. O Varshneya! Shame on me for having struck him.’ While Savyasachi was thus lamenting, Radheya saw that Saindhava had been killed and attacked him.
‘“On seeing that Radheya was advancing, maharatha Partha laughed and spoke these words to Devaki’s son.6
‘Adhiratha’s son is advancing towards Satyaki’s chariot. There is no doubt that he cannot tolerate Bhurishrava’s
death in the battle. O Janardana! Urge the horses towards the spot where he is going. Let not Vrisha make Satyaki
follow in the footsteps of Somadatta’s son.’ Having been thus addressed by Savyasachi, the mighty-armed and immensely energetic Keshava spoke words that were appropriate to the occasion. ‘O Pandava! The mighty-armed one
is alone enough for Karna. In addition, the bull among the Satvata lineage is with Droupadi’s sons. O Partha! It is
not proper for you to ﬁght with Karna now. O destroyer of enemy heroes! He possesses the blazing weapon that
was given to him by Vasava.7 It is like a giant meteor. He worships it and has preserved it for you. Therefore, let
Karna proceed to the spot where Satvata is. O Kouravya! I know when the time will come for the evil-souled
one.’”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! Tell me about the clash between the brave Karna and Varshneya, which took
place after Bhurishrava and Saindhava had been brought down. Satyaki was without a chariot. Which chariot did
he mount? Also tell me about the two Panchalas8 who protected the chariot wheels.”
‘Sanjaya said, “I will tell you everything that happened in that great battle. Listen patiently. All this is because
of your own evil conduct. O lord! Mentally, Krishna had already known earlier that the brave Satyaki would be defeated by the one with the sacriﬁcial altar on his standard.9 O king! Janardana knows the past and the future. O
king! Therefore, the immensely strong one had summoned his charioteer, Daruka, and had given him instructions.
‘Let my chariot be yoked for tomorrow.’10 The gods, the gandharvas, the yakshas, the serpents, the rakshasas and
men can never defeat the two Krishnas. The gods and the siddhas, with the grandfather11 at the forefront, know

about the inﬁnite prowess of those two. Listen to the battle, as it happened. On seeing that Satyaki was without a
chariot and Karna was attacking him with raised weapons, Madhava blew a rishabha note on his conch shell with
great force.12 From the sound of that conch shell, Daruka got the message. He took that chariot, with Suparna13
decorating the standard. With Keshava’s permission, Daruka yoked the chariot, which was like the ﬁre or the sun,
and made Shini’s grandson ascend it. It could go wherever one wished and it was drawn by Sainya, Sugriva,
Meghapushpa and Balahaka.14 It possessed a great speed and was decorated with gold. He ascended that chariot,
which was like a celestial vehicle15 and which had been yoked.
‘“He attacked Radheya and showered down many arrows on him. The two protectors of the chariot wheels, Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja, also abandoned Dhananjaya’s chariot and attacked Radheya. O great king! Radheya also
showered down arrows. In that battle, he angrily attacked Shini’s undecaying grandson. The gods, the gandharvas,
the asuras, the serpents and the rakshasas have not heard of such a battle having taken place in heaven or on earth
earlier. O great king! On witnessing their deeds, the soldiers, the rathas, the horses, the men and the elephants were
senseless with wonder and became spectators, witnessing those superhuman exploits. O king! They withdrew and
also watched Daruka’s skill as a charioteer. He moved forward and back, executed circular motions and retreated.
The charioteer of that chariot, descended from Kashyapa’s lineage, caused great wonder.16 The gods, the gandharvas and the danavas assembled in the sky, to watch that encounter between Karna and Shini’s descendant with
great attention. For the sake of their friends, those two powerful ones vigorously challenged each other in that battle. O great king! Karna, who was like an immortal, and Yuyudhana Satyaki showered down arrows on each other.
Unable to tolerate the death of Kouravya Jalasandha,17 Karna ground Shini’s descendant down with a shower of
arrows. Overcome by anger, Karna sighed like a giant serpent. In that encounter, his angry glances seemed to burn
up Shini’s descendant. The scorcher of enemies repeatedly attacked him, with great force. On seeing that he was in
great rage, Satyaki pierced him back with a great shower of arrows, like an elephant countering another elephant.
Those two tigers among men clashed, as spirited as tigers. In that battle, unparalleled in valour, they wounded each
other. Shini’s grandson, the scorcher of enemies, repeatedly pierced Karna, all over his limbs, with arrows that
were completely made out of iron. With a broad-headed arrow, he brought down his charioteer from his seat on the
chariot. He killed the four white horses with sharp arrows. The bull among men shattered his standard into a hundred fragments with a hundred arrows. O king! On seeing that Karna was without a chariot, your sons and the bulls
among men on your side were distressed.
‘“Karna’s son, Vrishasena, Shalya, the lord of Madra, and Drona’s son surrounded Shini’s descendant from all
sides. There was a melee everywhere and nothing could be discerned. O king! Seeing that the brave son of the suta
had been deprived of his chariot by Satyaki, a great lamentation arose from all the soldiers. O king! Having been
oppressed by Satvata’s arrows, Karna was also benumbed. O king! He ascended Duryodhana’s chariot and sighed
deeply. He remembered the respect he bore towards your son, the affection since childhood and the promise that he
had made about returning the kingdom to him. O king! When Karna was deprived of his chariot, your brave sons,
with Duhshasana at the forefront, succumbed to Satyaki. But he did not kill them, to protect the pledge that Bhimasena had taken earlier. He deprived them of their chariots and made them senseless, but did not take their lives
away from them. Bhimasena had taken a pledge to kill your sons and at the time of the second gambling match, so
had Partha18 about killing Karna. With Karna at the forefront, though they made efforts to kill Satyaki, supreme
among rathas, they did not succeed in killing him. With a single bow, he defeated Drona’s son, Kritavarma, other
maharathas and hundreds of bulls among the kshatriyas. Satyaki, the destroyer of enemies, possessed a valour that
was like that of the two Krishnas and for the sake of attaining to the afterworld and to do that which would bring
pleasure to Dharmaraja. O tiger among men! In this world, there are only three archers—Krishna, Partha and Shini’s descendant. No fourth one can be seen.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “Saytaki ascended Vasudeva’s invincible chariot. The young one, who is Vasudeva’s equal,
deprived Karna of his chariot. He was proud because of the strength of his own arms and that chariot was yoked by
Daruka. Did Satyaki then climb onto another chariot? I wish to hear this and you are skilled in recounting. O Sanjaya! Tell me that. I think that he is impossible to withstand.”

‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! Listen to what happened. Daruka’s immensely intelligent younger brother quickly
brought another chariot that had been prepared in the proper fashion. The pole was of iron and gold and was tied
with cloth. There was a lion on the standard, decorated with a thousand stars. The horses were as fast as the wind
and possessed golden harnesses. They were as white as the moon. The chariot was ﬁrm and its speed was beyond
that of sound. O lord of the earth! Those were the best of horses and they were colourful with gold. There was the
sound of nets of bells and the lances and spears were like lightning. It was stocked with implements of war and
many weapons and garments. That chariot rumbled like the roar of the clouds and it was prepared. Ascending this,
Shini’s descendant attacked your soldiers. Following his desire, Daruka went to where Keshava was. O great king!
The best of chariots was also brought for Karna. There were well-trained horses that had a great speed and they
were as white as conch shells or milk. The harnesses were colourful and golden. The sides and standard were made
out of gold and there were machines and ﬂags. There were many weapons and garments and there was a good
charioteer. Ascending this chariot, Karna rushed against the enemy again. This is the entire account, as you have
asked me to recount it. Know about the great destruction that was brought about because of your bad policy. Thirty-one of your sons were brought down by Bhimasena. With Durmukha at the forefront, they were colourful in
ﬁghting.19 O venerable one! Hundreds of brave ones were killed by Satvata and Arjuna, with Bhishma and Bhagadatta as the foremost. O king! This was the destruction that was brought about by your evil counsel.”’
CHAPTER 1100(123)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O Sanjaya! When this was the state of the brave ones on my side, what did Bhima do? O
Sanjaya! Tell me everything about that.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “After Bhimasena was rendered without a chariot and made to suffer the stakes that were Karna’s words, he was overcome by great intolerance and spoke these words to Phalguna. ‘O Dhananjaya! While you
looked on, Karna repeatedly told me that I was a eunuch and stupid and that I was a glutton. He said that I did not
possess skills with a weapon and that I should not ﬁght. He said that I was a child who got distressed in battle. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Someone who speaks to me in this way will be killed by me. O mighty-armed
one! You know the vows that you and I have taken together. O Kounteya! There is no doubt that what they mean to
you, are also what they mean to me.20 O best of men! Remembering my words, kill him. O Dhananjaya! Act so
that your pledge comes true.’
‘“Having heard the words of the inﬁnitely valorous Bhima, Arjuna advanced towards Karna in that battle and
spoke to him. ‘O Karna! O Karna! O son of a suta! Your sight is useless. You praise yourself. O one whose intelligence is based on adharma! Listen to what I am going to tell you now. There are two outcomes brave ones face in
a battle, victory or defeat. O Radheya! That is always the case, even if Vasava himself were to ﬁght. You were rendered close to death by Yuyudhana. You were without a chariot and exposed. Through chance, you deprived Bhimasena of his chariot. O Radheya! But the words that you spoke to Bhima were adharma. The brave ones who
know about the dharma of ﬁghting protect, to the best of their capacity, those who are running away at the end of a
battle. In the battle, when all the soldiers looked on and so did Keshava and I, there were several occasions when
Bhimasena robbed you of a chariot. However, the descendant of the Pandu lineage did not utter a single harsh
word to you. But you made Vrikodara hear many harsh words. And when he was not in my sight, you killed Subhadra’s son. You will reap the fruits of those offences today. O evil-minded one! It was for your own destruction
that you severed his21 bow then. O foolish one! You will be killed by me, with your servants, soldiers and mounts.
Do everything that you wish to, because a great calamity confronts you. In your very sight, I will kill Vrishasena22
in this battle. If any of these other kings are confused in their intelligence and advance against me, I will kill all of
them. I swear this truthfully, on my weapons. You are stupid and devoid of wisdom. But you pride yourself in this
battle. On seeing you brought down, the wicked Duryodhana will lament grievously.’ When Arjuna swore that he
would kill Karna’s son, a great and tumultuous uproar arose among all the rathas. There was great fear in that
ﬁerce battle. The rays of the thousand-rayed one became dim as it approached the mountain.23
‘“O king! Hrishikesha was stationed at the head of the battle. He embraced Bibhatsu, who had accomplished his
pledge, and said, ‘O Jishnu! It is through good fortune that your great vow has been accomplished. It is through

good fortune that the wicked Vriddhakshatra has been slain, together with his son. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Confronting the army of the sons of Dhritarashtra in battle, even the army of the gods would lose its senses.
O Jishnu! One should not doubt this. O tiger among men! Even if I think about it, I do not see any other man in the
worlds who is your equal, in terms of ﬁghting with this army. There are many who are extremely powerful, your
equals and superiors. These lords of the earth have assembled because of the son of Dhritarashtra. They are armoured. But they could not advance against your angry person in the battle. Your valour and strength are like that
of Rudra and the Destroyer. There is no one else who could have exhibited such valour in battle. O unblemished
one! O scorcher of enemies! There is no one like you and you accomplished this alone. Once the evil-minded Karna has been killed, with his followers, and you have defeated and slain that enemy, I will praise you even more.’
Arjuna replied, ‘O Madhava! It is through your favours that this vow of mine has been accomplished. It was one
that even the gods would have found difﬁcult to fulﬁl. O Madhava! This victory is not a surprise for those who
have you as a protector. It is through your favours that Yudhishthira will obtain the entire earth. O Varshneya! O
lord! This is because of your power. This victory is yours. O Madhusudana! Our prosperity has been brought by
you.’ Having been thus addressed, Krishna smiled gently and urged the steeds slowly, showing Partha the ﬁeld of
battle, in all its cruelty.
‘“Krishna said, ‘Desiring victory in the battle and great fame, there are many brave kings who are lying down on
the ground, struck by your arrows. Their weapons and ornaments are strewn around. Horses, chariots and elephants are in distress. Their armour has been shattered and they are faced with great grief. Some are still alive.
Others have lost their lives. But even the kings who are dead seem to be alive because of the supreme radiance that
they possess. Their arrows are gold-tufted and they have many sharp weapons. Look. The earth is covered with
mounts and weapons. There are armour, shields, garlands and heads decorated with earrings. There are headdresses and crowns, garlands of ﬂowers and jewels that are worn on crowns. There are strings around the neck and armlets, extremely radiant and made out of gold. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There are many other colourful
ornaments that make the earth beautiful. There are fans and whisks and colourful standards, horses, chariots and
elephants. Many cushions from the horses are scattered around. There are different kinds of carpets and extremely
expensive bumpers. Behold. The earth is littered with these and looks like a picture. Those who rode on elephants
have been fallen down, along with the elephants. They look like lions that have been dislodged from mountain
peaks by thunder. Look at the others. There are horse riders on the earth, together with the horses. There are large
numbers of foot soldiers and infantry, their bodies covered with wounds.’ Having shown Kiriti the ﬁeld of battle,
Krishna blew on Panchajanya, delighting those who had assembled on their side.”’
CHAPTER 1101(124)

‘Sanjaya said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! King Yudhishthira alighted from his chariot. With his eyes
full of tears, he embraced the two Krishnas. His fair face had the complexion of a lotus. Wiping it, he spoke to Vasudeva and Pandava Dhananjaya. ‘O maharathas! It is through good fortune that I see you after you have accomplished this burden in the battle. It is through good fortune that the wicked Saindhava, worst of men, has been
killed. O Krishna! It is through good fortune that you have brought me this great delight. It is through good fortune
that large numbers of the enemy are immersed in an ocean of grief. There is nothing in the worlds that is impossible for you. O Madhusudana! You are the preceptor of all the worlds. You are the protector. O Govinda! It is
through your favours that we will vanquish the enemy, just as in earlier times, the chastiser of Paka defeated the
danavas through your favours. O Varshneya! O Madhava! Whether it is the conquest of the earth or whether it is
the conquest of the three worlds, it is certain that those who satisfy you will be successful in that. O lord of the lord
of the gods! Those who satisfy you do not obtain sin, nor are they defeated in battle. O Hrishikesha! It is through
your favours that Shakra became the lord of the gods, obtained prosperity and succeeded in conquering the three
worlds in the ﬁeld of battle. O lord of the thirty gods! O Krishna! It is through your favours that the thirty gods obtained immortality and enjoyed the eternal worlds. O destroyer of enemies! It is because of valour originating from
your favours that Shakra killed thousands of daityas and became the lord of the gods. O Hrishikesha! O brave one!
It is through your favours that everything in this universe, mobile and immobile, is established in its own place and
is engaged in meditation and the offering of oblations. In the beginning, everything was immersed in an ocean of

water and there was darkness. O supreme among men! It is through your favours that the universe became manifest. O Achyuta! You are the creator of all the worlds and the supreme soul. Those who seek refuge in Hrishikesha
are never confounded. You are without beginning and without death. You are the undecaying god who drives the
worlds. O Hrishikesha! Those who are devoted to you can overcome every difﬁculty. You are supreme. You are
ancient. You are the Being. You are ancient. You are supreme.24 Those who attain such a supreme one, obtain
supreme prosperity. You have been sung about in the four Vedas. The Vedas chant about you. O great-souled one!
By seeking refuge in you, I will obtain supreme prosperity. You are Dhananjaya’s friend. You are engaged in ensuring Dhananjaya’s welfare. You are Dhananjaya’s protector. He who attains you, obtains happiness.’ Having
been thus addressed, the great-souled Keshava and Pandava cheerfully replied to the king, the lord of the earth.
‘The wicked King Jayadratha has been burnt in the ﬁre of your anger. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The
army of the sons of Dhritarashtra is extremely great. But in the battle, it is decaying. It has been struck, slain and
destroyed. O destroyer of enemies! The Kouravas are being destroyed because of your anger. O brave one! The
evil-minded Duryodhana has enraged you. With his friends and relatives, he will give up his life in this battle, destroyed by your sight. Earlier, because of your anger, Bhishma, the grandfather of the Kurus and extremely difﬁcult for even the gods to defeat, was struck and made to lie down on a bed of arrows. O destroyer of enemies! It
will be extremely difﬁcult for them to obtain victory in this battle. O Pandava! Because of your wrath, they have
come under the clutches of death. O granter of honours! One who enrages you will soon have his kingdom, life,
dear ones, sons and all kinds of happiness destroyed. O Yudhishthira! You have always been devoted to the dharma
of kings. I think that the Kouravas, with their sons, animals and relatives, have been destroyed because of your
anger.’25
‘“The mighty-armed Bhima and maharatha Satyaki, both of whom were mangled and wounded by arrows, saluted their senior and elder. Those great archers were stationed there, surrounded by the Panchalas. On seeing those
two joyful ones, stationed before him, with their hands joined in salutation, Kounteya26 congratulated Bhima and
Satyaki. ‘O brave ones! It is through good fortune that I see that the two of you have been freed from that ocean of
soldiers. Drona and Hardikya were like invincible crocodiles in that abode of makaras. It is through good fortune
that you have defeated all the kings of the earth in the battle. It is through good fortune that I see you victorious in
this battle. It is through good fortune that Drona and the immensely strong Hardikya have been defeated in the battle. O unblemished ones! It is through good fortune that I see that you have passed through that ocean of soldiers.
O brave ones! You pride yourselves in battle and you do not run away from an encounter. You are as dear to me as
my life. It is good fortune that I am seeing both of you.’ Having thus spoken to Yuyudhana and Vrikodara, tigers
among men, King Pandava embraced them and shed tears of joy. O lord of the earth! Everyone in that army was
delighted. Having witnessed victory, the Pandavas set their minds on ﬁghting.”’
CHAPTER 1102(125)

‘Sanjaya said, “O king! When Saindhava was killed, your son, Suyodhana, was distressed and lost all hope about
defeating the enemy. His face was miserable and covered with tears. He thought that a warrior like Arjuna did not
exist on earth. O venerable one! When he was enraged, Drona, Radheya, Ashvatthama and Kripa were incapable
of standing before him. ‘Partha has vanquished all my maharathas in battle. He has killed Saindhava in the encounter and no one could counter him. This large army of the Kouravas has been completely destroyed by him. I
do not see any protector, not even Purandara himself. In this battle, I depended on Karna. He raised his weapons in
the encounter, but was defeated. Jayadratha has been slain. In the midst of the assembly hall, he spoke harsh words
to the Pandavas. That Karna has been defeated in the battle and Saindhava has been brought down. I depended on
his valour and regarding Achyuta as straw, refused him when he solicited peace. That Karna has been vanquished
in the battle.’ O king! He was thus distressed in his mind and in search of recourse, glanced towards Drona. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! Your son, who had caused injury to all the worlds, went to him. He told him everything, about the great slaughter of the Kurus, about the victory of the enemy and about the straits the sons of Dhritarashtra were immersed in.

‘“Duryodhana said, ‘O preceptor! Behold the great destruction of those whose heads have been sprinkled.27 I
placed my grandfather, the brave Bhishma, at the forefront of the battle. Having slain him, the avaricious Shikhandi satisﬁed his old desire. With all the Panchalas, he is now afﬂicting the vanguard of the army. There is the other
invincible one, your disciple Savyasachi. He has destroyed seven akshouhinis and has killed King Jayadratha.
These well-wishers have sought to do what is agreeable to us and desiring our victory, have gone to Yama’s abode.
How will I repay that debt? For my sake, those lords of the earth are lying down on the ground. They have given
up all the prosperity of the earth and are lying down on the ground. Having caused such a slaughter of my friends,
I am a coward. I do not think that even one thousand horse sacriﬁces will purify me. I am avaricious and wicked. I
have acted against dharma. They have made efforts to be victorious and have obtained Vaivasvata’s28 eternal
abode. I am inferior in conduct and have been an enemy to my well-wishers. In the midst of these kings, why
doesn’t the earth provide me a hole?29 In the midst of those kings, what will the grandfather tell me, his limbs
covered with blood? With Bhishma killed in the battle, I do not have a protector and cannot sleep. What will he tell
an ignoble man like me when he meets me? I am one who does not follow dharma and have caused strife among
relatives. He has conquered the afterworld. Behold the great archer Jalasandha, killed by Satyaki. The brave maharatha raised his weapons for my sake and gave up his life. On seeing that Kamboja has been killed,30 and Alambusa, and many other well-wishers, what is the point of my remaining alive now? Those brave ones strove and
were killed for my sake. They did not retreat. For the sake of my welfare, they used the utmost of their capacity to
obtain victory. O scorcher of enemies! Today, I will use my strength to repay my debt to those departed ones. With
the waters of the Yamuna, I will then offer oblations to them. O supreme among wielders of all weapons! Know
this to be the truth. I swear this on my good deeds, my valour and my sons. I will kill all the Panchalas and Pandavas in the battle and obtain peace. Or, in the battle, I will go to the world where they have gone.31 On seeing
that they are not protected well by us, our allies do not wish to support us and think that the Pandus are superior. O
mighty-armed one! O one whose aim is unﬂinching! You have yourself determined our death in the battle. You
have always been partial towards your excellent disciple, Dhananjaya. Thus, all those who desired our victory have
been killed. I see Karna as the only one who is assured about our victory and desires it. One with evil intelligence
does not examine the truth and doesn’t know the nature of friendship. To accomplish an objective, such a person
engages someone as a friend. O my well-wisher on this earth! I have performed an extremely terrible deed. I have
been confused, avaricious and wicked. I have always been led by the tongue.32 Jayadratha has been slain and so
has Somadatta’s valiant son, as have the Abhishahas, Shurasenas, Shibis and Vasatis. I will today go where those
bulls among men have gone. For my sake, they have killed in the battle by the ﬁghting Kiriti. O bull among men!
O preceptor of the sons of Pandu! There is truly no purpose in my remaining alive. Grant me leave.’”’
CHAPTER 1103(126)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O son! After the king of Sindhu was killed in the battle by Savyasachi, and so was Bhurishrava, what was the state of your mind then? In the assembly of the Kurus, Duryodhana spoke in that fashion to
Drona. O Sanjaya! What did he33 say after that? Tell me all this.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that Saindhava and Bhurishrava had been
killed, a loud and great lamentation arose among your soldiers. All of them censured the counsel of your son. Because of that policy, hundreds of bulls among kshatriyas had been slain. On hearing the words of your evil-minded
son, Drona reﬂected for a short while. He was grievously hurt and said, ‘O Duryodhana! Why are you striking me
with words that are like arrows? I have always told you that Savyasachi cannot be defeated in battle. O Kourava!
We know what Arjuna is capable of accomplishing in the battle. Protected by Kiriti, Shikhandi killed Bhishma in
the battle. The one who could not be killed by gods and men was killed in the encounter. On seeing this, I knew
that the army of the Bharatas would be destroyed. We regarded that man as the foremost among all brave ones in
the three worlds. On that hero having been killed, who else can we depend on? O son!34 Shakuni played with dice
in the assembly of the Kurus. However, those dice were not dice at all. They were sharp arrows capable of tormenting enemies. O son! Those arrows are now being released by Jaya and are killing us. In his lamentations, the

great-souled Vidura described them thus and spoke grave and auspicious words for your beneﬁt. But you did not
listen. That is the reason for this terrible and great calamity. O Duryodhana! By ignoring his words, you have
caused it. Krishna35 was born in a noble lineage and in her conduct, followed all forms of dharma. She did not deserve it. But in our sight, you had her brought to the assembly hall. O son of Gandhari! You are reaping the fruits
of that adharma now. This is nothing and greater evils will befall you in the world hereafter. This is because you
used deceit to defeat the Pandavas in the gambling match and exiled them to the forest, dressed in the skin of ruru
deer. They are like my sons and have always followed dharma. Tell me. In this world of men, is there any other
brahmana other than me, who will injure them? In the assembly of the Kurus, with Shakuni and with Dhritrarashtra’s sanction, you excited the wrath of the Pandavas. Duhshasana supported you and Karna increased it. Ignoring
the words of Kshatta,36 you yourself repeatedly increased it. All of you surrounded Arjuna and sought to protect
the king of Sindhu. How was he killed in your midst? O Kouravya! How was Saindhava killed when you, Karna,
Kripa, Shalya and Ashvatthama were alive? To protect the king of Sindhu, all the kings fought and used their ﬁerce
energy. How was he killed in their midst? O Duryodhana! In particular, the lord of the earth37 sought assurance
from you and me to save him from Arjuna. But he did not obtain that rescue and Phalguna killed him. I do not see
any means for my remaining alive. I see that I will myself be immersed in the disease that is Dhrishtadyumna, until
I kill the Panchala and Shikhandi. Since I am myself tormented, why are you striking me with these stakes of
words? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You have been incapable of rescuing the king of Sindhu. Bhishma
was never exhausted in his deeds. He possessed a golden standard and was unwavering in his aim. Since you do
not see him in the battle, how can you hope for victory? Saindhava has been killed in the midst of the maharathas
and Bhurishrava has also been slain. What do you think the outcome will be? O king! Kripa is invincible and is
still alive. I honour him for not having followed the king of Sindhu.38 Bhishma was incapable of being killed in a
battle, even by the gods, with Vasava. He was the performer of extremely difﬁcult deeds. O king! When I saw that
he was brought down, while you and younger brother, Duhshasana, looked on, I thought that the earth no longer
belonged to you. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O venerable one! The formations of the Pandavas and the
Srinjayas are united and are attacking me now. Without killing all the Panchalas, I will not take off my armour. O
son of Dhritarashtra! For your welfare, I will perform deeds in the battle. O king! Go and tell my son Ashvatthama
that I have said that in this battle, he should protect his life and destroy the Somakas. “Follow the words and instructions of your father. Establish yourself in non-violence, self-control, truth and virtue. Observe dharma, artha
and kama, but without transgressing dharma and artha. You must always perform deeds in which dharma is the
most important. With the eye and the mind, brahmanas must be satisiﬁed and served to the best of one’s capacity.
Do not do anything to cause them displeasure. They are like the ﬂames of the ﬁre.”39 O king! I have been tormented by the stakes of your words and will wage a great battle. O destroyer of enemies! I will penetrate this battle formation.40 O Duryodhana! If you can, go and protect your army. The angry Kurus and Srinjayas will ﬁght, even
during the night.’ Having said this, Drona proceeded against the Pandavas and the Srinjayas. He wished to sap the
energy of the kshatriyas, like the sun does to the stars.”’
CHAPTER 1104(127)

‘Sanjaya said, “Thus urged by Drona, King Duryodhana became overcome by intolerance and made up his mind to
ﬁght. Your son, Duryodhana, then spoke to Karna. ‘The vyuha constructed by the preceptor is extremely impenetrable, even to the gods. Behold. With Krishna as his aide, Pandava Kiriti penetrated it, while you were looking
and the great-souled Drona was struggling and so were the foremost among warriors. He brought down Saindhava.
O Radheya! Look. Kings of the earth, foremost among warriors, have single-handedly been killed by Partha, like
inferior animals by a lion. O destroyer of enemies! In this battle, this happened while I was looking on. Shakra’s
son has left only a little bit of my soldiers left. Despite Drona ﬁghting and making the best of efforts in the battle,
how could Phalguna accomplish his desire and penetrate the extremely impenetrable vyuha? The great-souled preceptor has always loved Phalguna. O destroyer of enemies! That is the reason he granted him entry, without ﬁghting with him. Drona, scorcher of enemies, offered assurance to Saindhava. He then allowed Kiriti to enter. Behold
my bad luck. Had I permitted the king of Sindhu to leave for his home earlier, there would not have been this de-

struction of men in the battle. In the hope of remaining alive, Jayadratha wished to go home. But having obtained
assurance from Drona in the battle, I restrained him. My warrior brothers, Chitrasena and the others, have encountered Bhimasena and were destroyed by him, while we evil-souled ones looked on.’
‘“Karna said, ‘Do not censure the preceptor. The brahmana is ﬁghting to the best of his ability. In the battle, I do
not think that Pandava can be defeated by Drona, though he is skilled in the use of weapons. That is the reason the
one with the white horses41 has passed him and has penetrated. O Suyodhana! I think that anything determined by
destiny can never be transgressed, even if we make endeavours and ﬁght to the utmost of our strength. O king!
With Saindhava killed in the battle, it seems that destiny is supreme. With you, we have made the utmost effort in
the ﬁeld of battle. All our manliness has been rendered futile by fate. We have always endeavoured, but our valour
has been unsuccessful. Whenever a man performs an act, but is not favoured by destiny, fate destroys all his exertions. A man with perseverance must do whatever he has to do and must not have doubts about the act. Success depends on destiny. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Parthas were deprived through deceit and the use of
poison.42 They were burnt in the house of lac43 and defeated in the gambling match. Using the principles of royal
policy, they were exiled to the forest. Though all of this was undertaken with great care, it has been frustrated by
destiny. Let us make efforts to ﬁght and not turn our backs on death. You and they will make efforts and traverse
the path determined by destiny. It does not seem that they have done anything good by using superior intelligence.
O extender of the Kuru lineage! O brave one! Nor is it the case that we have performed bad deeds because of inferior intelligence. Destiny determines the outcome, of good deeds and inferior ones. Fate has its own action and is
awake when everyone else is asleep. When the war commenced, you had many soldiers and many warriors. The
sons of Pandu had fewer, but have destroyed many strikers on your side. I think that this destruction of our manliness is the work of fate.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “O lord of men! While they were talking a lot, the Pandava battle formations appeared in the battle. O king! Because of your evil cousel, an encounter commenced between those on your side and the others and
chariots and elephants clashed against each other.”’
CHAPTER 1105(128)

‘Sanjaya said, “O lord of men! That army of yours had large numbers of horses and elephants. It fought everywhere, attacking the soldiers of the Pandus. The Panchalas and the Kurus fought against each other, having decided to go to the afterworld, the great kingdom of Yama. Brave ones clashed against brave ones and struck with arrows, lances and spears. They quickly sent each other to Yama’s abode. Rathas fought against rathas and caused
ﬁerce ﬂowing of blood. There was a great battle and they killed each other. O great king! Crazy and intoxicated
elephants clashed against each other and gored each other with tusks. In that tumultuous battle, horse riders desired
great fame and killed horse riders with javelins, spears and battleaxes. O mighty-armed one! There were hundreds
of foot soldiers, with weapons in their hands. O king! They dashed against each other, always enterprising in their
valour. O venerable one! The lineages, names and families of the Panchalas and the Kurus could only be deciphered through hearing.44 In that battle, the warriors attacked each other with arrows, spears and battleaxes. Wishing to send others to the afterworld, they roamed around fearlessly. O king! They released thousands of arrows in
the ten directions, which were no longer illuminated, because the sun had set. O great king! When the Pandaveyas
were fearlessly ﬁghting, Duryodhana penetrated into their army. Because of Saindhava’s death, he was overcome
by supreme grief. Thinking that life was mortal, he penetrated into the army of the enemy. Making the earth tremble with the roar of his chariot, your son attacked the Pandava army. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! That tumultuous clash between them and him caused a great destruction among all the soldiers. Just as the midday sun
scorches with its rays, in their midst, your son tormented them with his shower of arrows. In that battle, the Pandavas were incapable of glancing at him. They were only interested in running away and lost all enthusiasm about
defeating the enemy. Your great-souled and archer son used gold-tufted arrows that were dazzling at the tip. The
Panchalas were slaughtered and ﬂed. Afﬂicted by those arrows, the Pandu soldiers quickly began to fall down. O
lord of the earth! In the battle, those on their side were incapable of performing deeds like those done by the king
who was your son. In the encounter, the Pandava soldiers were crushed by your son, like lotuses by an elephant.

They were like blooming lotuses destroyed by an elephant, ones that had lost their sheen because of the wind and
the sun, once the water had dried up. Because of your son’s energy, the Pandava soldiers were like that.
‘“O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the Pandava soldiers were being killed by your son, the
Panchalas attacked him, with Bhimasena at the forefront. He45 pierced Bhimasena with ten arrows, each of
Madri’s sons with three arrows, Virata and Drupada with six each, Shikhandi with one hundred, Dhrishtadyumna
with seventy, Dharma’s son with seven and the Kekayas and the Chedis with many sharp arrows. He pierced Satvata with ﬁve, each of Droupadi’s sons with three and also piercing Ghatotkacha in that battle, roared like a lion.
With arrows that were ﬁerce at the tip, he brought down hundreds of other warriors, elephants, horses and chariots
in that battle, like an angry Destroyer slaughtering beings. His large bow had a golden back. O venerable one! As
he was striking down enemies with this, the eldest of the Pandavas46 severed it into three fragments with two
broad-headed arrows. He then pierced him with ten powerful and sharp arrows. These passed through all his inner
organs and having mangled him, entered the ground. The warriors who were around Yudhishthira were delighted,
like the gods surrounding Purandara after Vritra had been killed. O venerable one! Then, King Yudhishthira, who
is supremely difﬁcult to repulse, dispatched an arrow towards your son in that battle. Severely wounded by this, he
sat down on his supreme chariot. O Indra among kings! At this, a great noise arose from the Panchala soldiers.
‘The king has been killed,’ they shouted in delight. O venerable one! The ﬁerce sound of arrows was heard there.
In that battle, Drona quickly showed himself. Cheerfully, Duryodhana grasped his bow ﬁrmly and asking the Pandava king to wait, attacked him. Wishing to seize the king,47 the Panchalas swiftly attacked back. Wishing to save
the supreme among the Kurus, Drona received them, like the one with the rays destroys clouds that have been
raised by a violent wind. O king! A great battle commenced between those on your side and the enemy, as they
clashed in their desire to ﬁght, and it increased the carnage.”’
CHAPTER 1106(129)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “After speaking to Duryodhana, my son, who has always transgressed me, the preceptor was
overcome by anger and penetrated the Pandavas. The brave one is extremely skilled in weapons. He entered and
roamed around in the battle. How did the Pandavas counter the great archer, Drona? Who protected the right wheel
of the great-souled preceptor? When he killed the enemies in the battle, who protected his left wheel? The one who
is supreme among all wielders of weapons seemed to be dancing along the path of his chariot. He was as angry as
a ﬁre.48 How did he come by his death?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “Having killed Saindhava in the evening, Partha met the king49 and the great archer, Satyaki,
and then attacked Drona. Yudhishthira and Pandava Bhimasena also quickly attacked Drona, each with a separate
army. So did the intelligent Nakula and the invincible Sahadeva. Dhrishtadyumna, Shatanika,50 Virata with the
Kekayas, the Matsyas and the Shalveya soldiers also began to ﬁght with Drona. O king! King Drupada, Dhrishtadyumna’s father, was protected by the Panchalas and advanced against Drona. The great archers, Droupadi’s
sons, and the rakshasa Ghatotkacha also attacked the immensely illustrious Drona, with their soldiers. There were
six thousand Prabhadrakas and Panchalas, skilled in striking. With Shikhandi at the forefront, they advanced
against Drona. With other tigers among men, the maharatha Pandavas attacked Drona, bull among brahmanas. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! When those brave ones advanced to ﬁght, it was already night. It was ﬁerce and
increased the fear of cowards. O king! At that inauspicious and terrible time, many warriors went to their destruction. It caused the death of elephants, horses and elephants. During that terrible night, jackals howled in all directions. They caused great fear, because their gaping mouths were blazing. Fierce owls could be seen and they
caused great terror. In particular, they were perched on the standards of the Kouravas. O Indra among kings! A
great roar arose among the soldiers. This mingled with the loud sound of battle drums and the blare of other drums,
and with the trumpeting of elephants and the neighing of horses. There was the sound of hooves and a tumultuous
noise spread everywhere. O great king! In that twilight hour, there was a ﬁerce battle between Drona and all the
Srinjayas. Darkness covered the earth and nothing could be seen. The dust raised by the soldiers covered everything. Men, horses and elephants were immersed in blood. The earth’s dust could no longer be seen and we were
full of lassitude. During that night, a terrible slapping sound could be heard. It arose from the clashing of weapons

and was like the noise of bamboos being burnt in a forest in the mountains. O king! Because everything was covered in darkness, one could not distinguish one’s own side from that of the enemy. At the beginning of that night,
everyone seemed to be mad. O Indra among kings! The dust that arose from the earth settled down because of the
blood. The darkness disappeared because of the golden radiance of armour and ornaments. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! The army of the Bharatas was adorned with gems and gold and looked like the sky in the night,
decorated with stars. Full of lances and standards, that place resounded with the noise of jackals and wild crows
and ﬁerce cries and roars made by those who were ﬁghting. There was a great and tumultuous sound and it made
the body hair stand up. All the directions were covered by the uproar, which was like the sound of the great Indra’s
vajra. O great king! In that night, the soldiers of the Bharatas could be seen, illuminated with armlets, golden earrings and the radiance of weapons. There were elephants and chariots, decorated in gold. During that night, they
looked like clouds tinged with lightning. Swords, lances, clubs, arrows, maces, javelins and battleaxes were seen to
descend, ﬂaming like ﬁres. Duryodhana was like the wind at the front. The chariots and elephants were like clouds.
The sound of musical instruments was like thunder. The bows and standards were like lightning. Drona and the
Pandavas were like clouds. The swords, javelins and clubs were like thunder. The shower of arrows was like a terrible wind, both hot and cold. It was ﬁerce and caused extreme astonishment. It was destructive of life and there
was no escape. Without any fear, the soldiers entered there, wishing to ﬁght. At the beginning of that terrible night,
there was a great roar that created fear among cowards and delighted heroes. An extremely terrible and ﬁerce battle
commenced in the night, as the Pandus and Srinjayas united and angrily attacked Drona. O king! But all those who
advanced against the great-souled one were forced to retreat and some others were sent to Yama’s eternal abode.”’
CHAPTER 1107(130)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “The inﬁnitely energetic and invincible one,51 intolerant and angry, penetrated the Srinjayas.
What was the state of your mind then? After the one with an immeasurable soul had spoken to my disobedient son
and had penetrated, how did Partha counter him? When the brave Saindhava and Bhurishrava had been killed, the
greatly energetic and unvanquished one attacked the Panchalas. When the invincible scorcher of enemies penetrated, what did he52 think? What did Duryodhana think was the most appropriate task for the occasion? Who were
the ones who followed that brave granter of boons, supreme among brahmanas? Who were the ones who remained
behind the brave one and fought? Who fought in the front, as he killed the enemies in the battle? I think that all the
Pandavas must have been afﬂicted with the arrows of Bharadvaja’s son. O lord! They must have been like lean
cows trembling in the cold. Having penetrated the Panchalas, how did the great archer, tiger among men and destroyer of enemies, come by his death? All the soldiers and maharathas united and clashed in the night. They were
agitated and crushed by him separately. Who were the intelligent ones who were present then? You have said that
the rathas on my side were killed, driven away, defeated and deprived of their chariots when they engaged in that
encounter and that the Parthas did not run away. O Sanjaya! In the darkness of the night, how could you distinguish between them and the Kurus there?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! During that night, there was an extremely terrible battle. During that night, the Pandavas, together with their soldiers, attacked Drona. Using his swift arrows, Drona sent all the Kekayas and Dhrishtadyumna’s sons to the world of the dead. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the maharathas who
advanced against him were dispatched to the world of the hereafter. O king! When he crushed them, the powerful
maharatha, King Shibi,53 angrily attacked Bharadvaja’s brave son. On seeing that maharatha from the Pandava
side descend, Drona pierced him with ten arrows that were completely made out of iron. Shibi pierced him back
with thirty sharp arrows. He brought his54 charioteer down with a broad-headed arrow and smiled. At this, Drona
killed his horses and the great-souled one’s charioteer. He severed his55 head from his body, with the helmet still
on it.
‘“Remembering that his father had earlier been killed by Bhimasena,56 the son of Kalinga angrily attacked him,
together with the soldiers from Kalinga. He pierced Bhima with ﬁve arrows and again pierced him with seven. O
king! He struck Vishoka57 with three arrows and his standard with one. Vrikodara became extremely angry with
that wrathful and brave one from Kalinga. He leapt from his chariot onto his chariot and killed him with a blow of

his ﬁst. The powerful Pandava killed him with a blow of his ﬁst and all his bones were separated and suddenly fell
down on the ground. Karna and his maharatha brothers58 could not tolerate this. They struck Bhimasena with iron
arrows that were like venomous serpents. Abandoning his own chariot, Bhima went to Dhruva’s chariot.59 With a
blow from his ﬁst, he brought down Dhruva, who had incessantly been striking him. He was thus slain and brought
down by the powerful son of Pandu. O great king! Having killed him, the immensely strong Bhimasena went to
Jayarata’s60 chariot and repeatedly roared like a lion. Having seized Jayarata by the left hand, he roared. While
Karna was stationed in front, he killed him with a slap of his palm. Karna hurled a golden javelin towards Pandava.
However, Pandu’s son laughed and seized it.61 The invincible Vrikodara hurled it back towards Karna. While it
was descending through the sky, Shakuni severed it with an arrow that had been soaked in oil.
‘“O king! Your sons62 advanced towards Bhima’s chariot. They enveloped Vrikodara with a mighty shower of
arrows. In that battle, Bhima laughed at Durmada and used his arrows to send his horses and charioteer to Yama’s
eternal abode. Durmada ascended Dushkarna’s chariot. Those two brothers, the scorchers of enemies, were mounted on the same chariot. In the forefront of that battle, they rushed against Bhima. They were like the lord of the
waters63 and Mitra attacking Taraka, supreme among daityas. Your sons, Durmada and Dushkarna, were mounted
on the same chariot and pierced Bhima with arrows. While Karna, Drona’s son, Duryodhana, Kripa, Somadatta
and Bahlika looked on, Pandava, the scorcher of enemies, kicked the chariot of the brave Durmada and Dushkarna
and made it sink into the ground. Extremely angry, he struck and crushed those powerful and brave sons of yours,
Dushkarna and Durmada, with his ﬁsts and foot. Cries of woe arose among the soldiers. On seeing Bhima, the
kings said, ‘The one who has grasped the sons of Dhritarashtra is Rudra in the form of Bhima.’ O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Having said this, all the kings ﬂed. They lost their senses and urged their mounts, with no two
of them running away together.
‘“At the commencement of the night, a great carnage was caused in the army. The immensely strong Vrikodara,
whose eyes were like a blooming lotus, was worshipped by the bulls among the kings. The powerful one went to
King Yudhishthira and honoured him. The twins, Drupada, Virata, Kekayas and Yudhishthira were supremely delighted. They showed great homage to Vrikodara, just as the gods did to Hara after Andhaka had been killed.64
Your sons, who were like Varuna’s sons, were ﬁlled with rage. With their great-souled preceptor and with chariots,
infantry and elephants, they violently surrounded Vrikodara from all sides, desiring to ﬁght with him. Everything
was covered in darkness, as dense as the clouds. At the commencement of the night, the great-souled and supreme
kings began to ﬁght an extraordinary and ﬁerce battle that gave rise to great fear and caused delight to wild crows,
wolves and vultures.”’
CHAPTER 1108(131)

‘Sanjaya said, “After his son65 was killed by Satyaki, though he had decided to fast to death, Somadatta became
extremely angry and spoke these words to Satyaki. ‘In earlier times, the gods have laid down norms of dharma for
kshatriyas. O Satvata! You abandoned those. Why did you resort to the dharma of bandits?66 In a battle, one who
is wise and follows the dharma of kshatriyas should not strike someone who is running away, someone who is distressed, someone who is without weapons or someone who has sought refuge. O Satvata! It is indeed said that,
among the Vrishnis, there are two mighty-armed warriors who are maharathas—Pradyumna and you. When his
arm had been severed by Partha, he had decided to fast to death. Why did you act cruelly and bring him down
then? O Satvata! O one who prides himself on bravery! I swear by my two beloved sons67 and by all my good
deeds, that as long as Partha Jishnu does not protect you, with your sons and your brothers, before this night is
over, I will kill you. O wretch of the Vrishni lineage! If not, let me descend into a terrible hell.’ Having said this,
the immensely strong Somadatta angrily blew on his conch shell and roared loudly, like a lion. The immensely
strong Satvata possessed teeth like a lion and eyes like the petals of lotuses. He became extremely angry and spoke
these words to Somadatta. ‘Your brave son, maharatha Bhurishrava, has been killed. O king! His brother, Shala,
has also been afﬂicted by grief.68 I will also kill you today, with your sons, animals and relatives. O Kourava!
Make special efforts to remain stationed in this battle. O one with a drum on your banner! King Yudhishthira has

always engaged in donations, self-control, purity, non-violence, modesty, fortitude and forgiveness. Because of
that constancy, your energy has already been sapped. With Karna and Soubala, you will be destroyed in this battle.
I swear on Krishna’s feet and on all my good deeds, that I will angrily slay you and your sons in this battle. You
will escape only if you decide to run away.’ Having addressed each other in this way, those two supreme of men
began to shoot arrows at each other, with eyes that were red with rage.
‘“With a thousand elephants and ten thousand horses, Duryodhana surrounded Somadatta and stationed himself
there. The angry Shakuni, supreme among wielders of all weapons, also surrounded him, with his sons, grandsons
and brothers who were like Indra in valour. O mighty-armed one! Your brother-in-law was young and was capable
of withstanding the vajra. The intelligent one had one hundred thousand horses ahead of him. He surrounded and
protected the great archer, Somadatta, with these. Protected by these, the powerful one69 enveloped Satyaki with
arrows. On seeing that he was enveloped by arrows with straight tufts, Dhrishtadyumna became angry. He gathered a large army and advanced. O king! Those two armies clashed against each other, as if two oceans were agitated by turbulent storms. Somadatta pierced Satyaki with nine arrows and Satyaki struck the bull among the Kuru
lineage with ten. Having been thus pierced in the battle by the powerful one with a ﬁrm bow, he70 became senseless and sank down on the ﬂoor of his chariot. On seeing that he had lost consciousness, Somadatta’s charioteer
quickly bore the maharatha away from the ﬁeld of battle. On seeing that he had lost his senses and was afﬂicted by
Yuyudhana’s arrows, Drona’s son angrily attacked Satvata in the ﬁeld of battle.
‘“On seeing that he was descending towards the chariot of Shini’s descendant, Bhimasena’s son71 angrily countered him. He was on an extremely large and terrible chariot that was made completely out of iron and covered
with the skins of bears. It was drawn by mounts that looked like elephants. But those were neither horses, nor elephants. It had eight distorted wheels. A king of vultures was perched on the top of the standard. It dilated its eyes
and shrieked. The ﬂags were red and green and decorated with garlands of entrails. He was stationed on that large
chariot with eight wheels. Riding this, he was surrounded by one akshouhini of rakshasas, possessing terrible
forms. On seeing him advance with his great bow, the kings were agitated and distressed. He was like the Destroyer at the end of a yuga, like Yama with a staff in his hand. On seeing him, your son’s army was agitated and afﬂicted by fear. They were like waves in the Ganga, agitated by the wind into whirlpools. Ghatotkacha roared like a lion
and terriﬁed by this, the elephants exuded urine. The men were extremely miserable. Once twilight has passed, the
rakshasas become even more powerful on earth. In every direction, they brought down a shower of boulders. Iron
wheels, catapults, lances, javelins, spears, shataghnis and battleaxes showered down incessantly. On seeing the
ﬁerce and terrible state in the ﬁeld of battle, the kings, your sons and Karna were distressed and ﬂed in different
directions. However, Drona’s son was proud of his strength of weapons and he alone was not distressed. He used
his arrows to destroy the maya that had been created by Ghatotkacha. When that maya was destroyed, Ghatotkacha
became angry. Senseless with rage, he showered down terrible arrows. These were forceful and penetrated Ashvatthama, like snakes entering a termite hill. The arrows were covered with blood and penetrated Sharadvati’s
son.72 Those gold-tufted arrows, sharpened on stone, swiftly entered the ground. The powerful Ashvatthama, light
in the use of his hands, became angry. He angrily pierced Ghatotkacha with ten arrows. Ghatotkacha was severely
wounded in his inner organs by Drona’s son. He picked up a chakra with a hundred thousand spokes. Its edges
were as sharp as a razor. It had the complexion of the rising sun and was decorated with gems and diamonds.
Wishing to kill Ashvatthama, Bhimasena’s son hurled it. Though it descended with great force, Drona’s son used
arrows to swiftly shatter it into fragments. It was foiled and fell down on the ground, like the wishes of an unfortunate person. On seeing that the chakra had been brought down, Ghatotkacha quickly enveloped Drona’s son with
arrows, like Svarbhanu73 covering the sun.
‘“Ghatotkacha’s son was handsome and was like a mass of collyrium. As Drona’s son advanced, he checked
him, like a king of mountains against the wind. Anjanaparva, Bhimasena’s grandson, brought down a shower of
arrows and he74 looked like Mount Meru, with rain from a cloud pouring down on it. Ashvatthama was like
Rudra, Upendra75 and Indra in his valour and he was not frightened. He severed Anjanaparva’s standard with an
arrow and cut down his two charioteers with two others. With three others, he severed the trivenu.76 He severed

his bow with one and struck his four horses with four. Deprived of his chariot, he77 grasped a sword in his hand
and it was decorated with golden dots. With an extremely sharp arrow, he78 severed the sword into two fragments.
O king! The son of Hidimba’s son quickly grasped a golden club and whirling it, hurled it. However, Drona’s son
struck it with his arrows and made it fall down. At this, Anjanaparva rose up into the sky and began to roar like a
dark cloud. He showered down trees from the sky. Ghatotkacha’s son was versed in maya. But Drona’s son used
arrows to strike him in the sky, like the rays of the sun against clouds. He then descended and once again stationed
himself on his chariot, decorated with gold. Anjanaparva was as beautiful as a lofty mountain. He was clad in iron
armour. But Drona’s son killed Anjanaparva, the son of Bhima’s son, like Maheshvara against Andhaka.
‘“On seeing that his immensely strong son had been killed by Ashvatthama, he79 approached Drona’s son,
whose armlets seemed to be blazing with anger. Without any fear, he spoke these words to Sharadvati’s son, who
was then consuming the army of the Pandavas, like a ﬁre that has arisen in the forest. ‘O Drona’s son! Stay. You
will not escape from me with your life. I will kill you today, like Agni’s son destroyed Krouncha.’80 Ashvatthama
replied, ‘O child! Go and ﬁght with others. O one who possesses the valour of an immortal! O Hidimba’s son! It is
not proper that a father should ﬁght with a son.81 O Hidimba’s son! I have no desire to be angry with you. However, if anger is generated, one may end up killing one’s own self.’ Bhimasena’s son was overcome with sorrow on
account of his son. On hearing these words, his eyes became coppery red with rage. He approached Ashvatthama
and said, ‘O Drona’s son! Do you think that I am an ordinary person, who will be distressed in this battle? I have
been born from Bhima, in the noble lineage of the Kurus. I am a son of the Pandavas and they never retreat from a
battle. I am a lord of the rakshasas and I am Dashagriva’s82 equal in strength. O son of Drona! Wait. Wait. You
will not escape from me with your life. On the ﬁeld of the battle today, I will destroy your love for ﬁghting.’ Having spoken these words, the extremely strong rakshasa, with eyes coppery red in rage, angrily attacked Drona’s
son, like a lion against a king of elephants. Ghatotkacha showered down wheels of chariots and arrows, like a
cloud showering rain. These descended on Drona’s son, bull among rathas. But before that shower of arrows could
reach him, Drona’s son countered them with his arrows. It seemed that a battle was raging in the sky between those
two sets of arrows. Because of the friction from those weapons, sparks of ﬂame were generated and at the commencement of the night, the sky seemed to be bright with ﬁreﬂies. Drona’s son, proud in battle, paciﬁed and destroyed that maya. Seeing that his maya had been dispelled, Ghatotkacha disappeared again. He assumed the form
of a lofty mountain, with trees crowding the summit. It had large fountains, from which, spears, javelins, swords
and clubs ﬂowed like water. Drona’s son saw that mountain, which was like a mass of collyrium. Large numbers of
weapons issued from it. Drona’s son smiled and invoked the vajra weapon. Struck by that weapon, that king of
mountains was quickly destroyed. He83 then became a blue cloud in the ﬁrmament, decorated with Indra’s
weapon.84 He brought down a shower of boulders and covered Drona’s son in that battle. Drona’s son, supreme
among those who have knowledge of weapons, then afﬁxed the vayavya weapon and struck the blue cloud that had
arisen. Drona’s son covered all the directions with his large numbers of arrows. The supreme of men killed a hundred thousand rathas. He then saw that Ghatotkacha was again fearlessly advancing towards him on a chariot, with
his bow stretched, and surrounded by many rakshasas. They were like lions and tigers and like crazy elephants in
their valour. They were on elephants and chariots and astride the backs of horses. Their mouths gaped. Their heads
and necks were ﬁerce. These were the followers of Hidimba’s son. There were Poulastyas and Yatudhanas.85 They
were extremely terrible in their valour. Those brave ones wielded many kinds of weapons and were clad in many
kinds of armour and ornaments. They were immensely strong and made a ﬁerce noise. Their eyes were dilated
with rage. Those rakshasas, invincible in battle, arrived to ﬁght.
‘“On seeing them, your son was distressed and Drona’s son spoke to him. ‘O Duryodhana! Wait. You should not
feel any fear now. With your brothers, and with the kings who are like Indra in valour, remain here. I will slay your
enemies, so that you do not suffer defeat. I tell you this truthfully. Assure your army.’ Duryodhana replied, ‘Since
your mind is vast, I do not think that what you have said is wonderful. O descendant of the Goutama lineage! Your
devotion to us is great.’ Having spoken these words to Ashvatthama, he then spoke to Soubala. ‘Dhananjaya is surrounded by a hundred thousand rathas, who are ornaments on the ﬁeld of battle. Advance against Dhananjaya with

sixty thousand elephants and Karna, Vrishasena, Kripa and Nila. The ones from the north, Kritavarma, Purumitra,
Shrutaparna, Duhshasana, Nikumbha, Kundabhedi, Urukrama, Puranjaya, Dridharatha, Pataki, Hemapankaja,
Shalya, Aruni, Indrasena, Sanjaya, Vijaya, Jaya, Kamalaksha, Puru, Krathi, Jayavarma and Sudarshana—these will
follow you with sixty thousand foot soldiers. O maternal uncle! Slay Bhima, the twins and Dharmaraja, like Indra
of the gods against the asuras. My hopes of victory are established in you. They have been severely struck by the
arrows of Drona’s son and have been wounded in the battle. O maternal uncle! Kill the Kounteyas, like the son of
the ﬁre86 against the asuras.’ O king! Having been thus addressed by your son, Soubala swiftly departed to destroy
the Pandavas and delighted your son.
‘“Meanwhile, during that night, there was an extremely terrible battle between Drona’s son and the rakshasas,
like that between Shakra and Prahlada. Extremely angry, Ghatotkacha struck Goutami’s son in the chest with ten
arrows that were as ﬁrm as poison or the ﬁre. He was severely struck by those arrows shot by Bhima’s son and wavered on his chariot, like a tree struck by the wind. Ghatotkacha then used an anjalika arrow that was extremely
radiant to quickly sever the bow in the hand of Drona’s son. Drona’s son grasped another bow that was large and
was capable of bearing a heavy burden. He showered down sharp arrows, like rain ﬂowing down from a cloud. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Sharadvati’s son dispatched many gold-tufted arrows that were capable of
killing the enemy, towards the sky and towards the one who was ranging in the sky.87 Afﬂicted by the arrows of
Drona’s son, those large numbers of broad-chested rakshasas looked like crazy elephants that were tormented by
lions. The lord consumed those rakshasas, with their horses, charioteers and chariots, with his arrows. He was like
the illustrious ﬁre, consuming beings at the time of the destruction of a yuga. He severely consumed one akshouhini of nairritas88 with his arrows, like the god Maheshvara burning down the city of Tripura in the sky.89 He was
like the powerful god90 who burns all beings at the end of a yuga. Having consumed them for the sake of your
welfare, Drona’s son, foremost among victorious ones, was resplendent. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! No
one among the thousands of kings and the Pandavas was capable of glancing towards Drona’s son in that battle.
The only exception was the brave Ghatotkacha, the immensely strong Indra among the rakshasas.
‘“O foremost among the Bharata lineage! His eyes were red with rage. He slapped his palms against each other
and bit his lower lips. He angrily addressed his own charioteer. ‘Take me to the son of Drona.’ He was borne on a
chariot that was terrible in form and had a victorious ﬂag fastened to it. The destroyer of enemies again engaged in
a duel with Drona’s son. The rakshasa angrily hurled an extremely terrible vajra, made by Rudra, towards Drona’s
son. It possessed eight wheels. Drona’s son abandoned his chariot and bow and leapt down. He seized it,91 hurled
it back and again ascended his chariot. Immensely radiant, it consumed his92 horses, charioteer, standard and
mounts. Having done this, the extremely terrible vajra penetrated the earth. On witnessing that deed of Drona’s
son, where he had leapt down and seized the extremely terrible weapon made by Shankara, all the beings worshipped him. O king! Going to Dhrishtadyumna’s chariot, Bhimasena’s son again released sharp arrows towards
the broad chest of Drona’s son. Without any fear, Dhrishtadyumna also shot gold-tufted arrows that were like venomous serpents towards the chest of Drona’s son. Drona’s son shot thousands of iron arrows at them. However,
those two lions among men used their own arrows, which were like ﬂames of ﬁre, to counter them. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! That extremely ﬁerce battle delighted all warriors. With a thousand chariots, three hundred
elephants and six thousand horses, Bhima arrived at that spot.
‘“Drona’s son, the performer of unblemished deeds and with dharma in his soul, fought with the rakshasa who
was Bhima’s son and Dhrishtadyumna and his followers. Drona’s son displayed his extraordinary valour. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! We think that no other being is capable of such deeds. While Bhimasena, Hidimba’s son, Parshata, the twin warriors, Dharma’s son, Vijaya and Achyuta looked on, within an instant, he used
sharp arrows to destroy one akshouhini of rakshasas, with their horses, charioteers, chariots and elephants. Severely struck and afﬂicted by iron arrows, elephants sank and fell down on the ground, like mountains with two
peaks.93 The trunks of elephants were severed. Immobile elephants were strewn around on the ground. Others
writhed, like serpents. O king! The earth was beautiful, with golden rods that were ﬂung away and umbrellas. It
looked like the ﬁrmament, at the time of the destruction of a yuga, studded with many moons, suns and planets.
Standards were strewn around like frogs and drums were scattered like tortoises. The umbrellas were like arrays of

swans. The garlands and whisks were like foam. Herons and vultures were giant crocodiles. The many weapons
were the ﬁsh. Chariots that were hurled away were like giant banks. The beautiful ﬂags were the trees. The extremely terrible arrows were the smaller ﬁsh. The lances and spears were the ﬁerce lizards. The marrow and ﬂesh
constituted the large mire. Headless torsos were the rafts. The hair was the moss and it increased terror among
those who were cowards. The horse riders were giant serpents and there was an inexhaustible ﬂow of bodies.
There was an immensely forceful river of blood that was created by Drona’s son. Warriors lamented in loud tones.
The wounds94 were the waves. That extremely terrible river ﬂowed towards the ocean that was Yama’s eternal
abode.
‘“Having killed the rakshasas, Drona’s son struck Hidimba’s son with his arrows. Drona’s immensely strong son
was extremely angry. He again struck Vrikodara, the Parshatas and the other Parthas with large numbers of iron
arrows. The lord killed Suratha, Drupada’s son. In that battle, he again killed Shrutanjaya, Suratha’s younger brother. O Indra among kings! Drona’s son slew Balanika, Jayanika, Jaya and Shrutaharya95 and sent them to Yama’s
abode. With three other sharp arrows that were well tufted and garlanded with gold, he killed the powerful Shatrunjaya and sent him to Shakra’s world. He killed Prishaghna and the insolent Chandradeva. He killed ten of Kuntibhoja’s sons with ten arrows. Ashvatthama was extremely angry. He afﬁxed a supreme arrow and drawing his
bow back all the way up to his ear, released that supreme arrow, which was terrible and like Yama’s staff. He
quickly shot it towards Ghatotkacha. O lord of the earth! That great and well-tufted arrow pierced the rakshasa’s
heart and swiftly penetrated the earth. On seeing him fall, maharatha Dhrishtadyumna thought that he had been
killed. O Indra among kings! He removed him from the presence of Drona’s son and placed him on another chariot. O king! At this, Yudhishthira’s chariots and soldiers retreated. They were defeated in that battle and Drona’s
brave son roared. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He was worshipped by all the beings and by your sons.
Bodies of rakshasas96 were strewn around everywhere. Their bodies were mangled by hundreds of arrows and
they were killed and brought down. Having been killed, they fell down on the ground, which seemed to be strewn
with mountain peaks and was terrible and impassable. The siddhas, the gandharvas, masses of pishachas, serpents,
birds, ancestors, winged animals,97 large numbers of rakshasas, innumerable beings, apsaras and gods worshipped
Drona’s son.”’
CHAPTER 1109(132)

‘Sanjaya said, “On seeing that Drupada’s sons, Kuntibhoja’s sons and thousands of rakshasas had been killed by
Drona’s son, Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna and Yuyudhana united and made up their minds
to ﬁght. On beholding Satyaki in that battle, Somadatta again became angry and enveloped him in every direction
with a great shower of arrows. There was an extremely terrible battle between those on your side and the enemy
and it increased fear. It was ﬁerce and was fought by those who desired victory. For the sake of Satvata, Bhima
pierced Kourava Somadatta with ten arrows and the brave one pierced him back with one hundred. The aged
one98 possessed all the qualities, like Yayati, the son of Nahusha. On account of his son, he was overcome with
grief. Satvata angrily pierced him with ten sharp arrows that possessed the force of the vajra. Having struck him
with great power, he again pierced him with seven arrows. For Satvata’s sake, Bhimasena hurled a new, ﬁrm and
terrible club towards Somadatta’s head. In that battle, Satyaki angrily shot a supreme arrow towards Somadatta’s
chest. It was like the ﬁre to the touch and was well tufted. The terrible club and the arrow simultaneously descended on the body of the ratha and maharatha Somadatta fell down. On seeing that his son99 was unconscious, Bahlika attacked and released a shower of arrows, like a cloud that pours at the right time. For the sake of Satvata, in the
forefront of that battle, Bhima afﬂicted and pierced the great-souled Bahlika with nine arrows. Pratipa’s son was
enraged. The mighty-armed one struck Bhima on the chest with a lance, like Purandara hurling the vajra. Having
been struck by it, Bhima trembled and lost his senses. Having recovered his senses, the powerful one hurled an
iron club. Thus struck by Pandava, Bahlika’s head was severed. He was killed and fell down on the ground, like a
king of mountains shattered by thunder.
‘“On seeing that the brave Bahlika, bull among men, had been killed, ten of your sons, who were like
Dasharatha’s sons,100 attacked Bhima. Bhima killed your sons with ten iron arrows. He then countered Karna’s

beloved son, Vrishasena. At this, Karna’s famous brother, Vrisharatha, struck Bhima with iron arrows and was
killed by that powerful one. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhima then used iron arrows to kill seven brave
rathas and uprooted your brother-in-law, Shatachandra. Unable to tolerate the death of maharatha Shatachandra,
Shakuni’s brave brothers, Gajaksha, Sharabha and Vibhu, attacked Bhimasena and struck him with sharp arrows.
They afﬂicted him and poured down a shower of powerful iron arrows. But he killed those ﬁve extremely powerful
rathas with ﬁve arrows.101 On seeing that those brave ones had been killed, the best of kings began to tremble.
‘“O unblemished one! While the one who had been born in a pot102 and your sons looked on, Yudhishthira angrily destroyed your soldiers. In that battle, Yudhishthira dispatched the Ambashthas, Malavas, brave Trigartas,
Shibis and large numbers of others to the world of the dead. The king cut down the Abhishahas, Shurasenas,
Bahlikas and Vasatikas and caused the earth to be covered with a mire of blood. O king! In that battle that involved
many people, Yudhishthira used his arrows to send brave warriors from Madraka to the land of the dead. In the direction of Yudhishthira’s chariot, a tumultuous sound arose. ‘Kill. Seize. Capture. Pierce. Slice down.’ On seeing
that your soldiers were being driven away by Yudhishthira, Drona was urged by your son and countered him with
his arrows. Drona was extremely angry and unleashed the vayavya weapon at the king. But he103 destroyed that
divine weapon with another weapon. When that weapon was destroyed by Yudhishthira, Bharadvaja’s son hurled
varuna, yamya, agneya, tvashtra and savitra weapons.104 He was extremely enraged and wished to kill the descendant of the Pandu lineage. However, the mighty-armed one, who knew about dharma, was not frightened. He
used his weapons to destroy all the weapons that had been hurled by the one who had been born in a pot. The one
who had been born in a pot wished to fulﬁl the pledge that he had made.105 O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
He released the aindra and prajapatya weapons.106 He wished to kill the son of dharma and was devoted to ensuring your son’s welfare. The lord of the Kurus107 possessed the gait of an elephant and a lion. He was broad in
the chest and his eyes were large and red. His energy was not inferior.108 He invoked the mahendra weapon109
and destroyed those weapons. On seeing that his weapons had been destroyed, Drona was overcome with anger.
Wishing to destroy Yudhishthira, he unleashed the brahma weapon.110 Everything was covered in darkness and
we could see nothing. O lord of the earth! All the beings were full of great terror. O Indra among kings! On seeing
that a brahmastra had been invoked, Yudhishthira, Kunti’s son, used a brahmastra to counter it. At this, all the foremost of warriors praised those bulls among men. The great archers, Drona and Partha, were skilled in all forms of
ﬁghting.
‘“Drona abandoned Kounteya and attacked Drupada’s soldiers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! His eyes
were coppery red in anger and he destroyed them with the vayavya weapon. Slaughtered by Drona, the Panchalas
ﬂed, while Bhimasena and the great-souled Partha111 were looking. Kiriti and Bhima used their power to make
them return. They attacked your army with two large arrays of chariots. Bibhatsu was on the right and Vrikodara
was on the left ﬂank. They showered down a great torrent of arrows on Bharadvaja’s son. O great king! The Srinjayas, the immensely energetic Panchalas and the Matsyas and Satvatas followed them. The army of the Bharatas
was then slaughtered by Kiriti. O great king! Drona and your own son112 tried to counter them. But they were incapable of countering those warriors.”’
CHAPTER 1110(133)

‘Sanjaya said, “On seeing that the large army of the Pandavas had been stirred up and thinking that it could not be
resisted, Duryodhana spoke to Karna. ‘O one who is devoted to friends! The time for friends has arrived.113 O
Karna! In the battle, save all these extremely powerful warriors. The Panchalas, Matysas, Kekayas and the maharatha Pandavas have angrily surrounded them and are sighing like serpents. Desiring victory, these Pandavas are
roaring in delight. There are many Panchalas on chariots and they are like Shakra in valour.’
‘“Karna replied, ‘Even if Purandara arrives as a saviour, I will quickly defeat and kill Pandava.114 O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! I know this to be the truth. Be comforted. I will slay the son of Pandu and the assembled
Panchalas. I know that there will be victory, like Pavaka’s son giving it to Vasava.115 O lord of the earth! I am

alive to do that which brings you pleasure. Among all the Parthas, Phalguna is supreme in strength. I will hurl this
invincible spear towards him, one that has been created by Shakra. O one who grants honours! Once that great
archer has been slain, his brothers will come under your control and will again be exiled to the forest. O Kouravya!
As long as I am alive, you should never sorrow. I will defeat all the Pandavas in the battle, together with the Panchalas, the Kekayas and the assembled Vrishnis. I will use torrents of arrows to make them porcupines and give the
earth to you.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “When Karna said this, the mighty-armed Kripa Sharadvata smiled and spoke these words to the
son of the suta. ‘O Karna! Wonderful. This is wonderful. The bull among the Kuru lineage has a protector. O Radheya! With you as a protector, if only words could bring success. O Karna! In Kouravya’s presence, you speak a
lot. But one rarely witnesses your valour or your strength. We have seen you in many encounters with the son of
Pandu. O son of a suta! You have always been defeated by Pandava. O Karna! When the son of Dhritarashtra was
being taken away by the gandharvas, all the soldiers fought. You were the sole exception and you ran away.116 O
Karna! In the city of Virata, all the united Kouravas were defeated by Partha in a battle and that included you and
your younger brother.117 In the ﬁeld of battle, you are incapable of withstanding Phalguna alone. How can you
have the enterprise to defeat all the Pandavas, together with Krishna? O Karna! O son of a suta! You have spoken a
lot about ﬁghting. Do not speak and show your valour now. That is the vow which virtuous men follow. O son of a
suta! You are always thundering, like clouds in the autumn, which do not have any water. O Karna! You are seen to
be without success. But the king does not understand this. O Radheya! You will roar as long as you do not see
Partha. When you see Partha in front of you, your roars will become rare. You will roar as long as you are beyond
the reach of Phalguna’s arrows. Once you are pierced by Partha’s arrows, your roars will be rare. Kshatriyas show
their valour through their arms. Brahmanas show their valour through their eloquence with words. Phalguna’s
bravery is in his bow. Karna’s bravery is in his fancies.’
‘“When Sharadvata addressed these harsh words to him, Karna, supreme among strikers, spoke these words to
Kripa. ‘Brave ones always roar, like clouds that shower down rain. Once seeds have been sown in the soil, the
fruits are soon obtained. I do not see any faults in brave ones who are in the vanguard of the battle and having taken up heavy burdens, indulge in boasting. When a man bears a burden, it is also established in his mind. It is certain that destiny also aids him then. In my mind, I have resolved to take up an extremely heavy and unmatched
burden. O brahmana! If I decide to thunder then, how does it harm you in any way? Like clouds that are full of water, brave ones do not roar in vain. Knowing their own capacity, the Pandavas are roaring. I will make endeavours
in the battle today, against the united Krishna and Pandava. O Goutama! I am thundering because of the initiative
that has been generated. O brahmana! With your followers, behold the fruits of that roaring. I will kill the sons of
Pandu, together with Krishna and the Satvatas. I will give Duryodhana the earth, bereft of all thorns.’
‘“Kripa replied, ‘O son of a suta! These fancies are delusions and I do not accept them. You have spoken about
ﬂinging away the two Krishnas and Pandava Dharmaraja. O Karna! Victory is certain for the side that has those
two, skilled in ﬁghting.118 Even if gods, gandharvas, yakshas, men, serpents and rakshasas armour themselves,
Krishna and Pandava cannot be conquered in a battle. Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, is devoted to brahmanas. He is
truthful in speech and self-controlled. He worships his seniors and the gods. He is always devoted to dharma. In
particular, he is skilled in the use of weapons. He is intelligent and grateful. His brothers are strong and have practised the use of all weapons. They are devoted to serving their superiors. They are wise, always devoted to dharma
and illustrious. Their relatives have Indra’s valour. They are skilled in striking and are devoted to them. Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Durmukha’s son,119 Janamejaya, Chandrasena, Bhadrasena, Kirtidharma, Dhruva, Dhara,
Vasuchandra, Damachandra, Simhachandra, Suvedhana, Drupada’s sons, Drupada, who knows about the use of
great weapons, the king of Matsya and his followers, Shatanika, Sudashana, Shrutanika, Shrutadvaja, Balanika,
Jayanika, Jayashva, Rathavahana, Chandrodaya, Kamaratha, Virata’s handsome brothers, the twins, Droupadi’s
sons and the rakshasa Ghatotkacha are ﬁghting for their sake. When these are on their side, they cannot be destroyed. If they so desire, the entire universe, with gods, asuras and men, with the yakshas, masses of rakshasas,
beings, serpents and elephants can be destroyed through the valour of the weapons of Bhima and Phalguna. Yudhishthira can consume the earth with his sight. The armoured Shouri is engaged in their cause and his strength is

immeasurable. O Karna! How can you contemplate vanquishing the enemy in a battle? O son of a suta! You have
always been extremely stupid, since you are thinking of engaging with Shouri in the battle.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “O bull among the Bharata lineage! Thus addressed, Radheya laughed. Karna spoke these words
to the preceptor, Kripa Sharadvata. ‘O brahmana! The words that you have spoken about the Pandavas are indeed
true. That apart, there are many other qualities vested in Pandu’s son. Partha cannot be vanquished in battle, even
by the gods, with Vasava, and by the daityas, yakshas, gandharvas, pishachas, serpents and rakshasas. But even
then, I can defeat Partha because of the spear that has been given to me by Vasava. O brahmana! The spear that
Shakra has given me is incapable of being repulsed. In the battle, I will kill Savyasachi with this. Once Pandava
has been killed, Krishna and his brothers will never be able to enjoy the earth, since Arjuna won’t be there. All of
them will be destroyed. O Goutama! Without making any efforts, the earth, with all its oceans, will come under
Kourava’s suzerainty. There is no doubt that good policies can ensure success in everything. O Goutama! I am
roaring because I know all this. You are a brahmana and are aged. You are incapable in battle. You are deluded by
affection towards Partha and are insulting me. O brahmana! O evil-minded one! If you again speak such injurious
words to me, I will take out my sword and slice off your tongue. O brahmana! You wish to praise the Pandavas in
this encounter, in order to frighten all the soldiers and the Kouravas. O brahmana! Listen to the words I have to say
on this. Duryodhana, Drona, Shakuni, Durmukha, Jaya, Duhshasana, Vrishasena, the king of Madra, you, Somadatta, Bhuri,120 Drona’s son and Vivimshati have stationed themselves in this battle. All of them are skilled in
ﬁghting. They are brave and skilled in the use of weapons. They wish to attain heaven. They are knowledgeable
about dharma. They are skilled in ﬁghting. In a battle, they can kill even the gods. They are stationed in this battle,
wishing to kill the Pandavas. These armoured ones wish for Kouraveya’s victory. Even for extremely powerful
ones, I think that victory depends on destiny, since the mighty-armed Bhishma is lying down, having been pierced
by a hundred arrows. Vikarna, Chitrasena, Bahlika, Jayadratha, Bhurishrava, Jaya, Jalasandha, Sudakshina, Shala,
best among rathas, the valiant Bhagadatta and many other brave kings, who were extremely difﬁcult even for the
gods to vanquish, have been killed in this battle, though they were stronger than the Pandavas. O worst of men! Do
you not think that this is nothing but destiny? O brahmana! You have always sought to satisfy Duryodhana’s enemies. Even among them, hundreds and thousands of brave ones have been killed. All the soldiers, of both the Kurus and the Pandavas, have been destroyed. I do not see any power on the part of the Pandavas. O worst of brahmanas! You have always thought them to be strong. I will ﬁght against them in this battle, to the best of my capacity, for the sake of ensuring Duryodhana’s welfare. Victory is determined by destiny.’”’
CHAPTER 1111(134)

‘Sanjaya said, “On seeing that the son of the suta had addressed harsh words towards his maternal uncle,121
Drona’s son powerfully raised his sword and rushed against him. Ashvatthama said, ‘O Karna! O extremely evilminded one! O worst of men! O one with wicked intelligence! Behold. I will use this sword to sever your head
from your body.’ O great king! On seeing him forcefully attack, King Duryodhana himself and Kripa, foremost
among men, restrained him. Karna said, ‘O supreme among Kurus! This worst of brahmanas122 is evil-minded.
He brags about his bravery in battle. Set him free and let him have a taste of my valour.’ Ashvatthama replied, ‘O
son of a suta! O extremely evil-minded one! This transgression of yours will be pardoned by us. But this increasing insolence of yours will be destroyed by Phalguna.’ Duryodhana said, ‘O Ashvatthama! O one who grants honours! Be paciﬁed. You should pardon him. You should never be angry with the son of the suta. You, Karna, Kripa,
Drona, the king of Madra and Soubala have to undertake a great task. O supreme among brahmanas! Be paciﬁed.
All the Pandavas are advancing in this direction, wishing to ﬁght with Radheya. O brahmana! They are attacking
in every direction.’ The valiant Karna, foremost among rathas, raised the best of bows. He was surrounded by the
foremost of the Kouravas, like Shakra by masses of gods. Resorting to the strength of his own arms, the energetic
one remained stationed there.
‘“O great king! A battle then commenced between Karna and the Pandavas. They angrily rushed at each other,
roaring like lions. On seeing the mighty-armed Karna, in that great battle, they123 let out a roar. ‘There is Karna.
Where is Karna stationed? Karna, wait. O evil-souled one! O worst of men! Fight with us.’ Others saw Karna and

their eyes became red with anger. They said, ‘This son of a suta is limited in his intelligence. He deserves to be
killed by all these lions among kings. No purpose is served by his remaining alive. He shows extreme enmity towards the Parthas. This man has always been wicked. He bases himself on Duryodhana’s advice and is the root of
all injury. Let us kill him.’ Thus conversing, the kshatriyas attacked. Goaded by the Pandaveyas, to kill the son of
the suta, the maharathas enveloped him with a great shower of arrows. On seeing all those maharathas advancing
towards him, the son of the suta was not distressed. He was not overcome by fear. He saw that advancing ocean of
soldiers, like a city. He was powerful and undefeated in battle. O bull among the Bharata lineage! For the sake of
your sons, the extremely powerful one, swift in the use of his hands, released a shower of arrows and countered
those soldiers in every direction. The kings also showered down arrows on him. They brandished hundreds and
thousands of bows. They fought against Radheya, like masses of daityas against Shakra. In every direction, the
lord Karna used his great shower of arrows to counter the shower of arrows that were released by the kings. As
they sought to counter each other’s deeds, it was extraordinary, like Shakra against the danavas, in the battle between the gods and the asuras. We witnessed the extraordinary dexterity shown by the son of the suta then. Though
they strove in the battle, the enemy could not strike him. He repulsed the storm of arrows released by the maharatha kings. With sharp arrows that were marked with his own name, Radheya pierced yokes, umbrellas, standards and horses. Oppressed by Karna, the kings became anxious. At that time, they were like cows afﬂicted by the
cold. Horses, elephants and rathas were slain. We saw that large numbers of them were brought down by Karna. O
king! Heads and arms were strewn around in every direction. The earth was strewn with brave ones who did not
retreat. They were killed and were being killed. There were lamentations everywhere. With all those ﬁerce warriors, the place looked like Vaivasvata’s124 city.
‘“On witnessing Karna’s valour, King Duryodhana approached Ashvatthama and spoke these words. ‘In this
battle, the armoured Karna is ﬁghting with all the kings. Behold. Afﬂicted by Karna’s arrows, the soldiers are running away. They are like an army of the asuras, being driven away by Kartikeya. In this encounter, the soldiers can
be seen to have been defeated by the intelligent Karna. Look. Bibhatsu is advancing, wishing to kill the son of the
suta. Therefore, take appropriate steps, so that the maharatha son of a suta is not killed by Pandava in the battle.’
At this, Drona’s son, Kripa, Shalya and maharatha Hardikya advanced against Partha, with a view to rescuing the
son of a suta. On seeing that they were advancing, Kounteya advanced against Karna, like the gods and the powerful Shakra against Vritra.”
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O suta! On seeing the angry Phalguna advance, like Death, what did Vaikartana Karna do
next? The maharatha has always sought to rival Partha. In an encounter, he was conﬁdent that he would defeat the
extremely ﬁerce Bibhatsu. He now suddenly obtained someone towards whom he has always borne extreme enmity. O suta! What did Vaikartana Karna do next?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “Pandava was advancing, like an elephant against another elephant. On seeing this, Karna fearlessly advanced against Dhananjaya. When Vaikartana’s arrows descended with force, the energetic Pandava, the
scorcher of enemies, countered them. O venerable one! Karna enveloped him with a net of arrows. Extremely angry, he pierced him with his arrows. The immensely strong Partha could not tolerate his dexterity. The scorcher of
enemies released thirty arrows towards the son of a suta. These arrows were sharp, pointed at the tip, and sharpened on stone. Extremely enraged, the powerful and valiant one pierced him on the forefront of his left arm with
another arrow and seemed to be laughing. Having been pierced with great force, the bow fell down from his hand.
But in an instant, the immensely strong one125 picked up another bow and displaying the lightness of his hands,
shrouded Phalguna with a storm of arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The son of a suta released a
shower of arrows. Dhananjaya smiled and countered that shower of arrows. O king! They showered down arrows
at each other. Those great archers enveloped each other, wishing to outdo each other’s deeds. In that battle, there
was a wonderful encounter between Karna and Pandava. They were angry, like wild elephants driven by desire.126
On beholding Karna’s prowess, Partha, the great archer, quickly severed the bow from his hand. With four broadheaded arrows, he dispatched his horses to Yama’s abode. The scorcher of enemies severed his charioteer’s head
from his body. His bow was severed. His horses were slain. His charioteer was killed. Partha, Pandu’s descendant,
pierced him with four arrows. With his horses slain, that bull among men swiftly got down from his chariot. Afﬂicted by those arrows, he quickly climbed onto Kripa’s chariot.

‘“O bull among the Bharata lineage! On seeing that Radheya had been defeated and afﬂicted by Dhananjaya’s
arrows, those on your side ﬂed in the ten directions. O king! On seeing that they were running away, King Duryodhana restrained them and spoke these words to them. ‘O brave ones! Do not run away. O bulls among the kshatriyas! Stay here. To kill Partha in this battle, I will myself advance. I will kill Partha, together with the Panchalas
and the Somakas. Today, I will ﬁght with the wielder of Gandiva. Partha will witness my valour, which is like
Death at the end of a yuga. I will release thousands of nets of arrows. The warriors will see them in the battle, descending like locusts. I will shower down arrows from my bow, like from clouds at the end of summer. The warriors and the soldiers will see them. With my straight-tufted arrows, I will vanquish Partha in the battle today. O
brave ones! Stay in this battle and give up your fear of Phalguna. Phalguna will not be able to withstand my valour
today. I will be like the shoreline, holding back the ocean that is the abode of makaras.’ Having said this, surrounded by a large army of soldiers, the king advanced towards the invincible Phalguna. His eyes were red with rage.
‘“On seeing that the mighty-armed one was advancing, Sharadvata approached Ashvatthama and spoke these
words to him. ‘This mighty-armed king is intolerant and has lost his senses because of his rage. Following the conduct of insects,127 he wishes to ﬁght with Phalguna. While we look on, he will give up his life before Partha. As
long as he is not within the reach of Phalguna’s arrows, the Kourava king will be alive. O brave one! Quickly restrain him. Partha’s terrible arrows are like snakes that have cast off their skins. Restrain him in this battle, before
the king is reduced to ashes. O granter of honours! While we are here and are looking on, he should not engage
himself. As long as his aides are here, the king should not ﬁght with Partha himself. If Kouravya ﬁghts with Partha
Kiriti, I think it will be difﬁcult for him to remain alive, like an elephant against a tiger.’ Having been addressed by
his maternal uncle, Drona’s son, supreme among the wielders of weapons, quickly went to Duryodhana and spoke
these words. ‘O Gandhari’s son! As long as I am live, you should not ﬁght. O Kouravya! I have always desired
your welfare and you are disregarding me. You should not have any anxiety about defeating Partha. O Suyodhana!
I will restrain him. You stay here.’
‘“Duryodhana replied, ‘The preceptor128 protects the sons of Pandu, like his own sons. O supreme among brahmanas! You have also always been partial towards them. It is my misfortune that your valour in battle has always
been mild. Perhaps it is because of your affection towards Dharmaraja or Droupadi. I do not know. I am ashamed
because of my own avarice. All the relatives deserved happiness. But they confronted supreme unhappiness and
have been defeated. You are foremost among wielders of weapons. You are Maheshvara’s equal in battle. O son of
Goutami! Had you so wished, you were capable of destroying my enemies. O Ashvatthama! Show me your
favours. Destroy those who are causing me injury. O unblemished one! Even the gods are incapable of remaining
within reach of your weapons. O Drona’s son! Kill the Panchalas and the Somakas, with their followers, in the battle. Protected by you, we will kill the ones who remain. O brahmana! These Somakas and illustrious Panchalas are
angrily roaming around amidst my soldiers, like a conﬂagaration. O mighty-armed one! O supreme among men!
Restrain them and the Kekayas. Otherwise, protected by Kiriti, they will destroy us before that. O venerable one!
This is your task, regardless of whether you do it now or later. O mighty-armed one! You have been born for the
destruction of the Panchalas. O one without decay! You will make the world empty of all the Panchalas. The sages
who obtained success spoke about the future in this way. The gods, together with Vasava, are incapable of remaining within reach of your weapons, not to speak of the Parthas and the Panchalas. I am telling you this truthfully.’”’
CHAPTER 1112(135)

‘Sanjaya said, “Drona’s son was invincible in a battle. Thus addressed by Duryodhana, the mighty-armed one
replied, ‘O Kourava! What you have said is true. The Pandavas have always been dear to me and my father. And
we are also dear to them. O extender of the Kuru lineage! But that does not apply to a battle. O son!129 We will
ﬁght to the best of our capacity and without any fear, are prepared to give up our lives in battle. O supreme among
kings! In an instant, Karna, Shalya, Kripa, Hardikya and I are capable of destroying the Pandava army. O extender
of the Kuru lineage! If we were not present in this battle, the mighty-armed one130 is also capable of destroying
the army of the Kouravas in an instant. We are ﬁghting with the Pandavas to the best of our capacity. In a similar
way, they are ﬁghting with us. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Energy has clashed against energy and is be-

ing paciﬁed. As long as Pandu’s son131 is alive, the Pandava army is incapable of being quickly defeated. I tell
you this truthfully. The sons of Pandu are capable and are ﬁghting for their own interests. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Why should they not be able to slaughter your soldiers? O king! You are extremely avaricious. O
Kourava! You have resorted to deceit. You are insolent and are suspicious of everything. That is the reason you
suspect those on your own side. For your sake, I am making the best of efforts and am prepared to give up my own
life. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! For your sake, I will advance to ﬁght. I will ﬁght against the enemy and defeat the best of the best. O destroyer of enemies! To bring you pleasure in this battle, I will ﬁght with the Panchalas, Somakas, Kekayas and Pandaveyas. The Panchalas and Somakas will be consumed by my arrows. They will
be like cattle afﬂicted by a lion and will run away in different directions. The king who is Dharma’s son will witness my valour today. Against the Somakas, the world will be full of Ashvatthama, and Yudhishthira, Dharma’s
son, will be severely distressed. In the battle, he will see that the Panchalas and the Somakas have been killed. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will kill whoever advances to do battle with me. O brave one! Having encountered me, no one will be able to escape with his life.’ Having spoken thus to your son, Duryodhana, the mightyarmed one advanced to ﬁght and to drive away all the archers. The supreme of all beings wished to do that which
would bring pleasure to your sons.
‘“Goutami’s son then spoke to the Kekayas and the Panchalas. ‘O maharathas! All of you strike at my body. Remain stationed in this battle and show me the dexterity of your weapons.’ O great king! Thus addressed, all of
them showered down weapons towards Drona’s son, like water pouring down from the clouds. Having destroyed
those arrows, Drona’s son brought down eight heroes, in front of the sons of Pandu and the lord Dhrishtadyumna.
In that battle, the Panchalas and Srinjayas were killed and abandoning the ﬁght with Drona’s son, ﬂed in the ten
directions.
‘“O great king! On seeing that the brave Panchalas and Somakas were running away in that battle, Dhrishtadyumna attacked Drona’s son. He was surrounded by one hundred brave rathas who did not retreat. They were
on golden and colourful chariots that roared, like clouds full of rain. On seeing that warriors had been brought
down, maharatha Dhrishtadyumna, the son of the king of Panchala, spoke these words to Drona’s son. ‘O son of
the preceptor! O evil-minded one! Why are you killing these? If you are brave in a battle, ﬁght against me. If you
are stationed in front of me, I will kill you.’ O bull among the Bharata lineage! The powerful Dhrishtadyumna
pierced the son of the preceptor with sharp arrows that penetrated the inner organs. Drona’s son was struck by a
continuous line of swift arrows. They were gold-tufted, pointed at the tip, ﬁerce and capable of piercing all bodies.
He looked like a ﬂowering tree, with bees in search of honey hovering around it. Thus pierced, he became extremely angry, like a snake that has been struck with a foot. Drona’s proud son was not frightened. With the bow in
his hand, he spoke these words. ‘O Dhrishtadyumna! Wait for an instant, without going away. I will shoot sharp
arrows and send you to Yama’s abode.’ Saying this, Drona’s son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, showed the dexterity of his hands and enveloped Parshata in every direction with a torrent of arrows. The one who was invincible
in battle was thus shrouded in that encounter by Drona’s son. The eloquent son of Panchala roared and spoke to
Drona’s son. ‘O brahmana! You do not know about my origin or my vow. O extremely evil-minded one! I will not
kill you, without killing Drona ﬁrst. In this battle today, I will kill your father, and then you. I will convey you to
the world of the dead. That is my resolution. You have hatred towards the Parthas and are devoted to the Kouravas.
As long as I see you stationed before me, you will not escape with your life. As for that brahmana,132 he has abandoned the conduct of brahmanas and is devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. That wicked of men should be slain
by all the worlds, just as you should be.’ Having been thus harshly addressed by Parshata, the supreme among
brahmanas was overcome by great rage and asked him to wait. He glanced at Parshata and seemed to burn him
down with his eyes.
‘“He sighed like a serpent and showered him with arrows. O supreme among kings! In that battle, he was enveloped by Drona’s son, though that supreme among rathas was surrounded by all the Panchala soldiers. However,
the mighty-armed one did not tremble and resorting to his own fortitude, shot many kinds of arrows at Ashvatthama. In that battle, they countered each other, as if they were in a gambling match in which their lives were
the stakes. They could not tolerate each other and countered those torrents of arrows. The great archers created
showers of arrows in every direction. The clash between Drona’s son and Parshata was terrible in form and ﬁerce.

On beholding this, the siddhas and charanas worshipped them. The torrents of arrows ﬁlled the sky and the directions and as they fought, they created a great darkness with those arrows, so that they could not be seen. They
seemed to be dancing around in that encounter, with the bows drawn in circles. They sought to kill each other and
wished to defeat each other. Those mighty-armed ones fought wonderfully, showing their dexterity and skills. In
that encounter, thousands of foremost among warriors applauded them. They were seen to ﬁght in that battle, like
wild elephants in the forest. Both the armies were ﬁlled with great delight. O venerable one! Roars like lions’ were
heard and conch shells were blown. The ﬁerce battle increased the terror of cowards. For a short instant, that tumultuous battle seemed to be equal. O great king! Then Drona’s son severed the standard, bow, the umbrella, the
two parshni charioteers, the charioteer and the four horses of great-souled Parshata. He killed them in the battle
and brought them down on the ground. The one with an immeasurable soul then used straight-tufted arrows to
drive away hundreds and thousands of Panchalas. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The Pandava soldiers were
distressed on seeing the great deeds, which were like those of Vasava, of Drona’s son in the battle. He killed a hundred maharatha Panchalas with a hundred arrows. With three sharp arrows, Drona’s son killed three other maharathas, while Drupada’s son133 and Phalguna looked on. He killed many Panchalas who were stationed before
him. In that encounter, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas were slaughtered. Their chariots and standards were strewn
around. They dared not approach Drona’s son and abandoned him. Thus did Drona’s maharatha son defeat the enemies in that battle. He let out a mighty roar, like clouds at the end of summer. Having killed many brave ones, Ashvatthama was resplendent. He was like the ﬁre that consumes all beings at the end of a yuga. Having defeated
thousands of enemies in the battle, he was honoured by the Kouraveyas. Drona’s powerful son was resplendent,
like Indra of the gods, after having killed large numbers of the enemy.”’
CHAPTER 1113(136)

‘Sanjaya said, “O great king! Then Yudhishthira and Pandava Bhimasena surrounded Drona’s son from every direction. King Duryodhana and Bharadvaja’s son attacked the Pandavas in that encounter and a battle commenced.
O great king! It was terrible in form and increased the terror of cowards. Yudhishthira was angry and dispatched
large numbers of Ambashthas, Malavas, Vangas, Shibis and Trigartas to the world of the dead. Bhima was indomitable in battle. He killed Abhisahas, Shurasenas and other kshatriyas and ﬁlled the earth with the mire of
blood. O king! In that battle, Kiriti used sharp arrows to send large numbers of Youdheyas, those from the mountainous regions and Madrakas to the world of the dead. They were severely afﬂicted with iron arrows. Tuskers fell
down on the ground, like mountains with two peaks.134 The trunks of elephants were severed and rolled around,
here and there. The earth was strewn with these and looked beautiful, as if with serpents that moved around. O
king! The earth was resplendent, because golden and colourful umbrellas were ﬂung away. It was as if the sky was
resplendent with the sun, moon and planets at the time of the destruction of a yuga. ‘Kill. Strike without any fear.
Pierce. Slice down.’ These and other ﬁerce sounds were heard in the vicinity of the chariot of the one with the red
horses.135 Drona became extremely angry and used the vayavya weapon in the battle. He was unapproachable and
killed them, like a turbulent wind driving away clouds. While Bhimasena and the great-souled Partha looked on,
the Panchalas were slaughtered by Drona and ﬂed. But Kiriti and Bhima forcefully restrained them. They attacked
your army with a large number of chariots. Bibhatsu was on the right ﬂank and Vrikodara on the left. They showered down great torrents of arrows on Bharadvaja’s son. O great king! Maharatha Srinjayas, Panchalas, Matsyas
and Somakas followed them. There were the best of rathas in the army of your son, skilled in striking. With a large
army, they approached Drona’s chariot. That large army of the Bharatas was slaughtered by Kiriti. On top of this,
they were afﬂicted by darkness and sleep. O great king! Though Drona himself and your son tried to restrain them,
they were incapable of restraining the warriors. That large army was shattered by the arrows of Pandu’s son. With
the world covered in darkness, they ﬂed in all the directions. Some kings abandoned hundreds of their mounts. O
great king! They were overcome by fear and ran away in different directions.”’

CHAPTER 1114(137)

‘Sanjaya said, “On seeing Somadatta stretch his large bow, Satyaki addressed his charioteer. ‘Take me towards Somadatta. Without killing the enemy, Bahlika’s son and the worst of the Kouravas, in the battle today, I will not return from the encounter. O suta! I tell you this truthfully.’ Thus addressed, the charioteer urged those extremely
fast horses from the Saindhava region. They possessed the complexion of conch shells and were capable of withstanding all sounds in the battle. They were as fast as thought or the wind and bore Yuyudhana. O king! They were
like Indra’s tawny steeds in earlier times, when he ventured to kill the daityas. On seeing that Satvata was powerfully descending in the encounter, the mighty-armed Somadatta was not frightened and attacked him. He released
showers of arrows, like clouds showering down rain. He shrouded Shini’s descendant, like clouds covering the
sun. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Satyaki was also not frightened in that battle. In every direction, he enveloped the bull among the Kuru lineage with a torrent of arrows. Somadatta pierced Madhava in the chest with
sixty arrows. O king! Satyaki pierced him back with sharp arrows. Wounded by each other’s arrows, those bulls
among men looked resplendent. They were like blossoming kimshuka trees with beautiful blossoms at the time of
ﬂowering. The limbs of the illustrious ones from the Kuru and Vrishni lineages were covered with blood. They
glanced at each other and seemed to burn each other down with their sight. Those scorchers of enemies roamed
around in chariots that traversed circular paths. They were terrible in form and were like clouds that showered
down rain. O Indra among kings! With arrows mangling their bodies everywhere and wounded by those arrows,
they looked like porcupines. Those arrows were well tufted and struck by these, they were beautiful. O king! They
looked like trees during the monsoon, covered by ﬁreﬂies. The limbs of the maharathas blazed with those arrows.
In that battle, they looked like angry elephants, covered with ﬂaming torches.
‘“O great king! In that encounter, maharatha Somadatta used an arrow in the shape of a half-moon to slice down
Madhava’s great bow. He then swiftly struck him with twenty ﬁve arrows. At a time when speed was of the essence, he again struck him with ten arrows. Satyaki took up another bow that was more powerful. He quickly
pierced Somadatta with ﬁve arrows. O king! In that encounter, Satyaki seemed to smile. He used another broadheaded arrow to cut down the golden standard of Bahlika’s son. On seeing that his standard had been brought
down, Somadatta wasn’t scared. He struck Shini’s descendant with twenty-ﬁve arrows. Satvata became enraged in
that battle. In that encounter, he used a sharp kshurapra arrow to slice down the archer Somadatta’s bow. O king!
He136 was like an elephant with its tusks shattered and he struck him in many ways with a hundred gold-tufted
arrows that ﬂew straight. Maharatha Somadatta took up another bow. The immensely strong one enveloped Satyaki
with a shower of arrows. Extremely wrathful, Satyaki pierced Somadatta in that battle. Somadatta also afﬂicted
Satyaki with his net of arrows.
‘“For Satvata’s sake, Bhima struck Bahlika’s son with ten arrows. However, without any fear, Somadatta struck
Shini’s descendant with arrows. For Satvata’s sake, Bhimasena took up a new, ﬁrm and terrible club and hurled it
towards Somadatta’s chest. On seeing that the club, terrible in form, was descending towards him in the battle,
Kourava laughed and sliced it down into two fragments. That large and iron club was seen to be shattered into two
fragments and fell down, like the giant summit of a mountain that has been shattered by thunder. O king! In that
encounter, Satyaki used a broad-headed arrow to slice down Somadatta’s bow and used ﬁve more to cut down his
arm-guards. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He quickly struck his four supreme horses with four arrows and
sent them to the king of the dead. With a broad-headed arrow with drooping tufts, he severed the charioteer’s head
from his body. The tiger among rathas, the bull among the Shini lineage, laughed. O king! Satvata then released an
extremely terrible arrow that ﬂamed like the ﬁre. It was gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone. With great
force, Shini’s descendant shot that supreme of arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! That terrible arrow
quickly struck the lord and brought him down. Severely wounded by the powerful maharatha Satvata, the mightyarmed Somadatta fell down and died.
‘“On seeing that Somadatta had been killed, the maharathas attacked Yuyudhana and brought down a great
shower of arrows on him. They attacked him with a large army and with Drona’s battle formation. The immensely
strong ones on your side were angry. While Bharadvaja’s son looked on, Yudhishthira drove them away with arrows. On seeing that the soldiers were being driven away by Yudhishthira, Drona attacked with great force. His

eyes were red with rage. He pierced Partha with seven extremely sharp arrows. Having pierced him, the mightyarmed one licked the corners of his mouth and severed Yudhishthira’s standard and bow. In that encounter, with his
bow severed, and at a time when speed was of the essence, the supreme among kings swiftly took up another ﬁrm
bow. The king pierced Drona with a thousand arrows and his horses, charioteer, standard and chariot too. It was
wonderful. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! For a short while, Drona was distressed and oppressed by that
storm of arrows. He sank down on the ﬂoor of his chariot. However, in a short while, the supreme of brahmanas
regained his senses. He was overcome by great rage and invoked the vayavya weapon. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! However, the valiant Partha was not frightened in the battle and stretched his bow, repulsing that
weapon with a weapon of his own.
‘“Vasudeva spoke to Yudhishthira, Kunti’s son. ‘O Yudhishthira! O mighty-armed one! Listen to what I tell you.
O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Give up this battle with Drona. Drona has always desired to seize you in
the battle. I do not think that you should ﬁght with him in this way. The one who has been created to kill him137
will kill him tomorrow. Abandon the preceptor and go to the spot where King Suyodhana is. Bhima, tiger among
rathas, is ﬁghting with the Kouravas there.’ Having heard Vasudeva’s words, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira thought for
an instant. He then went to the spot where Bhima, the destroyer of enemies, was stationed and was ﬁghting a ﬁerce
battle. He was slaying your warriors, like Death with a gaping mouth. Pandava138 made the earth resound with the
great clatter of his chariot. It was as if a cloud was roaring in the ten directions, at the end of the summer. To kill
the enemy, he positioned himself along Bhima’s ﬂank. At the commencement of the night, Drona also began to kill
the Pandus and the Panchalas.”’
CHAPTER 1115(138)

‘Sanjaya said, “The terrible and ﬁerce battle continued. O lord of the earth! The world was covered in darkness and
dust. As they were stationed in that encounter, the warriors could not see each other. The great battle continued on
the basis of guessing and signs. Men, elephants and horses encountered supreme destruction and it made the body
hair stand up. O supreme among kings! The brave Drona, Karna and Kripa and Bhima, Parshata and Satyaki, agitated each other’s soldiers. In every direction, the maharathas slaughtered the soldiers. Because of the darkness and
the dust, the elephants ﬂed in different directions. The warriors were terriﬁed and bereft of their senses. They also
ﬂed in different directions. O great king! They were killed and ﬂed in that encounter. Thousands of maharathas
killed each other in that battle. They were blind and confounded by the darkness and this was due to your stupid
son’s policy. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the soldiers, and the protectors of the soldiers, were confused in that battle. Everything was covered in darkness.”
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “They were agitated by the Pandavas and their energy was sapped. Those on my side were
blinded and shattered by the darkness. What was the state of your minds then? O Sanjaya! When the world was
covered in darkness, how did their soldiers and those on my side again become visible?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “There were soldiers who had not been killed.139 Instructed by their leaders, they again
arranged themselves in the form of a vyuha. Drona was in the front and Shalya at the rear. O king! Drona and
Soubala were along the ﬂanks. During that night, the king himself140 protected all the soldiers. O king! Duryodhana spoke to the large numbers of infantry and comforted them. ‘Abandon your supreme weapons. Take up ﬂaming lamps in your hands.’ Thus instructed by the supreme of kings, they were cheered and took up lamps. Divided
through different standards, during that night, the army was beautiful because of the radiance of the ﬁre. They were
adorned in extremely expensive ornaments. They possessed divine weapons. These blazed as they were hurled. In
a short while, properly arranged, those lamps lit up the entire army. The foot soldiers held lamps with oil in their
hands and this made all the soldiers look radiant. They looked like clouds in the night sky, illuminated by lightning. When the soldiers were illuminated in this way, Drona, who was like the ﬁre, scorched all the directions. O
Indra among kings! In his golden armour, he was like the midday sun with its rays. As the light was reﬂected from
golden ornaments, sparkling swords and bows and yellow weapons, it was beautiful. There were bright clubs and
dazzling bludgeons. There were lances and spears. O Ajamidha! As they were repeatedly lit, the rays of the lamps
reﬂected from these. O king! There were umbrellas, new whisks and other accompaniments and they ﬂamed like

giant meteors. There were golden garlands that were whirled around. They looked brilliant. Because of the reﬂection from the weapons and the illumination from the lamps, your army then looked dazzling. O king! There was
the radiance from the reﬂection on ornaments and it was extremely beautiful. There were yellow weapons that
were well crafted, used for mangling bodies. They were whirled by the brave ones and created a ﬂaming radiance
there, like the lightning in the sky at the end of summer. These were brought down with great force to kill the enemy and the faces of the men trembled as they did this, like large clouds driven by the wind. It was as if a raging
conﬂagaration blazes like the sun and destroys a large forest. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The army
blazed in that light and looked ﬁerce in form, generating great fear.
‘“On seeing that our army was thus illuminated, the Parthas quickly instructed all their soldiers and the large
numbers of foot soldiers to also light lamps. Seven lamps were placed on each elephant. Ten lamps were placed on
each chariot. There were two lamps on the back of each horse. There were other lamps on the ﬂanks, the standards
and the rear. There were others along the ﬂanks of all the soldiers, at the rear and in the front, in every direction.
Other men roamed around in the midst of the two armies, with ﬂaming torches in their hands. All the soldiers and
the masses of infantry got mixed up with the elephants, the chariots and the large numbers of horses. The army of
the sons of Pandu was illuminated with others who were in the midst and held ﬂaming torches in their hands. It
was as if a ﬁre was rendered more powerful because of an additional blaze and those two armies assumed greater
strength. It was like the sun making the planets more radiant, or the sun ﬁercely illuminating the ﬂames of a ﬁre.
That radiance spread on the earth and into the sky and spreading over all the directions, seemed to increase. The
splendour was extremely ﬁerce and made your soldiers, and theirs, visible. O king! As that radiance spread up towards the sky, the masses of gods, the gandharvas, the yakshas, the asuras and large numbers of siddhas were
awakened and assembled, with all the apsaras. The place was full of gods, gandharvas, yakshas, leaders among the
asuras, masses of apsaras and brave warriors who had been killed and had ascended to heaven. The ﬁeld of battle
looked like heaven itself. There were chariots, horses, elephants, all illuminated with lamps. Angry warriors
roamed around and so did wounded horses. Those large armies of chariots, horses and elephants were arrayed in
battle formation and were as resplendent as the gods and the asuras, arranged in vyuhas. The force of spears was
like a turbulent wind. The large chariots were like clouds. There was the roar of chariots and horses. Weapons
showered down, like clouds raining blood. As night commenced, there was a battle between the men who were
like gods. The great-souled one141 was like a giant ﬁre. He tormented the foremost among the Pandavas. O Indra
among men! He was like the sun that has reached the midpoint of the sky at the end of the monsoon.”’
CHAPTER 1116(139)

‘Sanjaya said, “The world, covered in dust and darkness, was thus illuminated. Wishing to kill each other, the
brave ones attacked. O king! They clashed in that battle, with weapons, lances and swords in their hands. Overcome with rage, they glanced at each other. There were thousands of blazing lamps in every direction. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The ground was beautiful, like the ﬁrmament decorated with planets. The ﬁeld of battle was dazzling, as if with hundreds of ﬂaming torches. The earth looked as if the worlds were about to be consumed.142 All the directions were illuminated with lamps in every direction. They were as beautiful as trees with
ﬁreﬂies during a monsoon evening. Brave ones separately clashed against brave ones, elephants clashed with elephants, horses with horses and chariots clashed against chariots. At the commencement of the night, on the instructions of your son, they were all cheerful. O great king! Arjuna started to swiftly destroy the Kourava soldiers and
weaken all the kings.”
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “When the invincible and intolerant one angrily penetrated into the army of my son, what
was the state of your minds then? When that scorcher of enemies penetrated, what did the soldiers think? Given
the occasion, what did Duryodhana think should be done? In that battle, who were the scorchers of enemies who
advanced against that brave one? Who protected Drona’s right wheel and who was on the left? As the brave one
fought, which valiant ones protected his rear? Who advanced in front, killing the enemies in the battle? That unvanquished one, great archer, penetrated the Panchalas.143 The valiant tiger among men seemed to be dancing
around in the path of his chariot. Advancing on his chariot, Drona consumed the Panchalas with his arrows. He

was as angry as a ﬁre.144 How did he come about his death? You always speak of the enemy as undisturbed and
unvanquished. But in the battle, you have always said that those on my side were killed, distressed and routed and
that the rathas were deprived of their chariots.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O great king! During that night, Drona desired to ﬁght. Discerning his mind, Duryodhana
spoke to his obedient brothers—Vikarna, Chitrasena, the Kourava Mahabahu, Durdharsha, Dirghabahu and their
followers.145 ‘O brave ones! Go and endeavour to protect Drona’s rear. Hardikya will be near the right wheel and
Shalya on the left.’ Saying this, your son addressed the remaining brave maharathas from Trigarta. ‘The preceptor
is extremely controlled. The Pandavas are making great efforts. As he kills the enemy in the battle, protect the one
who is so controlled. Drona is powerful in battle. He is dexterous in the use of hands and valiant. He can defeat the
thirty gods in an encounter, not to speak of the Parthas and Somakas. O maharathas! All of you unite and make the
best of efforts. Protect Drona from the Panchala maharatha Dhrishtadyumna. O kings! With the exception of
Dhrishtadyumna, I do not see any warrior among the Pandaveya soldiers who can defeat Drona in a battle. Therefore, I think that all our efforts should be to protect Bharadvaja’s son. Thus protected, he will slay the Somakas and
the Srinjayas and the kings. With the Srinjayas slain at the forefront of the array, there is no doubt that Drona’s son
will kill Dhrishtadyumna in the battle. In that fashion, maharatha Karna will defeat Arjuna in the battle. Armouring
myself, I will defeat Bhimasena in the battle. It is evident that we will be victorious for a very long time. O maharathas! Therefore, protect Drona in this battle.’ O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Having thus spoken,
your son, Duryodhana, instructed the soldiers in that terrible darkness.
‘“O bull among the Bharata lineage! A battle commenced in the night. Both the armies were ﬁerce and desired
victory. Arjuna attacked the Kourava soldiers and the Kouravas attacked Arjuna. They used many different kinds
of weapons and afﬂicted each other. Drona’s son attacked the king of Panchala146 and Bharadvaja’s son attacked
the Srinjayas. In that battle, they enveloped them with straight-tufted arrows. O venerable one! As the Pandu, Panchala and Kourava soldiers slaughtered each other, a terrible uproar arose. We, or our forefathers, had not seen or
heard of anything like this earlier. The battle that commenced in the night engendered great fear.”’
CHAPTER 1117(140)

‘Sanjaya said, “O lord of the earth! That terrible battle that took place during the night led to the destruction of all
beings. At that time, Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, spoke to the Pandavas, Panchalas and Somakas. ‘Advance only
against Drona, desiring to kill him.’ O king! On hearing the king’s words, the Panchalas and the Somakas advanced against Drona, roaring ﬁercely. Those on our side roared back in return and counter-attacked with intolerance. In that encounter, they used the best of their capacity, the best of their enterprise and the best of their spirit.
‘“Yudhishthira was advancing towards Drona, desiring to kill him, like a crazy elephant against another crazy
one, and Hardikya Kritavarma attacked him. O king! In the forefront of that battle, the Kourava Bhuri147 released
a shower of arrows, from every direction, on Shini’s descendant. O king! Maharatha Sahadeva wished to advance
against Drona and Vaikartana Karna countered the Pandava. Bhimasena advanced, like Death with a gaping
mouth. In that encounter, Duryodhana himself countered the obstinate one, who was advancing like Death. O king!
Nakula was foremost among warriors and was skilled in all forms of ﬁghting. Shakuni Soubala quickly countered
him. O king! Shikhandi, supreme among rathas, advanced on his chariot and Sharadvata Kripa countered him in
that battle. O great king! Prativindhya148 advanced on horses that had the complexion of peacocks and
Duhshasana made endeavours to counter him. Bhimasena’s son,149 skilled in a hundred different kinds of maya,
advanced, and wishing to protect his father’s honour, Ashvatthama checked him. In that battle, maharatha Drupada
wished to advance against Drona and Vrishasena checked him, together with his soldiers and his followers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Virata quickly advanced, wishing to kill Drona, and the king of Madra angrily
checked him. Wishing to kill Drona, Nakula’s son, Shatanika, proudly advanced in that battle. Chitrasena quickly
countered him with his arrows. Maharatha Arjuna, foremost among warriors, advanced, driving everyone away. O
great king! Alambusa, Indra among rakshasas, checked him.150 The great archer, Drona, slaughtered enemies in
the battle. However, Panchala Dhrishtadyumna cheerfully countered him. O king! There were other maharatha
sons of Pandu who also advanced and the rathas on your side countered them, with all their energy. In that great

battle, elephant riders swiftly clashed with other elephant riders. Hundreds and thousands were seen to ﬁght with
each other. O king! During that night, horses advanced against each other with great force and seemed to be like
mountains with wings. O great king! Horse riders clashed against horse riders with spears, lances and swords in
their hands and roared separately. There were many men there, clashing against each other. They used large numbers of clubs, bludgeons and many other kinds of weapons.
‘“Hardikya Kritavarma angrily countered Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, like the shoreline holds back the ocean.
Yudhishthira pierced Hardikya with ﬁve swift arrows. Asking him to wait, he again pierced him with twenty arrows. O venerable one! Kritavarma became extremely angry with Dharma’s son. He severed his bow with a broadheaded arrow and pierced him with seven arrows. Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, then picked up another bow. He
pierced Hardikya in the arms and the chest with ten arrows. O venerable one! Having been thus pierced in the battle by Dharma’s son, Madhava151 trembled with rage and afﬂicted him with seven arrows. However, Partha severed his bow and his arm-guard. The king released ﬁve sharp arrows that had been sharpened on stone. They
pierced his armour, which was decorated with gold and was extremely expensive. They then penetrated the earth,
like angry snakes entering a termite hill. In the twinkling of an eye, he152 picked up another bow and pierced Pandava with sixty arrows and his charioteer with nine. Pandava’s soul was immeasurable. O foremost among the
Bharata lineage! He laid down his giant bow on his chariot and hurled a lance that was like a serpent. It was large
and decorated with gold. Having been thus released by Pandava, it penetrated his right arm and entered the ground.
At that time, Partha again picked up his bow. He enveloped Hardikya with straight-tufted arrows. In that battle, in
an instant, the foremost of brave rathas among the Vrishni lineage153 made Yudhishthira devoid of his horses,
charioteer and chariot. The eldest of the Pandavas then grasped a sword and a shield. But in that battle, Madhava
sliced these down with his sharp arrows. Yudhishthira then picked up a spear with a golden handle. It was difﬁcult
to resist and in that battle, he quickly hurled it towards Hardikya. It was released from Dharmaraja’s hands and descended suddenly. However, dexterous in the use of his hands, Hardikya severed it into two fragments and
laughed. He then shrouded Dharma’s son with hundreds of arrows. He angrily cut down his armour with sharp arrows. The great-souled one’s armour was severed by Hardikya. O king! It fell down in that battle, like a stellar
cluster dislodged from the ﬁrmament. His bow was severed. He was without a chariot. He was without armour. He
was afﬂicted by arrows. Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, quickly withdrew himself from that battle. Kritavarma defeated Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son. The immensely strong one again began to protect Drona’s wheel.”’
CHAPTER 1118(141)

‘Sanjaya said, “O king! In that battle, Bhuri descended on Shini’s descendant, who was supreme among rathas and
was advancing like an elephant towards water. Satyaki became angry. He used ﬁve sharp arrows to quickly pierce
him in the heart and blood began to ﬂow. Shini’s descendant was indomitable in battle. But in that fashion, in that
encounter, Kourava pierced him between the arms with ten sharp arrows. O great king! They wounded each other
with terrible arrows. Their eyes were red with rage and they stretched their bows in anger. O great king! An extremely terrible shower of arrows rained down. Both of them were as angry as Death and released them from their
bows. O king! They stationed themselves in that battle and shrouded each other with arrows. For a short while, the
battle between the two seemed to be equal. O great king! However, extremely wrathful, Shini’s descendant
laughed in that battle and severed the bow of the great-souled Kourava. Once the bow had been severed, he asked
him to wait and quickly pierced him in the heart with nine sharp arrows. The scorcher of enemies was thus pierced
by his powerful enemy. He grasped another bow and pierced Satvata back. O lord of the earth! Having pierced Satvata with three arrows, he used an extremely sharp broad-headed arrow to sever his bow and seemed to be smiling.
O great king! With his bow severed, Satyaki became senseless with rage. He hurled an extremely forceful spear
towards his chest. His limbs were shattered by that spear and he fell down from his supreme chariot. His limbs
were red, like the one with the blazing rays in the sky.154
‘“On seeing that the brave one had been killed in that encounter, maharatha Ashvatthama forcefully advanced
towards Shini’s descendant. He brought down a torrent of arrows, like clouds showering down rain on Meru. O
king! On seeing that he was angrily advancing towards the chariot of Shini’s descendant, maharatha Ghatotkacha

let out a roar and spoke these words. ‘O Drona’s son! Wait. You will not escape from me with your life. I will kill
you today, like King Skanda killed Mahisha.155 In the forefront of this battle, I will kill you today and destroy the
love you bear towards ﬁghting.’ Having spoken thus, the rakshasa, the destroyer of enemy heroes, angrily attacked
Drona’s son, like a lion against a king of elephants. His eyes were coppery red with rage. Ghatotkacha showered
down arrows that were as long as a chariot’s axle. Like clouds pouring down rain, he shrouded Drona’s son, bull
among rathas. But, in that battle, Drona’s son quickly used his own arrows to counter those arrows, which were
like venomous serpents, before they could reach him. He then used hundreds of sharp and swift arrows that were
capable of penetrating the inner organs against Ghatotkacha, the scorcher of enemies and an Indra among rakshasas. O great king! Pierced by those arrows, the rakshasa looked beautiful in the forefront of the battle, like a
porcupine with its quills erect. Bhimasena’s powerful son was overcome with rage. He showered down ﬁerce arrows on Drona’s son and they had the sound of the vajra and thunder. There were kshurapras and those that were in
the shape of a half-moon. There were those with iron heads. Some had tufts like a boar’s ear. Others were hollow
and sharp. Still others had barbed tufts. That tumultuous shower of arrows made a sound like the vajra and thunder.
They were angrily released and descended on him. However, the senses of Drona’s son were not numbed. That torrent of arrows was extremely difﬁcult to withstand. However, the immensely energetic one invoked a divine
weapon with a mantra and drove them away, like the wind dispelling large clouds. The arrows seemed to be ﬁghting with each other in the sky. O great king! They were terrible in form and this increased the joy of the warriors.
Because of the friction among the weapons, sparks were generated in every direction. At the commencement of the
night, the sky seemed to be covered with ﬁreﬂies. Drona’s son covered all the directions with his arrows. To ensure
the welfare of your sons, he countered the rakshasa.
‘“In the battle, there was a duel between Drona’s son and the rakshasa. In the midst of that dark night, it was like
that between Shakra and Prahlada. In that battle, Ghatotkacha was ﬁlled with extreme rage. He struck Drona’s son
in the chest with ten arrows that were like the ﬁre of destruction. Having been pierced in that battle by the rakshasa, Drona’s immensely strong son wavered, like a tree struck by a storm. He lost his senses and grasped the
pole of his standard. O lord of men! Sounds of lamentation arose among all your soldiers. O lord of the earth! All
those on your side thought that he had been killed. In that battle, on seeing that Ashvatthama was in that state, the
Panchalas and Srinjayas roared like lions. Having regained his senses, the immensely strong Ashvatthama, the
scorcher of enemies, drew his bow with his left hand. He drew the bow back up to his ear and quickly aimed a terrible and supreme arrow towards Ghatotkacha. It was like Yama’s staff. O lord of the earth! That supreme and
ﬁerce arrow, with excellent tufts, pierced the rakshasa’s heart and then entered the ground. O great king! Thus
pierced by Drona’s son, who prided himself in battle, the Indra among rakshasas, who was extremely strong, sank
down on the ﬂoor of his chariot. On seeing that Hidimba’s son was senseless in that ﬁeld of battle, his charioteer
was terriﬁed and quickly bore him away from Drona’s son. Having thus pierced Ghatotkacha, Indra among rakshasas, in the battle, Drona’s immensely strong son let out a mighty roar. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He
was honoured by your sons and by all the warriors. His body blazed, like the sun at midday.
‘“Bhimasena was ﬁghting in the vicinity of the chariot of Bharadvaja’s son. King Duryodhana himself pierced
him back with sharp arrows. O venerable one! Bhimasena pierced him with nine arrows. Duryodhana pierced him
back with twenty arrows. Shrouded by arrows in the forefront of that battle, they looked like the moon and the sun
in the sky, when they are covered by a net of clouds. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Asking Bhima to
wait, King Duryodhana pierced him with ﬁve arrows. Bhima severed his bow and his standard with nine arrows.
He pierced the best of the Kouravas with ninety arrows with straight tufts. O venerable one! Duryodhana became
angry with Bhimasena. O king! While all the archers looked on, he shot arrows.156 Bhima repulsed all the arrows
that were released from Duryodhana’s bow. He struck Kourava with twenty-ﬁve small arrows. O venerable one!
Duryodhana became angry with Bhimasena. He severed his bow with a kshurapra arrow and pierced him back
with ten arrows. The immensely strong Bhimasena picked up another bow. He swiftly pierced the king with seven
sharp arrows. Showing the dexterity of his hands, he157 severed his bow quickly and then a second, a third, a
fourth and a ﬁfth. O great king! Full of himself, he severed all the bows Bhima picked up. O great king! Your son
was insolent about his prowess and wished for victory. On seeing that the bows were repeatedly severed, in that

battle, he158 then hurled a sparkling lance that was made completely out of iron. But before that lance could reach
him, Kourava severed it into three fragments, while all the worlds and the great-souled Bhima looked on. O great
king! At this, Bhima grasped a heavy club that was extremely radiant. Powerfully, he hurled it towards Duryodhana’s chariot. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In that encounter, the heavy club forcefully crushed your son’s
horses and charioteer. O Indra among kings! It also destroyed your son’s chariot, decorated with gold. He quickly
descended from his chariot and ascended that of the great-souled Nandaka.159
‘“Bhima thought that your maharatha son160 had been killed. He roared loudly like a lion and challenged the
Kouravas. Your soldiers also thought that the king had been killed. In every direction, sounds of lamentation arose.
On hearing those lamentations, all the warriors were frightened. O king! On hearing Bhimasena’s roar, the greatsouled King Yudhishthira thought that Suyodhana had been killed. He speedily rushed to the spot where Partha
Vrikodara was. O lord of the earth! Wishing to ﬁght with Drona, the Panchalas, Kekayas, Matsyas and Srinjayas
made their efforts and speedily advanced against him. A great battle commenced between Drona and the enemy.
Everything was immersed in ﬁerce darkness and they started to kill each other.”’
CHAPTER 1119(142)

‘Sanjaya said, “O lord of the earth! Sahadeva wished to advance against Drona. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, Vaikartana Karna countered him. Sahadeva pierced Radheya with nine swift arrows. He again
pierced him with ten sharp arrows with straight tufts. Karna pierced him back with one hundred arrows with
straight tufts. Displaying the lightness of his hands, he quickly severed his bow. Madri’s powerful son picked up
another bow. He pierced Karna with twenty arrows and it was extraordinary. Karna killed his horses with arrows
with straight tufts. With a broad-headed arrow, he swiftly conveyed his charioteer to Yama’s eternal abode. Deprived of his chariot, Sahadeva grasped a sword and a shield. But Karna struck these down with his arrows and
laughed. He161 then grasped an extremely terrible and extremely large club that was heavy and decorated with
gold. In that battle, he hurled it towards Vaikartana’s chariot. It was violently released by Sahadeva and descended.
Karna shattered it with his arrows and made it fall down on the ground. On seeing that the club had been destroyed, Sahadeva swiftly hurled a lance towards Karna. But it was struck down by the arrows. O great king! On
seeing that Karna was stationed before him, Sahadeva was ﬁlled with rage and descended from his chariot. He
picked up the wheel of a chariot and hurled it towards Adhiratha’s son. It descended powerfully, like an upraised
wheel of time. The son of a suta shattered it with thousands of arrows. Having rendered the wheel unsuccessful,
the great-souled Sahadeva was restrained with arrows and left the battle. O bull among the Bharata lineage! For a
short while, Radheya followed him. O lord of the earth! He laughed and spoke these words to Sahadeva. ‘O brave
one! In a battle, do not ﬁght with rathas who are superior. O son of Madri! Fight with those who are your equals.
Do not entertain any doubt about my words.’ He then touched him with the tip of his bow and again spoke these
words. ‘In the battle there, Arjuna is endeavouring to ﬁght with the Kurus. O son of Madri! Go there. Or if you
wish, go home.’ Having spoken those words, Karna, supreme among rathas, laughed. On his chariot, he proceeded
towards the Panchala and Pandu soldiers. O king! The maharatha was devoted to the truth and remembered the
words that he had given to Kunti.162 Though the destroyer of enemies could have killed Madri’s son in the battle,
he did not slay him. O king! Sahadeva was miserable and afﬂicted by the arrows. Tormented by the stakes of Karna’s words, he no longer wished to remain alive. In that battle, he swiftly ascended the chariot of the great-souled
Janamejaya from Panchala.
‘“Virata advanced against Drona, powerfully and swiftly. But the king of Madra shrouded the archer with a torrent of arrows. In the battle, both of them were ﬁrm archers and a duel commenced between them. O king! It was
like that between Jambha163 and Vasava in ancient times. O great king! Virata was the leader of an army and the
king of Madra quickly struck him with a hundred sharp arrows with straight tufts. The king164 pierced him back
with nine sharp arrows. He then struck him again with seventy-three arrows and yet again with one hundred. The
king of Madra slew the four horses that were yoked to his chariot. In that encounter, he brought down his charioteer and his standard from his chariot. With his horses slain, the maharatha swiftly descended from his chariot. He

stretched his bow and released sharp arrows. While the entire world looked on, Shatanika165 saw that his brother’s
mounts had been slain and swiftly approached him on his chariot. In that great battle, the king of Madra saw that
Shatanika was approaching. He pierced him with many arrows and conveyed him to Yama’s eternal abode. When
the brave one had been killed, Virata swiftly ascended his supreme chariot. That chariot was decorated with standards and garlands. His eyes were dilated with rage and his valour was doubled. He quickly enveloped the king of
Madra’s chariot with arrows. The king of Madra became angry. He used a hundred arrows with straight tufts to
ﬁrmly strike Virata, the leader of an army, in the chest. O great king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having
been thus severely struck, Virata sank down on the ﬂoor of his chariot. He was gravely struck and lost his senses.
He was wounded by the arrows and his charioteer bore him away from the ﬁeld of battle. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! In the night, that great army ﬂed. Shalya, the adornment of a battle, slaughtered them with hundreds of arrows.
‘“O Indra among kings! On seeing that the soldiers were running away, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya quickly arrived at the spot where Shalya was stationed. O king! Alambusa, Indra among rakshasas, advanced against them.
He was on a supreme chariot that possessed eight wheels. Pishachas, terrible in visage, were yoked to it and had
the faces of horses. The ﬂags were red and yellow and it was decorated with red garlands. It was made out of black
iron and was covered with ﬁerce and large bear skins. A ﬁerce king of vultures was perched on the standard. Its
wings were spotted and it dilated its eyes as it shrieked. It had an elongated beak. O king! That rakshasa was as
beautiful as an unbroken mass of collyrium. He advanced against Arjuna, like a hurricane against a king of mountains. O king! He showered down hundreds of storms of arrows towards Arjuna’s head. In that battle, there was an
extremely ﬁerce encounter between the man and the rakshasa. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On witnessing it,
everyone was ﬁlled with delight. Arjuna struck him with one hundred arrows. He severed his standard and his umbrella with nine sharp arrows. He pierced his charioteer with three arrows and his trivenu with another three. He
severed his bow with one arrow and killed his four horses with four arrows. Deprived of his chariot, he166 raised a
sword, but that was shattered into two pieces with arrows. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Partha then struck
the Indra among rakshasas with four sharp arrows and he ﬂed in fear. Having defeated him, Arjuna quickly advanced in Drona’s direction. O king! He showered large numbers of arrows as he proceeded, towards men, elephants and horses. O great king! They were slaughtered by the illustrious Pandava. The soldiers were brought
down, like trees uprooted by a storm. They were thus shattered by the great-souled Phalguna. O lord of the earth!
The entire army of your sons was routed and ﬂed.”’
CHAPTER 1120(143)

‘Sanjaya said, “Shatanika167 quickly consumed your soldiers with arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Your son, Chitrasena, countered him. Nakula’s son severely struck Chitrasena with an iron arrow and he pierced
him back with ten sharp arrows. O great king! In that battle, Chitrasena again struck Shatanika between the breasts
with nine sharp arrows. Nakula’s son used straight-tufted arrows to sever his168 armour from his body and it was
wonderful. O king! O Indra among kings! Divested of his armour, your son looked extremely beautiful, like a
snake that has cast off its skin at the right season. O great king! Nakula’s son then made efforts and severed his
standard and his bow with sharp arrows. In that encounter, the maharatha’s bow was severed and he was deprived
of his armour. O great king! He picked up another bow that was capable of shattering the enemy. Chitrasena swiftly struck Nakula’s son with nine arrows. In that encounter, the maharatha among the Bharata lineage angrily struck
him. O venerable one! Shatanika, supreme among men, was extremely angry and killed Chitrasena’s four horses
and his charioteer. Maharatha Chitrasena jumped down from his supreme chariot. The powerful one struck Nakula’s son with twenty-ﬁve arrows. In that battle, Nakula’s son performed a deed. With an arrow in the shape of a
half-moon, he severed his bow, which was adorned with gems. His169 bow was severed. He was without a chariot.
His horses were slain. His charioteer was killed. He swiftly climbed onto the chariot of the great-souled Hardikya.
‘“Maharatha Drupada, with his army, was advancing towards Drona. Vrishasena swiftly showered hundreds of
arrows on him. O unblemished one! In that encounter, Yajnasena170 pierced Karna’s maharatha son, in the arms
and in the chest, with sixty arrows. Yajnasena was stationed on his chariot. Vrishasena angrily struck him, between

the breasts, with many sharp arrows. O great king! In that battle, their limbs were wounded with arrows. The arrows were like thorns. They were as beautiful as porcupines with erect quills. Those arrows were gold-tufted and
sharp at the tip. Their armour was shattered by those arrows. In that great battle, they were covered with blood and
looked extremely beautiful. They were as radiant and colourful as beautiful kalpavrikshas.171 In the forefront of
the battle, they were as dazzling as ﬂowering kimshukas. O king! Vrishasena struck Drupada with nine arrows and
again pierced him with seventy arrows. He again pierced him with three other arrows. O great king! Karna’s son
shot thousands of arrows and was as resplendent as a cloud that was showering down. The armour of Drupada’s
soldiers was shattered with arrows. O king! In the battle which took place in the night, they172 assumed a ﬁerce
form and drove them away. The lamps that had been lit were abandoned everywhere. O king! The earth was as
beautiful as a cloudless sky, adorned with planets. The earth was beautiful because of the armlets that had fallen
down. O great king! It was like clouds during the monsoon, tinged with lightning. The Somakas were frightened
and were driven away by Karna’s son. It was like the danavas, terriﬁed of Indra at the time of the tarakamaya battle. The Somakas were afﬂicted and driven away in that battle. O great king! They were illuminated in that battle
and looked beautiful. Having defeated them in the encounter, Karna’s son was resplendent. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! He was like the sun when it has attained midday. Among the thousands of kings on your side and
those of the enemy, there was a single one who blazed there and it was the powerful Vrishasena. He defeated the
brave maharatha Somakas in that encounter. He then swiftly proceeded to the spot where King Yudhishthira was.
‘“Prativindhya angrily consumed enemies in that battle. Your maharatha son, Duhshasana, advanced against
him. O king! The clash between them was wonderful in form. It was like a conjunction between Budha and Bhargava in a cloudless sky.173 Prativindhya was the performer of extremely difﬁcult deeds and in that encounter,
Duhshasana pierced him in the forehead with three arrows. Thus pierced by your powerful archer son, the mightyarmed one looked beautiful, like a mountain with peaks. In that encounter, maharatha Prativindhya pierced
Duhshasana with nine arrows and pierced him again with seven. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Your son
then performed an extremely difﬁcult deed. With ﬁerce arrows, he brought down Prativindhya’s horses. He used a
broad-headed arrow to bring down his charioteer and also his standard. O king! The archer shattered the chariot
into one hundred fragments. The lord angrily used straight-tufted arrows to shatter into tiny fragments the ﬂag, the
quiver, the harness and the yoke. Deprived of his chariot, the great-souled one174 stood with the bow in his hand
and fought with your son, showering many hundreds of arrows. He175 showed the dexterity of his hands and severed the bow with a kshurapra arrow. Once the bow had been severed, he struck him176 with ten broad-headed arrows. On seeing that he was without a chariot there, his maharatha brothers177 impetuously arrived with a large
army. O great king! He ascended Sutasoma’s178 radiant chariot and taking up a bow, pierced your son. Then, all
those on your side surrounded your son. In that battle, they advanced forcefully, with a large army. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! A battle commenced between those on your side and the others at that terrible time of the
night and it extended Yama’s kingdom.”’
CHAPTER 1121(144)

‘Sanjaya said, “In that battle, Nakula was impetuously slaughtering your soldiers. Enraged, Soubala advanced
against him, asking him to wait. Those two brave ones were ﬁrm in their enmity and wished to kill each other.
They drew their bows completely back and struck each other with arrows. O king! Just as Soubala swiftly released
showers of arrows, Nakula also exhibited his skills in ﬁghting. O great king! In that battle, those two brave ones
were covered with the thorns of arrows and were as beautiful as shalmali trees with thorns. O king! They dilated
their eyes and glanced obliquely at each other. Their eyes were red with rage and they consumed each other with
their sight. Your brother-in-law was extremely angry and laughing at Madri’s son, pierced him in the heart with a
sharp and barbed arrow. Having been severely wounded by your archer brother-in-law, Nakula sank down on the
ﬂoor of his chariot and lost his senses. O king! Beholding that his ultimate and insolent enemy, ﬁrm in his enmity,
was in that state, Shakuni roared like a cloud at the end of summer. Having regained his senses, Nakula, Pandu’s
son, rushed against Soubala again, like Death with a gaping mouth. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Enraged, he

pierced Shakuni with sixty arrows. He again struck him between the breasts with one hundred iron arrows. He then
severed the bow in his179 hand, with an arrow still afﬁxed to it. He swiftly severed his standard and brought it
down from the chariot onto the ground. O great king! O unblemished one! Having been severely wounded, your
brother-in-law sank down on the ﬂoor of his chariot and in the forefront of that army, on seeing that he had fallen
down and had lost his senses, his charioteer quickly bore him away on his chariot. The Parthas and their followers
roared loudly. Having vanquished the enemy in the encounter, Nakula, the scorcher of enemies, angrily told his
charioteer, ‘Take me to Drona’s battle formation.’ O king! On hearing the words of Madri’s intelligent son, in the
battle, his charioteer took him to the spot where Drona was ﬁghting.
‘“O lord of the earth! In that encounter, Shikandi wished to get at Drona. With great speed, Sharadvata Kripa
sought to check him. Goutama swiftly advanced in Drona’s vicinity. Shikhandi, the scorcher of enemies, seemed to
be laughing, and pierced him with nine broad-headed arrows. O great king! The preceptor180 wished to do that
which would ensure the welfare of your sons. He struck him181 with ﬁve swift arrows and again pierced him with
twenty. O lord of the earth! The great battle that took place between them was terrible in form, like the encounter
between Shambara and the king of the immortals in the battle between the gods and the asuras.182 The two maharathas covered the sky with nets of arrows. O foremost among the Bharatas! The night was naturally ﬁerce in
form and was rendered even more terrible by those two warriors, who were skilled in ﬁghting. It was terrible in
form and engendered fear. It was like a night of destruction.183 O great king! With an arrow that was in the shape
of a half-moon, Shikandi sliced down Goutama’s giant bow and shot many arrows at him. O king! Kripa became
angry at this and hurled a ﬁerce javelin. The shaft was golden and it was sharp at the tip, having been polished by
artisans. As it descended, Shikhandi struck it down with many arrows. It ﬂamed as it fell down on the ground, dazzling and immensely radiant. O great king! Goutama, supreme among rathas, picked up another bow and shrouded
Shikhandi with sharp arrows. Shikhandi, supreme among rathas, was enveloped in that encounter by the illustrious
Goutama and losing his senses, sank down on the ﬂoor of his chariot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Beholding that he had become unconscious in the battle, Sharadvata Kripa wished to kill him and struck him with
many arrows. Seeing that Yajnasena’s maharatha son could no longer ﬁght in the encounter, the Panchalas and the
Somakas surrounded him from all sides. Similarly, your sons also surrounded that best of brahmanas184 with a
large army and the battle resumed again.
‘“O king! In that encounter, rathas rushed against others. There was a tremendous sound, like that of clouds
thundering. O lord of the earth! Horse riders and elephants were driven away. O king! They attacked each other
and the ﬁeld of battle became cruel. O great king! As the foot soldiers rushed, the earth trembled with their footsteps, like a lady trembling with fear. Rathas attacked even more powerfully, astride their chariots. O king! They
were like crows, grabbing many locusts185 in the air. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were elephants
with shattered temples, rushing against other giant elephants with shattered temples and trampling them with their
feet. Horse riders clashed against horse riders and infantry against infantry. In that encounter, they angrily rushed
against each other. The soldiers advanced, retreated and returned again to the encounter. In the process, in the
night, they raised an extremely loud uproar. There were blazing lamps on the chariots, elephants and horses. O
great king! They seemed to be like giant meteors that had been dislodged from the sky. O foremost among the
Bharata lineage! O king! The ﬁeld of battle was illuminated by those lamps and it seemed to be like day. It was
like a spreading sun that destroys the darkness in the world. In that fashion, that terrible darkness was dispelled by
the light of those blazing lamps. All the weapons, the armour and the gems of the great-souled ones were overshadowed by the light from those blazing lamps. At the commencement of the night, there was a melee in the battle. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! In that encounter, the son killed the father and the father killed the son.
The friend killed the friend, the relative killed the relative and the maternal uncle killed his sister’s son. They were
confused. In that battle, they killed those on their own side, as well as on that of the enemy. They fought fearlessly
during that terrible night and this engendered fear.”’
CHAPTER 1122(145)

‘Sanjaya said, “That tumultuous battle raged on, giving rise to great fear. O great king! Dhrishtadyumna advanced
against Drona. He repeatedly tugged on the string of his supreme bow. He advanced towards Drona’s chariot,
which was decorated with gold. O great king! As Dhrishtadyumna advanced, wishing to get at Drona, the Panchalas and the Pandavas surrounded him. On seeing that Drona, supreme among preceptors, had been surrounded,
your son made efforts to protect Drona in that battle. During that night, the two clashing armies looked like oceans.
They were like ﬁerce oceans that had been stirred and agitated by a storm, with all the beings in them disturbed.”
‘“O great king! Panchala186 quickly pierced Drona in the chest with ﬁve arrows and roared like a lion. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that encounter, Drona pierced him with twenty-ﬁve arrows and with another
broad-headed arrow, severed his immensely radiant bow. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having been thus
pierced by Drona, Dhrishtadyumna swiftly abandoned that bow and bit his lower lip in rage. O great king! Having
become wrathful, the powerful Dhrishtadyumna picked up another excellent bow, wishing to bring about Drona’s
destruction. The destroyer of enemy heroes drew the colourful bow back up to his ear. He released a ﬁerce arrow
that was capable of taking Drona’s life. In the great battle, the powerful one released that terrible arrow. It illuminated all the soldiers, as if the sun had arisen. O king! On seeing that terrible arrow, the gods, the gandharvas and
men spoke these words. ‘May Drona be safe in this encounter.’ O king! But before that arrow could reach the preceptor’s chariot, Karna displayed the lightness of his hands and shattered it into twelve fragments. O king! O venerable one! It was thus shattered into many fragments by the son of a suta. Quickly rendered unsuccessful by Karna’s arrows, that arrow fell down. Having severed the arrow in the battle with his straight-tufted arrows, in that encounter, Karna pierced Dhrishtadyumna with ten arrows. Drona’s son pierced him with ﬁve, Drona himself with
seven, Shalya with nine arrows and Duhshasana with three. Duryodhana pierced him with twenty and Shakuni
with ﬁve. All the maharathas quickly pierced Panchala. For Drona’s sake, he was thus pierced by seven heroes in
that battle.187 O king! But without showing any fear, he pierced each of them back with three arrows. He pierced
Drona, Drona’s son, Karna and your son. Thus pierced by that archer, those supreme among rathas again quickly
pierced Dhrishtadyumna in that battle, with ﬁve arrows each.
‘“O king! Drumasena188 angrily pierced him with arrows. Asking him to wait, he again swiftly struck him with
three other arrows. He pierced him back with three fast and sharp arrows. They were gold-tufted and sharpened on
stone. They could rob warriors of their lives. He again used a broad-headed arrow to sever the valiant Drumasena’s
head, with golden and blazing earrings, from his body. The teeth still bit the lower lips in anger. But in that battle,
the head fell down on the ground. It was like a ripe palm fruit, which had been brought down by the force of a
strong wind.”
‘“The brave one again struck those brave ones with extremely sharp arrows. Colourful in ﬁghting, he severed
Radheya’s bow with a broad-headed arrow. Karna could not tolerate the severing of his bow, like a ﬁerce lion
whose tail has been severed. His eyes became red with rage and he sighed. He picked up another bow. He showered down a storm of arrows on the immensely strong Dhrishtadyumna. On seeing that Karna was enraged, those
brave ones, the six bulls among men,189 quickly surrounded Panchala’s son, wishing to kill him. On seeing that he
was in front of those supreme warriors, all those on your side thought that Dhrishtadyumna was already within the
jaws of death. At that time, Dasharha Satyaki showered arrows and advanced to the spot where the valorous
Dhrishtadyumna was. Satyaki was a great archer and indomitable in battle. On seeing that he was advancing, Radheya pierced him back with ten swift arrows. O great king! While all those brave ones looked on, Satyaki asked
him to wait and not run away, and then pierced him with ten arrows. The encounter between the powerful Satyaki
and the great-souled Karna was terrible, like that between Bali and Vasava. With the slapping of his palms, Satyaki, bull among the kshatriyas, frightened all the kshatriyas and pierced the lotus-eyed Karna back. O great king!
Making the earth tremble with the roar of his bow, the powerful son of a suta fought against Satyaki. Karna pierced
Shini’s descendant back with hundreds of arrows—vipatha, karni, naracha, vatsadanta and kshurapra.190 In that
way, Yuyudhana, foremost of rathas among the Vrishni lineage, showered down arrows on Karna. The encounter
between him and those on your side was wonderful and seemed to be equal. O great king! Karna’s armoured
son191 quickly pierced Satyaki from every direction with sharp arrows. The lord Satyaki used his weapons to
counter all their weapons and those of Karna. He angrily pierced Vrishasena between the breasts. O lord of the

earth! Pierced by that arrow, the valiant Vrishasena lost his senses. He discarded his bow and fell down on his
chariot. Karna thought that maharatha Vrishasena had been slain. He was tormented by sorrow on account of his
son and afﬂicted Satyaki. Maharatha Yuyudhana was oppressed by Karna. But he repeatedly struck Karna back
with many arrows and with force. He pierced Karna with ten arrows and Vrishasena with seven. Satvata severed
the bows and arm-guards of both. They192 strung other bows that were capable of terrifying the enemy and
pierced Yuyudhana from every direction with sharp arrows. That battle raged on and it was destructive of heroes.
‘“O king! Surpassing all sounds, the great roar of Gandiva was heard. O king! On hearing the clatter of the chariot and the roar of Gandiva, the son of a suta spoke these words to Duryodhana. ‘The great archer has killed all the
Shibis, the foremost of bulls among men and the Pouravas.193 Gandiva is roaring loudly. The clatter of the chariot
can be heard and Vasava’s son is roaring. It is evident that Pandava has accomplished deeds that only he himself is
capable of. O king! He will shatter this army of the Bharatas in many ways. The soldiers are being routed and no
one wishes to remain. It is as if a net of clouds is being dispelled by the wind. Approaching Savyasachi, those on
our side are being broken, like a boat on the ocean. Because of the arrows released from Gandiva, the foremost of
the warriors are ﬂeeing. O king! As they are being routed in a hundred ways, a large uproar can be heard. O tiger
among kings! In this night, it is echoing in the sky. There are the sounds of lamentations and roars like lions’. Musical instruments and many other sounds can be heard in the vicinity of Arjuna’s chariot. However, Satyaki, worst
of the Satvata lineage, is stationed in our midst. If we can attain this objective of ours,194 all our enemies will be
defeated. This son of the king of Panchala195 is engaged with Drona. O king! He is surrounded on all sides by
warriors who are supreme among men. O great king! If we kill Satyaki and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, there is no
doubt about the certainty that victory will be ours. Let us surround these two brave maharathas, as we did Subhadra’s son.196 O great king! Let us endeavour to kill those of the Vrishni and Parshata lineages. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Savyasachi is in front of us, advancing towards Drona’s divison. He knows that Satyaki is engaged with many bulls among the Kurus. Let many foremost ones, supreme among rathas, go there, so that Partha
does not know that Satyaki has been surrounded by many. Let the brave ones quickly release ﬁerce arrows, so that
Madhava can quickly go to the world of the hereafter.’ O king! Knowing this to be Karna’s view, your son spoke to
Soubala in that encounter, like Indra speaking to the illustrious Vishnu. ‘Surrounded by tens of thousands of elephants that do not retreat and surrounded by ten thousand chariots, go to where Dhananjaya is. Duhshasana,
Durvishaha, Subahu and Dushpradharshana will follow you, surrounded by many foot soldiers. O mighty-armed
one! O maternal uncle! O descendant of the Bharata lineage!197 Kill the two Krishnas, Dharmaraja, Nakula, Sahadeva and Bhimasena. My hopes of victory depend on you, like those of the gods on Indra of the gods. O maternal uncle! Slay the Kounteyas, like Pavaka’s son198 against the asuras.’ O lord! Having been thus addressed by
your son, Soubala went to where the Parthas were, with a large army and with your sons. For the welfare of your
sons, he wished to consume the sons of Pandu.
‘“When Soubala departed towards the army of the Pandavas, a battle commenced between those on your side
and the enemy. With a large army, the son of a suta advanced against Satvata. He advanced rapidly in that battle
and showered many arrows. All those on the Pandava side surrounded Satyaki. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! During that night, the great-souled Drona fought a great battle against the brave Dhrishtadyumna and the
Panchalas.”’
CHAPTER 1123(146)

‘Sanjaya said, “All of them were indomitable in battle and swiftly attacked. They were angry and intolerant and
advanced towards Yuyudhana’s chariot. O king! They were on well-constructed chariots that were decorated with
gold and jewels. With horses and elephants, they surrounded Satvata. Those maharathas penned him in from all
directions. They roared like lions and challenged Satyaki. They showered down many sharp arrows on Satyaki, for
whom, truth was his valour. Those spirited and immensely valorous ones desired to kill Madhava. On seeing them
swiftly advance, Shini’s mighty-armed descendant, the destroyer of enemy heroes, received them and shot many
swift arrows. Satyaki was a brave and great archer and invincible in battle. He severed heads with his ﬁerce arrows
that had straight tufts. With his kshurapra arrows, Madhava severed the trunks of elephants, the necks of horses

and the arms of many on your side, still holding on to weapons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Whisks and
white umbrellas fell down. O lord! The earth was beautiful, like the ﬁrmament full of stars. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! As they fought in that battle with Yuyudhana, there was a tremendous uproar, like that of dead
spirits wailing. The earth became full of that great sound. The night assumed a terrible form, giving rise to great
fear. Your army was shattered and afﬂicted by Yuyudhana’s arrows. In the night, there was a tremendous roar and
it made the body hair stand up.
‘“O king! On seeing this, your son, supreme among rathas, repeatedly spoke to his charioteer and urged him.
‘Goad these supreme horses towards that spot.’ The charioteer drove towards Yuyudhana’s chariot. Duryodhana
was angry. He was ﬁrm in wielding the bow and had conquered exhaustion. He was swift in the use of his hands
and was a colourful ﬁghter. He attacked Yuyudhana. Madhava drew his bow all the way back and pierced Duryodhana with twelve arrows that drank up blood. Despite being ﬁrst afﬂicted by the arrows of Shini’s descendant,
Duryodhana intolerantly pierced him back with ten arrows. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The battle between
the Panchalas and all the Bharatas became tumultuous and ﬁerce. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Shini’s descendant became angry in that battle. He pierced your maharatha son in the chest with eighty arrows. In that encounter, he used other arrows to convey his mounts to Yama’s eternal abode. Using his arrows, he quickly brought
down the charioteer from his chariot. O lord of the earth! With his horses slain, your son remained stationed on the
chariot. He released many sharp arrows in the direction of the chariot of Shini’s descendant. O king! In that encounter, Shini’s descendant showed the dexterity of his hands. He sliced down the ﬁve hundred arrows that had
been released by your son. O venerable one! Violent in that battle, he used a broad-headed arrow to sever your
son’s giant bow from his hand. Without a chariot and without a bow, the lord and master of all worlds quickly
climbed onto Kritavarma’s radiant chariot. O lord of the earth! In the middle of the night, when Duryodhana had
retreated, Shini’s descendant used his arrows to drive away your army.
‘“O king! Meanwhile, Shakuni surrounded Arjuna from every direction. There were thousands of chariots and
thousands of elephants. There were thousands of horses and these created a tumult. They released large and divine
weapons towards Arjuna. Driven by destiny, those kshatriyas fought against Arjuna. Arjuna countered thousands
of chariots, elephants and horses and caused a great destruction. In that battle, the brave Shakuni Soubala pierced
Arjuna with sharp arrows and seemed to be smiling. He again shot one hundred arrows and checked the maharatha. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, Arjuna pierced him with twenty arrows. He then
pierced each of those great archers with three arrows. O king! In the encounter, Dhananjaya repulsed them with his
innumerable arrows. He killed many warriors on your side, like the one with the vajra in his hand against the asuras. O great king! Arms and thousands of bodies were mangled. They were scattered around and the earth looked
beautiful, as if strewn with ﬂowers. He severely pierced Shakuni with ﬁve arrows with drooping tufts. He then
struck both him and Uluka with three large and iron arrows each.199 Urged by Vasudeva, he pierced Uluka and
roared loudly, ﬁlling the earth. Resorting to speed, Arjuna severed Shakuni’s bow. He killed his four horses and
sent them to Yama’s abode. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O lord of the earth! Soubala descended from his
chariot and quickly climbed onto Uluka’s chariot. The maharatha father and son were astride the same chariot.
They showered arrows on Partha, like two clouds raining down on a mountain. O great king! Pandava then pierced
them with his sharp arrows. He drove away your army, striking them with hundreds of arrows. It was like clouds
being scattered by the wind in every direction. O king! O lord of the earth! That army was shattered. O foremost
among the Bharata lineage! Your army was slaughtered in the night. They ﬂed in all the directions, glancing everywhere out of fear. Some abandoned their mounts in the battle. Others urged them.200 They were terriﬁed and ﬂed
in that terrible darkness. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The warriors on your side were defeated in that encounter. Delighted, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya blew on their conch shells.
‘“O great king! Dhrishtadyumna pierced Drona with three arrows. With a sharp arrow, he quickly severed the
string of his bow. Drona, the brave crusher of kshatriyas, ﬂung that bow down on the ground and picked up another
bow what was more powerful and more substantial. Drona pierced Dhrishtadyumna with seven swift arrows. O
king! In that encounter, he pierced his charioteer with ﬁve arrows. Maharatha Dhrishtadyumna swiftly countered
him with his arrows and killed the Kourava soldiers in hundreds and thousands. O venerable one! Your son’s army
was slaughtered at that time. A terrible river, with waves made out of blood, began to ﬂow between the two armies

and men, horses and elephants ﬂowed in it. O king! It was like the river Vaitarani201 that ﬂows towards the capital
of Yama’s kingdom. The powerful Dhrishtadyumna drove away your soldiers and was resplendent, like the energetic Shakra amidst the masses of gods. Dhrishtadyumna and Shikhandi blew on their giant conch shells and so did
the twins, Yuyudhana and Pandava Vrikodara. They defeated thousands of rathas and maharathas on your side. O
lord of the earth! Hoping for victory, the Pandavas roared like lions, in the sight of your son and those of Karna,
who was insolent of his valour, the brave Drona and Drona’s son.”’
CHAPTER 1124(147)

‘Sanjaya said, “O lord of the earth! On seeing that his own army was being slaughtered by those great-souled ones,
your son was overcome by great rage. He swiftly went to Karna and Drona, supreme among victorious ones. Overcome by feelings of intolerance, the one who was eloquent with words spoke these words. ‘Incited by your anger,
the two of you started this battle,202 on seeing that Saindhava had been killed by Savyasachi in the battle. My
army is being slaughtered by the Pandus. Though you are capable of obtaining victory, you are looking on, as if
you are incapable. If you are going to abandon me today, you should not have spoken to me in that way earlier.
“We will defeat the sons of Pandu in the battle.” O those who grant honours! On hearing your words, I allowed this
to happen. Otherwise, I would not have provoked an enmity with the Pandavas, so destructive of warriors. O bulls
among men! O ones who are great in valour! If I should not be abandoned by the two of you, then ﬁght in accordance with the valour you possess.’ Thus goaded by the words of your son, those two brave ones returned again to
the battle, like snakes that have been driven with sticks. They were the foremost among rathas. They were the best
archers in all the worlds. In that battle, they advanced against the Parthas, with Shini’s descendant at the forefront.
The Parthas also united, surrounded by their own soldiers and advanced against those two brave ones, who were
roaring repeatedly.
‘“The great archer Drona, supreme among those who wielded all weapons, angrily and spiritedly pierced the
bull among the Shini lineage with ten arrows. Karna pierced him with ten arrows and your son with seven, Vrishasena with ten and Soubala with seven. A mass of Kouravas surrounded Shini’s descendant. On seeing that
Drona was slaughtering the Pandava army in the battle, the Somakas quickly pierced him from every side and
showered arrows on him. O lord of the earth! O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona began to rob the
kshatriyas of their lives, like the sun destroys darkness with its rays. O lord of the earth! The Panchalas were
slaughtered by Drona and we heard a tremendous uproar as they called out to each other. Some abandoned their
sons, others their fathers, others their brothers and maternal uncles, others their sisters’ sons, friends and kin, as
they quickly ran away, seeking to save their lives. Others were confused and because of delusion, ran towards
him.203 In the battle, other Pandava warriors were sent to the world of the hereafter. Thus the Pandava soldiers
were killed by the great-souled ones.204 O king! They ﬂed in the night, throwing away thousands of blazing torches, while the warriors Bhimasena, Vijaya,205 Achyuta, the twins, Dharma’s son and Parshata looked on. With the
world covered in darkness, nothing could be seen. But because of the light that existed among the Kouravas, it
could be seen that the enemy was running away. O king! As the soldiers ran away, maharatha Drona and Karna followed them from the rear and showered many arrows.
‘“On seeing that the Panchalas were shattered and routed in every way, Janardana was distressed and addressed
Phalguna. ‘Parshata and Satyaki, together with the Panchalas, advanced against the great archers, Drona and Karna, and are being killed through ﬁerce arrows. Those maharathas have shattered them with their shower of arrows.
O Kounteya! The army should be restrained. It is still capable of taking a stand. Let us array all the soldiers in a
battle formation and rallying them, let us raise our weapons and advance against Drona and the son of a suta. They
are powerful and brave. They are skilled in the use of weapons and desire to obtain victory. They are angrily casting aside our army and destroying it in the night.’ O king! On seeing that Vrikodara was advancing, Janardana
again spoke to Pandava, as if to cheer him. ‘With the ﬁerce Bhima advancing in front, the soldiers are returning
again. This Bhima prides himself in battle and is surrounded by the Somakas and the Pandavas. They are angry
and are powerfully advancing against the immensely strong Drona and Karna. O descendant of the Pandu lineage!
For the sake of assuring all the soldiers, ﬁght against them, together with the maharatha Panchalas.’ Those tigers

among men, Madhava and Pandava, then approached Drona and Karna and stationed themselves at the forefront of
the battle.
‘“Yudhishthira’s large army returned again and went to the spot where Drona and Karna were crushing the enemy in the battle. In the night, there was a great and tumultuous encounter. O king! It was like that of two rising
oceans, when the moon has arisen. Your soldiers threw away the lamps from their hands and fought with the Pandavas, as if they were maddened at the destruction. There was an extremely terrible darkness, with dust. Desiring
victory, they fought on the basis of names and family names.206 The names uttered by the kings were heard. O
great king! That hour of the battle was like a svayamvara.207 There was sudden silence for a while and then a
great uproar arose again, from the angry warriors who were victorious and those who were defeated. O supreme
among the Kuru lineage! Like insects, the brave ones were drawn to the spots where there were lamps. O Indra
among kings! As all the Pandavas and the Kouravas fought, the great darkness of the night gathered around
them.”’
CHAPTER 1125(148)

‘Sanjaya said, “Karna, the destroyer of enemy heroes, was delighted at seeing Parshata in the battle. He struck him
in the chest with ten arrows that were capable of penetrating the inner organs. O venerable one! Dhrishtadyumna
swiftly pierced him back with ﬁve arrows, cheerfully asking him to wait. In that encounter, those great maharathas
used other arrows to envelop each other and drawing their bows all the way back, pierced each other. In that battle,
Karna used his arrows to pierce the charioteer and the four horses of Dhrishtadyumna, foremost among the Panchalas. He severed his supreme bow with sharp arrows and used a broad-headed arrow to bring down his charioteer from the seat on the chariot. Dhrishtadyumna was without a chariot. His horses were slain. His charioteer was
killed. He grasped a terrible club and crushed Karna’s horses. He208 was severely wounded by many arrows that
were like venomous serpents. O venerable one! He advanced towards Yudhishthira’s army on foot and climbed
onto Sahadeva’s chariot. The charioteer yoked other horses to Karna’s chariot. They possessed the complexion of
conch shells and were extremely fast. They were from the Saindhava region and were controlled well.209 Successful in attaining his objective, Radheya afﬂicted the maharatha Panchalas with his arrows, like clouds raining down
on a mountain. The large army of the Panchalas was afﬂicted by Karna. They ﬂed in fright, like deer assailed by a
lion. Horses and elephants fell down on the ground. Here and there, men were seen to swiftly fall down from their
chariots. In the great battle, Karna killed the ﬂeeing warriors with his kshurapra arrows and severed arms and
heads, still adorned with earrings. O lord of the earth! O venerable one! The thighs of those who were astride elephants, those who were on the backs of horses and those who were on the ground, were severed. But as they ﬂed in
the battle, many maharathas did not feel that their limbs or their mounts were severed by arrows. Slaughtered in
the battle, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas thought that even the stirring of a blade of grass was the son of the suta.
As they were frightened and ﬂed in the battle, the warriors were deprived of their senses and took those on their
own side to be Karna and ﬂed in fright. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As the shattered army ﬂed, Karna
quickly pursued it from the rear, showering arrows. They glanced at each other, unconscious and bereft of their
senses. They were incapable of standing before the great-souled one, who was like Death. O king! The Panchalas
were struck by Karna’s supreme arrows. Others glanced towards Drona and ﬂed in all the directions.
‘“King Yudhishthira saw that his own army was running away. Thinking that retreat was preferable, he spoke
these words to Phalguna. ‘Behold. The great archer, Karna, is stationed with a bow in his hand. Though it is a
dreadful night, he is scorching like the sun. The whizzing sounds of Karna’s arrows are being incessantly heard. O
Partha! Your relatives seem to be without a protector. He is swiftly afﬁxing and releasing arrows. It is certain that
he will destroy us and I see that the valiant one’s victory is certain. The time has come. Adopt the course of action
that you think to be appropriate next. O Dhananjaya! Do what needs to be done to kill Karna.’ Having been thus
addressed, the mighty-armed Partha spoke to Krishna. ‘The king is frightened of the supreme valour of Radheya,
the son of Kunti. Karna’s army is repeatedly acting and the time has come. Our army is running away and we must
quickly decide on a course of action. O Madhusudana! They are being mangled by Drona’s arrows. They are
frightened of Karna and are unable to take a stand. Behold. Karna is fearlessly roaming around there. He is show-

ering sharp arrows and driving away the best of rathas. O tiger among the Vrishni lineage! Like a snake that has
been stepped on with a foot, I cannot bear to see him wander around thus on the ﬁeld of battle and remain oblivious. Therefore, swiftly go to the spot where maharatha Karna is. O Madhusudana! I will kill him. Or let him kill
me.’ Vasudeva replied, ‘O Kounteya! I have seen Karna roaming around in the battle, like the king of the gods. He
is a tiger among men and superhuman in his valour. O Dhananjaya! O tiger among men! With the exception of you
and the rakshasa Ghatotkacha, there is no one else who can counter him in battle. O unblemished one! O mightyarmed one! I do not think that the time has come for you to confront the son of a suta in battle. He possesses a
blazing spear that he obtained from Vasava. O mighty-armed one! It is terrible in form and he has retained it for
you. Let the immensely strong Ghatotkacha advance against Radheya. He has been born from the powerful Bhima
and is like the gods in valour. He possesses divine weapons and also those of the rakshasas and asuras. Ghatotkacha has always been devoted to you and has your welfare in mind. It is my view that there is no doubt about
his defeating Karna in the battle.’ Having thus spoken to Partha, the mighty-armed and lotus-eyed one summoned
the rakshasa.
‘“O lord of the earth! He arrived before them, with armour, arrows, sword and bow. He paid his respects to
Krishna and Pandava Dhananjaya. He cheerfully addressed them, ‘Command me.’ He was like a cloud. He was
radiant and was adorned with blazing earrings. Dasharha smiled and spoke to Hidimba’s son. ‘O Ghatotkacha! O
child! Listen to what I tell you. The time has come for you, and no one else, to show valour. Be a raft to your relatives, who are submerging. You possess many kinds of weapons and the maya of rakshasas. O Hidimba’s son! Behold. The Pandava army is being driven away by Karna in the ﬁeld of battle, like cattle by a herdsman. It is my
view that this great archer, Karna, is ﬁrm in his valour. The bull among kshatriyas is slaughtering the Pandava soldiers. The one with the ﬁrm bow is releasing a great shower of arrows. Oppressed by the rays of his arrows, no one
is capable of standing before him. In this night, the son of a suta is afﬂicting them with his shower of arrows. The
Panchalas are being driven away, like frightened deer before a lion. O one who is terrible in valour! With your exception, there is no one else who can be seen, capable of countering the son of a suta, when he is thus engaged in
battle. O mighty-armed one! Perform the deeds that only you are capable of. You possess the energies of your maternal uncle210 and fathers and have the strength of your weapons. O Hidimba’s son! It is for reasons like this that
men desire sons, to save them in times of difﬁculty. Therefore, save your relatives. The strength of your weapons is
ﬁerce. Your maya is difﬁcult to withstand. O son of Bhima! You have always fought in a battle. The Pandavas have
been routed by Karna’s sharp arrows. O scorcher of enemies! They are sinking in the ocean of the sons of Dhritarashtra and cannot reach the shore. During the night, the rakshasas become invested with extreme valour, power
and bravery. They roam around valiantly and are invincible. Using maya in the battle, slay the great archer, Karna,
during the night. The Parthas, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, will kill Drona.’ O Kouravya! On hearing the
words of Keshava, Bibhatsu, the scorcher of enemies, also spoke to the rakshasa Ghatotkacha. ‘O Ghatotkacha! In
my view, you, the mighty-armed Satyaki and Pandava Bhimasena are the best among all our soldiers. In the night,
go and engage in a duel with Karna. Maharatha Satyaki will protect your rear. Aided by Satvata, slay the brave
Karna in the battle, just as Indra, aided by Skanda, struck Taraka in ancient times.’211 Ghatotkacha replied, ‘I am a
match for Karna, the supreme Drona and all the other kshatriyas who are skilled in the use of weapons. In this
night, I will present the son of the suta with a battle. People will speak about it as long as this earth lasts. I will not
save brave ones, or those who are frightened and join their hands in salutation. I will resort to the dharma of rakshasas and kill everyone.’ Having spoken thus, Hidimba’s mighty-armed son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, violently advanced against Karna, frightening your soldiers.
‘“On seeing that he was angrily descending, like an insect towards a ﬂame, the son of a suta, the supreme archer,
received him. At night, a battle commenced between Karna and the rakshasa. O tiger among kings! They roared at
each other, like Shakra and Prahlada.”’
CHAPTER 1126(149)

‘Sanjaya said, “O king! Ghatotkacha spiritedly advanced towards the chariot of the son of a suta, desiring to kill
Karna in the battle. On seeing this, your son212 spoke these words to Duhshasana. ‘On witnessing Karna’s valour

in the battle, this rakshasa is swiftly advancing. Advance quickly and prevent this maharatha from reaching Karna.
Surround yourself with a large army and go to the spot where the immensely strong Karna is stationed. Vaikartana
is ﬁghting with the rakshasa in this battle. O one who grants honours! Surrounded by the soldiers, make an effort
to protect Karna in the battle.’ O king! At this time, Jatasura’s powerful son approached Duryodhana. He was
supreme among strikers and spoke. ‘O Duryodhana! Your enemies are famous and invincible in battle. But with
your permission, I wish to kill the Pandavas and their followers. In earlier times, my father, Jatasura, was the foremost among rakshasas. Performing a deed that could kill rakshasas, the inferior Parthas brought him down.213 O
lord! I wish to satisfy the one who has departed214 and you should grant me permission.’ Having been thus addressed, the king was delighted and repeatedly said, ‘Aided by Drona, Karna and the others, I am capable of slaying the enemy. But with my permission, go. Slay Ghatotkacha in the battle.’ Having been thus addressed, the one
with a gigantic form challenged Ghatotkacha.
‘“Jatasura’s son countered Bhimasena’s son with diverse kinds of weapons. However, Hidimba’s son crushed
Alambala,215 Karna and the unassailable Kuru soldiers, like a giant wind driving away clouds. On seeing that the
ratha Ghatotkacha was using maya, Alambala quickly shot many different kinds of arrows at him. Alambala
pierced Bhimasena’s son with many arrows. He drove away the Pandava soldiers with his storm of arrows. O venerable one! The Pandava soldiers were thus driven away in the night, like clouds dispelled by the wind. O king!
Similarly, the Kuru soldiers were mangled by Ghatotkacha’s arrows and ﬂed in the night, throwing away thousands
of ﬂaming torches. Alambala became angry in that great battle. He struck Bhimasena’s son with many arrows, like
a giant elephant being goaded. Ghatotkacha shattered into tiny fragments his216 chariot, his charioteer and all the
ﬁerce weapons, capable of destroying life, that were hurled at him. Like clouds raining down on Mount Meru, he
showered down thousands of storms of arrows on Karna, the other Kurus and Alambala. Afﬂicted by the rakshasa,
the Kuru soldiers were agitated. The four kinds of forces217 began to crush each other down repeatedly. O great
king! Jatasura’s son was without a chariot. His charioteer was slain. In that battle, he angrily struck Ghatotkacha
with a ﬁrm blow of the ﬁst. Having been struck by the ﬁst, Ghatotkacha wavered, like a mountain, with its large
number of trees and creepers, as if during an earthquake. He then raised his arms, which were like clubs and capable of slaying the enemy. Bhimasena’s son severely struck Jatasura’s son with his ﬁst. Hidimba’s son angrily
crushed him and swiftly hurled him down. He seized him with arms that were like Indra’s standard and forced him
down on the ground. Alambala also seized the rakshasa Ghatotkacha in the encounter and wrathfully seizing him,
forced him down on the ground. There was a duel between those gigantic ones, Ghatotkacha and Alambala. As
they roared, it was tumultuous and made the body hair stand up. In particular, they were well versed in maya and
resorted to maya to overpower each other. Those immensely valiant ones fought, like Indra and Virochana’s
son.218 They became ﬁre and the ocean219 and Garuda and Takshaka.220 They again became a cloud and a giant
wind, or thunder and a giant mountain. They then became an elephant and a tiger and again became Svarbhanu221
and the sun. In this way, wishing to kill each each other, they created a hundred different kinds of maya. Alambala
and Ghatotkacha fought wonderfully well. They struck each other with clubs, maces, lances, bludgeons, battleaxes,
mallets and the summits of mountains. The foremost among rakshasa warriors resorted to great powers of maya
and fought as horses, elephants, infantry and chariots. O king! Wishing to kill Alambala, Ghatotkacha descended
violently, like a hawk. The Indra among rakshasas seized Alambala, whose form was gigantic. He raised him and
pressed him down in the battle, like Vishnu against Maya.222 Ghatotkacha grasped a sword that was extraordinary
to look at. He severed the terrible head from the body and it was dreadful to see.
‘“The rakshasa grasped the head by the hair, with the blood dripping from it. Ghatotkacha then swiftly advanced
towards Duryodhana’s chariot. The mighty-armed rakshasa approached and smiling, ﬂung the head, with a distorted face and dreadful hair, onto the chariot. He then roared loudly, like a cloud during the monsoon. O king! He
spoke these words to Duryodhana. ‘Witness the valour of your friend. He has been killed. You will now witness
Karna’s destruction and that of your own self.’ O lord of men! Having said this, he departed in Karna’s direction.
He shot hundreds of sharp arrows towards Karna’s head. O great king! A duel commenced between the man and
the rakshasa in that battle and it was terrible in form. It gave rise to great fear and was wonderful.”’

CHAPTER 1127(150)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “Vaikartana Karna and the rakshasa Ghatotkacha clashed against each other in the night. Tell
me about that wonderful event. What kind of terrible ﬁght did the rakshasa resort to? What kind of chariot did he
create with his maya and what were his weapons? What were the sizes of his horses, chariot, standard and bow?
What was his armour like and the guard around his neck? O Sanjaya! You are skilled in narrating. I am asking you.
Tell me all this.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “His eyes were red. His form was gigantic. He had the complexion of copper. His stomach
hung low. His body hair stood up. His hair was green. His eyes were like cones. His jaw was large. His gaping jaw
was wide, extending from one ear to another. His teeth were pointed and looked deadly. His tongue and lips were
extremely long, with the hue of copper. His eyebrows were long. His nose was thick. His body was blue. His neck
was red. He was as tall as a mountain and was a terrible sight. His form was gigantic. He was mighty-armed, with
a large head, and immensely strong. His body was harsh to the touch. The hair was tied into a ﬁerce bun on his
head. His hips were broad. His navel was deep. But though he was gigantic, his waist was thin. The ornaments on
his arms were also appropriate. He wore armlets and possessed great powers of maya. He wore a breastplate that
was like a garland of ﬁre on a mountain. A dazzling crown adorned his head. It was as large as a gate. It was golden and colourful and it had many beautiful segments. His earrings were like the rising sun. His golden garland
sparkled. His gigantic body was bedecked in extremely radiant armour made of brass. The giant chariot, which
was as large as a nalva,223 roared with a hundred bells. It was covered with bear skins. The standard and ﬂags
were red. It possessed a standard and garlands and was stocked with all the supreme weapons. It possessed eight
wheels and rumbled deeply, like a cloud. It was borne by powerful horses. They were ﬁerce, with red eyes, and
looked like elephants. They were swift and adopted whatever complexion one wished. The rakshasa Virupaksha
was the charioteer and he was resplendent, with earrings. The reins were like the rays of the sun and he grasped
these and controlled the horses in battle. He arrived with him, like the sun god with Varuna. A giant standard was
raised aloft the chariot. It looked like a giant mountain, encircled by giant clouds. It seemed to stretch up into the
sky. An extremely ﬁerce and carnivorous vulture was perched on it and its head was red. The chariot roared like
Vasava’s vajra. The bejewelled bow could slay the enemy and was twelve kishkus long.224 The bowstring was
ﬁrm when stretched. The arrows were as long as a chariot’s axle and he enveloped all the directions with these. In
the night that was destructive of brave ones, he advanced towards Karna. He was stationed on that chariot and
stretched his bow. The roar of the bow, when stretched, was heard to be like the sound of thunder. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! This terriﬁed your soldiers. All of them trembled, like giant waves on the ocean.
‘“On seeing the ﬁerce one with the malformed eyes advance, Radheya seemed to smile and quickly countered
him. Karna approached the smiling one225 and struck him from a close distance. He was like an elephant against
another elephant, like the bull who leads a herd against another bull. O lord of the earth! O king! There was a tumultuous clash between Karna and the rakshasa, like that between Indra and Shambara. They grasped immensely
powerful bows that made a ﬁerce noise. They enveloped and struck each other with giant arrows. They drew their
bows all the way back and released straight-tufted arrows. They countered each other and pierced the brass armour.
They were like tigers ﬁghting with their claws, or giant elephants with their tusks. They ﬂung spears226 at each
other and wounded each other with their arrows. They mangled each other’s limbs and struck each other with arrows. They scorched each other with storms of arrows and it was impossible to look at either of them. They were
wounded all over their limbs and they were covered with streams of blood. They looked beautiful, like mountains
covered with red ore, with streams ﬂowing down them. Their limbs were pierced with the tips of arrows and they
mangled each other. But though those immensely radiant ones struggled, neither could make the other tremble. O
king! For a long time, that duel in the night seemed to be equal. Karna and the rakshasa gambled in that battle,
with their lives as stakes. They afﬁxed sharp arrows and shot them. They terriﬁed those on their own side, and on
the side of the enemy, with the roars of their bows. O king! Karna could not get the better of Ghatotkacha.
‘“The supreme among those who have knowledge of weapons then invoked a divine weapon. On seeing that
Karna had invoked a divine weapon, the rakshasa Ghatotkacha, the descendant of the Pandu lineage, created a
great maya. He was surrounded by a large army of rakshasas, ﬁerce in visage. They wielded spears and clubs and

held mountains and trees in their hands. On seeing that he227 had raised his great bow, all the kings were distressed. He advanced like the destroyer of all beings, like Yama wielding a staff. Ghatotkacha emitted terrible roars
like a lion. The elephants passed urine and the men were severely distressed. A large and ﬁerce shower of stones
rained down in every direction. It was midnight and the powerful rakshasas released these with their enhanced
strength. Iron chakras, catapults, lances, javelins, spears, shataghnis and battleaxes rained down incessantly. The
kings saw that the battle had become extremely ﬁerce and terrible. Your sons and the warriors were distressed and
ﬂed. There was only a single proud one who was not distressed. This was Karna, who prided himself on the
strength of his weapons. Using his arrows, he destroyed the maya that had been created by Ghatotkacha. When that
maya was dispelled, Ghatokacha became intolerant. He released a terrible shower of deadly arrows towards the
son of the suta. In the great battle, these arrows penetrated Karna and covered with blood, entered the ground, like
angry snakes. The powerful son of the suta was enraged and using the dexterity of his hands, surpassed Ghatotkacha and pierced him with ten arrows. Ghatotkacha was pierced in his inner organs by the son of the suta. Severely wounded, he picked up a divine chakra with one thousand spokes. The edges were as sharp as a razor and it
was decorated with gems and jewels. Its complexion was like that of the rising sun. Wishing to kill him, Bhimasena’s son angrily hurled this towards Adhiratha’s son. It was hurled with great force. However, Karna struck it with
his arrows and rendered it unsuccessful, like the wishes of an unfortunate person. It fell down on the ground. On
seeing that the chakra had been brought down, Ghatotkacha became extremely angry. He shrouded Karna with arrows, like Svarbhanu eclipsing the sun. The son of the suta possessed the valour of Indra and Upendra228 and was
not frightened. He swiftly enveloped Ghatotkacha’s chariot with arrows. Enraged, Ghatotkacha grasped a club decorated with gold and hurled it. While it was still traversing, Karna shattered it with his arrows and made it fall
down.
‘“Bhimasena’s son, gigantic in form, rose up into the sky. He roared like a dark cloud. He brought down a shower of trees from the sky, using his powers of maya. Karna pierced him with his arrows, like the rays of the sun
passing through a mass of clouds. Karna killed all his horses and shattered his chariot into a hundred fragments. He
showered down arrows, like a cloud pouring down rain. There wasn’t a stretch of two ﬁngers on his229 body that
was not pierced. In a short while, he seemed to be like a porcupine with its quills erect. In that encounter, he was
enveloped with a storm of arrows and we could not see his horses, his chariot, his standard, or even Ghatotkacha.
He then used his own weapons to destroy Karna’s divine weapon. The one who knew about maya resorted to ﬁghting with maya in the battle with the son of the suta. Showing his dexterity, he used maya to ﬁght with Karna. Invisible in the sky, he brought down a net of arrows. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! Bhimasena’s son was great
in the use of maya and resorted to maya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Using his great maya, he caused
confusion. Using maya, he assumed many inauspicious faces with distorted mouths and these devoured the divine
weapons of the son of the suta. In that battle, the one with the gigantic form again seemed to be shattered into a
hundred fragments. He was seen to lie down, deprived of his life and deprived of his endeavour. On thinking that
he had been slain, the bulls among the Kurus roared in delight. However, he was then seen in all the directions, assuming new bodies. He again assumed a giant form, with one hundred heads and one hundred stomachs. The
mighty-armed one looked like Mount Mainaka. However, the rakshasa again assumed a form that was as small as a
ﬁnger. He rose up, like the waves of the ocean. He executed diagonal motions. He seemed to shatter the earth and
immerse himself in the waters. He became invisible and was then seen in a different place. He descended from his
chariot, decorated in gold, and again ascended it. Covered in maya, the armoured one was seen on earth, in the sky
and in all the directions.
‘“O lord of the earth! He fearlessly approached Karna’s chariot, earrings adorning his face and waving around,
and spoke these words to the son of the suta. ‘O son of a suta! Wait. With your life, you will not be able to go away
from me. On this ﬁeld of battle today, I will destroy all the affection that you have for ﬁghting.’ Having spoken
these words, the rakshasa, whose eyes were coppery red with anger and whose valour was cruel, rose up into the
sky and laughed loudly. He struck Karna, like a lion striking a king of elephants. He showered down arrows on
Karna, bull among rathas, like a cloud pouring down rain. These arrows were as long as a chariot’s axle, and Ghatotkacha showered them down. But Karna destroyed this from a distance. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On
seeing that his maya had been destroyed by Karna, Ghatotkacha used his maya and disappeared again. He became

a lofty mountain with many peaks full of trees. From that, a large stream of lances, spears, swords and clubs issued
forth like water. On seeing that mountain, which was like a mass of collyrium and from which many kinds of ﬁerce
weapons showered down, Karna was not agitated. He seemed to smile as he invoked a divine weapon. Because of
that weapon, that large mountain was ﬂung away and destroyed. He230 became a blue cloud in the sky, with Indra’s weapon231 in it. He showered down ﬁerce stones on the son of a suta. However, Karna Vaikartana
Vrisha,232 supreme among those who have knowledge of all weapons, afﬁxed a vayavya weapon and destroyed
that dark cloud. Using a large number of arrows, Karna scattered it in all the directions. O great king! He destroyed
the weapon that had been used by Ghatotkacha. In that battle, Bhimasena’s immensely strong son laughed. He
used his great maya against maharatha Karna. Ghatotkacha, supreme among rathas, again advanced towards him
on a chariot. He was not frightened and was surrounded by many rakshasas. They were like lions and tigers and
like crazy elephants in their valour. Some were astride elephants, others were astride chariots. And there were others who were on the backs of horses. They wielded many kinds of terrible weapons. They were adorned with diverse armour and ornaments. Those cruel ones surrounded Ghatotkacha, like the Maruts around Vasava.
‘“On seeing this, Karna, the great archer, began to ﬁght with the rakshasa. Ghatotkacha pierced Karna with ﬁve
swift arrows. He roared loudly and terriﬁed all the kings. Ghatotkacha again used an anjalika arrow and quickly
severed the bow in Karna’s hand, with many large arrows still afﬁxed to it. Karna picked up another ﬁrm and large
bow, capable of bearing a burden. It was as large as Indra’s weapon233 and he drew it back powerfully. O great
king! Karna shot gold-tufted arrows that were capable of killing the enemy towards the rakshasas who were in the
sky. The rakshasas were broad in the chest and those arrows shattered their herd. It was as if a herd of wild elephants were being oppressed by a lion. The rakshasas were destroyed by those arrows of the lord, together with
their horses, charioteers and elephants. The illustrious one consumed them, like the ﬁre consumes all beings at the
time of the destruction of a yuga. Having killed the rakshasa soldiers, the son of a suta was resplendent. It was like
the city of Tripura, being burnt in earlier times in the sky, by the god Maheshvara.
‘“O venerable one! O king! Among the thousands of kings on the side of the Pandaveyas, there was not a single
one who was capable of glancing at him. O king! The sole exception was the immensely strong Ghatotkacha, Indra
among the rakshasas. He possessed terrible valour and strength. Enraged, he looked like Vaivasvata.234 Fire was
generated from his angry eyes. O king! They were like ﬂaming drops of oil in giant torches. He struck one palm
with another palm. He gnashed his lower lips. He ascended his chariot, generated again through maya. It was
yoked to mounts that were actually asses. But they looked like elephants and had the faces of pishachas. He angrily
instructed his charioteer, ‘Take me to the son of a suta.’ The supreme of rathas advanced on a chariot that was terrible in form. O lord of the earth! There was again a duel with the son of a suta. The rakshasa was again enraged. He
hurled a vajra towards the son of a suta. That vajra was extremely terrible and possessed eight wheels. It had been
constructed by Rudra. As it descended, Karna placed his bow on his chariot and seized it. He hurled it back. But
he235 descended from his chariot. That immensely radiant weapon reduced his236 chariot to ashes, with his horses, charioteer and standard. It then shattered the earth and entered, astounding the gods who were there. Karna had
descended and had seized the great vajra, which had been created by a god. All the beings and gods applauded this.
Having performed this deed in the battle, Karna again ascended his chariot. The son of a suta, the scorcher of enemies, released iron arrows. O granter of honours! I do not think that there is anyone among all the beings who can
perform the terrible deed accomplished by Karna in the battle there. He237 was struck by those iron arrows, which
were like rain pouring down on a mountain. He possessed the form of a city of the gandharvas and disappeared
again. He was a scorcher of enemies and was great in the use of maya. Using his maya and his dexterity, he destroyed all those divine weapons. The weapons were destroyed by the maya of the rakshasa. However, without any
fear, Karna continued to ﬁght with the rakshasa.
‘“O great king! Bhimasena’s immensely strong son became angry. He divided himself into many different forms
and frightened the kings. Lions, tigers and hyenas arrived on the ﬁeld of battle. There were snakes with ﬁre in their
tongues. There were birds with iron beaks. He238 was himself struck with the sharp arrows released by Karna. As
large as a king of mountains, he disappeared from the spot. The rakshasas, pishachas, yatudhanas, leopards and
wolves advanced from all the directions, wishing to devour Karna. They uttered ﬁerce howls, so as to terrify him.

They wielded many terrible weapons. Karna pierced each of them with swift arrows that drank up their blood. He
used a divine weapon to destroy the maya of the rakshasa. He killed his horses with straight-tufted arrows. While
the rakshasa looked on, they were shattered and their limbs were mangled. Their backs were broken by the arrows
and they fell down on the ground. When the maya was destroyed, Hidimba’s son told Karna Vaikartana, ‘I will
bring about your death soon.’ Having said this, he disappeared.”’
CHAPTER 1128(151)

‘Sanjaya said, “When that battle between Karna and the rakshasa was going on, the valiant Alayudha, Indra among
the rakshasas, advanced. With a large army, he approached Suyodhana. He was surrounded by thousands of rakshasas with distorted forms. They had many different forms. The brave one remembered his earlier enmity. Baka,
his valiant relative who ate brahmanas, had been killed. So had the immensely energetic Kirmira, and his friend,
Hidimba. He had waited for a long time, remembering this earlier enmity. Knowing that a ﬁght was raging in the
night, he wished to kill Bhima.239 He was as crazy as an elephant and as angry as a serpent. Desiring to ﬁght, he
spoke these words to Duryodhana. ‘O great king! Know that the rakshasas Hidimba, Baka and Kirmira were killed
by Bhima. They were my relatives. He touched the maiden Hidimba in earlier times, disregarding us and all the
other rakshasas. O king! I am here to kill him and his followers, with the horses, chariots and elephants. I have arrived so that I can myself kill Hidimba’s son and all his advisers. I will kill all the sons of Kunti, with Vasudeva at
the forefront, and devour them, with all their followers. Restrain all your soldiers. We will ﬁght with the
Pandavas.’ On hearing his words, Duryodhana was delighted. Surrounded by his brothers, he showed him honours
and spoke these words. ‘We will ﬁght with the enemy, with you and your followers at the forefront. With the enmity in their minds, my soldiers cannot remain neutral.’ The bull among the rakshasas told the king that this was
acceptable.
‘“With those eaters of human ﬂesh, he advanced against Bhima. His body blazed and he was on a chariot that
was as radiant as the sun. O Indra among kings! It was like that of Ghatotkacha.240 It possessed a roar that was its
equal and it was decorated with many gates. That giant chariot was as broad as a nalva and it was covered with
bear skins. The horses were as swift as his.241 They had the forms of elephants and the voices of asses. Their sizes
were gigantic and one hundred of them were yoked. They fed on ﬂesh and blood. The roar of the chariot was like
his242 and it was like the rumbling of a giant cloud. The giant bow was like his. It was ﬁrm and more powerful.
The arrows were like his, as long as axles. They were gold-tufted and sharpened on stone. The mighty-armed one
was just as brave as Ghatotkacha. The blazing standard was like his, like the ﬁre and the sun, and was protected by
jackals and wild crows. In form, he was more handsome than Ghatotkacha and his anxious face was brilliant. His
armlets blazed. His crown and garlands also blazed. He had a headdress and had girded his sword. He had clubs,
catapults, maces, ploughs and bows and arrows. His skin was like that of an elephant. The chariot was as radiant as
the ﬁre, as he drove away the army of the Pandavas. He was resplendent in that battle and whirled around, like a
cloud tinged with lightning in the sky. There were the foremost of kings, brave warriors among the Pandavas. They
were immensely strong and possessed armour and shields. O king! When he arrived, they cheerfully fought with
him in every direction.”’
CHAPTER 1129(152)

‘Sanjaya said, “On seeing that the performer of terrible deeds had arrived to ﬁght, all the Kurus were ﬁlled with
delight. Your sons, with Duryodhana at the forefront, were like those who did not have rafts and desired to cross
the ocean, but had now obtained rafts. The kings thought that they had been born again. They welcomed and worshipped Alayudha, Indra among the rakshasas. While the battle between humans raged on, there was a fearful battle between Karna and the rakshasa.243 It was terrible to watch. The Panchalas and the kings smiled as they
watched it. O king! In that fashion, those on your side wandered around here and there. On witnessing the feats of
Hidimba’s son in the ﬁeld of battle, they were frightened. Drona, Drona’s son, Kripa and the others uttered wails of
lamentation. All of them were routed and everyone there became senseless. O great king! Your soldiers gave up all
hope of Karna remaining alive. On seeing that Karna was confronting the ultimate calamity, Duryodhana sum-

moned Alayudha, Indra among the rakshasas, and spoke these words to him. ‘Vaikartana Karna is engaged with
Hidimba’s son. He is performing great deeds in the battle, deserving of someone like him. But behold. Those brave
kings are being killed by Bhimasena’s son. They are being struck by many weapons and are like trees struck by a
tusker. In the midst of the kings, let this be your share in the battle.244 O brave one! You have my permission to
exhibit your valour and destroy him. O destroyer of enemies! Earlier, this wicked Ghatotkacha used his powers of
maya and afﬂicted Vaikartana Karna.’ Having been thus addressed by the king, the rakshasa, whose valour was
ﬁerce, agreed and attacked the mighty-armed Ghatotkacha.
‘“O lord! Bhimasena’s son abandoned Karna. As his enemy245 advanced, he crushed him with arrows. There
was a battle between those two enraged Indras among the rakshasas. They were like two crazy elephants ﬁghting
in the forest, desiring the same she-elephant. Having been freed from the rakshasa, Karna, supreme among rathas,
attacked Bhimasena on a chariot that was as radiant as the sun. On seeing that Ghatotkacha was being consumed in
the battle with Alayudha, like the leader of a herd of cattle when engaged with a lion, Bhima, supreme among
strikers, disregarded the advancing one.246
‘“O lord! On seeing that he was advancing, Alayudha abandoned Ghatotkacha and challenged Bhimasena. O
lord! Bhima, the destroyer of rakshasas, advanced impetuously and countered the Indra among rakshasas and his
followers with a shower of arrows. O king! Alayudha, the scorcher of enemies, repeatedly showered down swift
arrows that had been sharpened on stone on Kounteya. All the other rakshasas also attacked Bhimasena. Wishing
to ensure the victory of your sons, they wielded many terrible weapons. The immensely strong Bhimasena was afﬂicted by those strong ones. He pierced each of them with ﬁve sharp arrows. Those rakshasas, born from the
wombs of asses, were slaughtered by Bhima. They wailed loudly in lamentation and ﬂed in the ten directions. On
seeing that his followers had been terrorized by Bhima, the immensely strong rakshasa attacked with great force
and covered him with arrows. In that encounter, Bhimsena used sharp arrows that were pointed at the tip against
the rakshasa. Alayudha severed some of the arrows that were shot by Bhima in the battle. In the encounter, he
quickly received some of the others.247 On seeing this, Bhima, whose valour was terrible, powerfully hurled a
club at the Indra among the rakshasas. Its descent was like that of the thunder. The club descended powerfully, like
a ﬂaming ﬁre. Having struck the club down with a club, he248 advanced towards Bhima. Kounteya countered the
Indra among rakshasas with a shower of arrows. Using his own sharp arrows, the rakshasa rendered all of them unsuccessful. Instructed by the Indra among the rakshasas, all the rakshasa soldiers, terrible in form, returned and began to kill the rathas and the elephants. Severely afﬂicted by the rakshasas, the Panchalas, the Srinjayas, the horses
and the supreme elephants could not ﬁnd any peace there.
‘“On seeing that this extremely terrible encounter was going on in the great battle, the best of men249 spoke
these words to Dhananjaya. ‘Behold. The mighty-armed Bhima has come under the grasp of the Indra among the
rakshasas. O Pandava! Do not reﬂect. Follow in his footsteps. The maharathas Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Yudhamanyu, Uttamouja and Droupadi’s sons will go and ﬁght with Karna. O Pandava! On your instructions, let
Nakula, Sahadeva and the valiant Yuyudhana kill all the other rakshasas. O mighty-armed one! As for you, counter
this army of Drona’s that is in front of us. O tiger among men! Counter the grave danger that has arisen before us
now.’ Having been addressed by Krishna, those maharathas followed the instructions and advanced against Vaikartana Karna and the other rakshasas in the battle.
‘“The powerful Indra among the rakshasas drew his bow all the way back and released arrows that were like
venomous serpents, using these to sever Bhima’s bow. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! While Bhimasena
looked on, in that encounter, the immensely strong one used sharp arrows to kill his horses and charioteer. With his
horses slain and with his charioteer killed, he descended from his chariot. He roared and hurled a terrible and
heavy club towards him.250 The mighty club descended with a terrible noise. However, the rakshasa roared and
destroyed it with his own terrible club. On seeing that terrible and fearful deed performed by the Indra among the
rakshasas, Bhimasena was delighted. He quickly seized another supreme club. There was a tumultuous battle between the man and the rakshasa. As the clubs descended, the earth trembled severely with that force. They cast
aside their clubs and again clashed against each other. They struck each other with their ﬁsts, with a sound like that
of the thunder. Extremely intolerant, they struck each other with the wheels of chariots, yokes, axles, bumpers and

seats. They clashed against each other and blood ﬂowed from their wounds. They repeatedly attacked each other,
like crazy and giant elephants. Hrishikesha was engaged in the welfare of the Pandavas. On seeing this, he instructed Hidimba’s son to protect Bhimasena.”’
CHAPTER 1130(153)

‘Sanjaya said, “In that battle, on seeing that Bhima was within the grasp of the rakshasa, Vasudeva spoke these
words to Ghatotkacha. ‘O mighty-armed one! O immensely radiant one! Behold. Bhima is being devoured by the
rakshasa, while all the soldiers are looking on. Abandon Karna. O mighty-armed one! Quickly kill Alayaudha, Indra among the rakshasas. Kill Karna later.’ Hearing Varshneya’s words, the valiant one abandoned Karna. Ghatotkacha started to ﬁght with the Indra among rakhasas, Baka’s brother. In the night, there was an extremely tumultuous battle between the rakshasas. Alayudha’s warriors were rakshasas, terrible in form. Those brave ones
grasped their bows and arrows and descended with force. As they advanced with their weapons, maharatha Yuyudhana, Nakula and Sahadeva cut them down with sharp arrows. O king! In that encounter, Kiriti Bibhatsu shot arrows in all directions and uprooted all the bulls among the kshatriyas. O king! In that encounter, Karna drove away
many kings—Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi and other Panchala maharathas. On seeing that they were being killed,
Bhima, terrible in valour, quickly advanced against Karna in that battle, showering arrows. Having killed the rakshasas, Nakula, Sahadeva and maharatha Satyaki also went to the spot where the son of a suta was. They fought
with Karna, and the Panchalas with Drona.
‘“Alayudha struck Ghatotkacha, the scorcher of enemies, on the head with a large club. Having been thus struck,
Bhimasena’s immensely strong son seemed to lose his senses somewhat. Having regained his senses, in that battle,
the valiant one hurled a club that was like the ﬂaming ﬁre. It was decorated with a hundred bells. It was decorated
with gold. Released with great force by the one whose deeds were terrible, it crushed the horses, charioteer and
chariot 251 that made a large noise. Resorting to maya, the rakshasa quickly leapt down from the chariot, whose
horses, charioteer, axle and yoke had been destroyed and shattered, not to speak of the chariot itself. He used maya
and showered down copious quantities of blood. The sky seemed to be covered with dark clouds that were tinged
with lightning. There was the sound of thunder and lightning. In that great battle, there were loud sounds of slapping and this caused fright. On seeing the maya created by the rakshasa, the rakshasa who was Hidimba’s son rose
up and destroyed the maya with his own maya. On seeing that the maya was destroyed by maya, the one who used
maya showered down an extremely heavy downpour of stones on Ghatotkacha. The valiant one252 dispelled that
terrible shower of stones with a shower of arrows in all the directions and it was wonderful. They showered down
many weapons on each other—iron clubs, spears, maces, bludgeons, mallets, tridents, swords, spikes, javelins,
kampanas, iron arrows, sharp broad-headed arrows, arrows, chakras, battleaxes, slabs of stone,253 catapults, the
horns of cattle and ulukhalas.254 They uprooted the large branches of many kinds of trees and struck each other
with these—shami, pilu, karira, shamyaki, ingudi, badari, ﬂowering kovidara, palasha, arimeda, plaksha, nyogradha and pippala.255 They used many kinds of mountain peaks, decorated with diverse kinds of minerals. There
was a mighty sound, like the clapping of thunder. O king! The terrible battle between Bhima’s son and Alayudha
was like that between Hari and Indra and like that between Vali and Sugriva in ancient times. O king! They fought
with many different kinds of terrible weapons, such as arrows. They grasped sharp swords and struck each other
with these. Those extremely strong ones advanced and seized each other by the hair. O lord of men! Their bodies
were wounded and began to excrete sweat. Blood trickled down from the giant forms and it was as if it was raining
down on mountains. Hidimba’s son advanced with great force. He picked up the rakshasa and ﬂung him down with
great strength, severing the large head. That head, decorated with earrings, was severed. The extremely strong one
let out a mighty roar.
‘“On seeing that Baka’s relative, the scorcher of enemies with a giant body, had been slain, the Panchalas and
the Pandavas roared like lions. Thousands of battle drums and tens of thousands of conch shells were sounded by
the Pandaveyas, signifying that the rakshasa had been brought down. That night, with signs of their victory, became extremely resplendent. The garlands of lamps were as beautiful as lightning. Bhimasena’s immensely strong
son took Alayudha’s head and ﬂung it down before Duryodhana, who was bereft of his senses. King Duryodhana

saw that Alayudha had been killed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Together with his soldiers, he became extremely anxious. Remembering his earlier enmity, he256 had come to him on his own, promising to ﬁght and kill
Bhimasena in the battle. The king had thought that his257 death was certain and that he and his brothers would live
for a long time. Having seen that he258 had been killed by Bhimasena’s son, he thought that Bhimasena’s
pledge259 had already been fulﬁlled.”’
CHAPTER 1131(154)

‘Sanjaya said, “Having killed Alayudha, the rakshasa Ghatokacha was delighted. He stood at the forefront of the
army and roared in many ways. On hearing those tumultuous sounds, the elephants trembled. O great king! Those
on your side were overcome by terrible fear. On seeing that Bhimasena’s immensely strong son was engaged with
Alayudha, the mighty-armed Karna had attacked the Panchalas. He drew his ﬁrm bow all the way back and releasing arrows with drooping tufts, pierced Dhrishtadyumna and Shikhandi with ten arrows each. The supreme among
rathas used other iron arrows and made Yudhamanyu, Uttamouja and Satyaki tremble. O lord of men! Both on the
left and on the right, all their bows could be seen, drawn into circles as they fought. There was the twang of bowstrings, the slapping of palms and the clatter of chariot wheels. During the night, these sounds were tumultuous,
like that of clouds at the end of the summer. O king! The battle was beautiful, as if between clouds. The twang of
bowstrings and the clatter of wheels were the roar. The bows were drawn into circles. The standards were like
peaks. The torrent of arrows was like rain. Vaikartana was like a mountain that did not tremble. He had the essence
of a large mountain. O Indra among men! In that battle, the scorcher of a large number of enemies repulsed that
hail of arrows and it was wonderful. His sharp arrows were gold-tufted and colourful. They possessed the force of
thunder. In that encounter, the great-souled one struck the enemy. Vaikartana was engaged in ensuring the welfare
of your sons. The standards of some were brought down. The bodies of others were mangled by the arrows. Some
lost their charioteers. Others lost their horses. Achieving this quickly, Vaikartana was resplendent. In that battle,
many were severely afﬂicted and went and joined Yudhishthira’s army.
‘“On seeing that they were shattered and routed, Ghatotkacha became angry. He ascended a supreme chariot that
was decorated with gold and gems and roared like a lion. Approaching Vaikartana Karna, he pierced him with arrows that were like the vajra. They covered the sky with showers of hollow arrows, iron arrows, arrows sharpened
on stone, hollow arrows, arrows with long shafts, vatsadantas, arrows with heads like the ears of boars or the horns
of bulls and kshurapras and roared. That storm of arrows covered the sky in the battle and traversing diagonally,
made it look beautiful. They were gold-tufted and ﬂamed like the ﬁre. It was as if the sky was covered with diverse
ﬂowers. Their power was equal and they struck each other with supreme weapons. In that battle, no one could discern that either of those brave ones was superior to the other. That encounter between the sons of the sun god and
Bhima was wonderful in form. Many terrible weapons were showered down. It was as if Rahu was tormenting the
sun in the sky. O king! Ghatotkacha saw that he could not get the better of Karna. The supreme among those who
have knowledge of weapons then invoked a terrible weapon. With that weapon, the rakshasa ﬁrst killed Karna’s
horses and then the charioteer. Next, Hidimba’s son quickly disappeared.”
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “When the rakshasa, who fought in devious ways, disappeared, what did those on my side
think? O Sanjaya! Tell me this.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “On seeing that the rakshasa had disappeared, all the Kurus loudly exclaimed, ‘The rakshasa
ﬁghts in devious ways. He will show himself and kill Karna in the battle.’ Karna was a wonderfully dexterous warrior. He covered all the directions with his net of arrows. The sky became dark because of those arrows and all the
creatures were rendered invisible. The son of a suta exhibited his dexterity and no one could discern when he afﬁxed an arrow, when he aimed it, when he released it and when he touched the quiver with his ﬁngers. The entire
sky was covered by those arrows. From the sky, the rakshasa resorted to a terrible and ﬁerce maya. We saw what
looked like red clouds in the sky. They blazed, like the ﬁerce ﬂames of a ﬁre. O Indra among Kouravas! Lightning
issued from these and so did blazing meteors. Loud and ﬁerce roars issued forth, like the sound of a thousand
drums being beaten. Gold-tufted arrows rained down. There were javelins, spears, clubs, other weapons, battleaxes, swords washed in oil, axes that blazed at the edges, spikes, sparkling clubs that were girded with iron, colourful

bludgeons, lances that were sharp at the tip, heavy maces decorated with gold and bound in cloth and shataghnis.
They showered down in every direction. Thousands of giant boulders fell down there, with thunder and lightning.
There were hundreds of razor-sharp chakras. They manifested themselves, blazing like the ﬁre. There were spears,
rocks, battleaxes, javelins, vajras and extremely terrible bolts of thunder. That large and blazing shower descended.
With his storm of arrows, Karna could not destroy these. Horses were struck by the arrows and fell down. Elephants were struck by the vajras and fell down. Maharathas were struck by the rocks and fell down, shrieking loudly. Using that extremely terrible shower of weapons in every direction, Ghatotkacha caused destruction. Duryodhana’s army was distressed and could be seen to roam around. As they wandered around, there were sounds of
lamentation. They were being destroyed and were miserable. Because they were noble, the foremost among the
brave ones did not run away.260 Nor were they distressed. However, that shower created by the rakshasa was extremely ﬁerce and terrible. The large weapons descended. On seeing that the large army was being destroyed, a
great fear arose in the hearts of your sons. Hundreds of jackals howled in extremely ﬁerce tones. Their tongues
seemed to blaze with ﬁre. O Indra among kings! On seeing that the large numbers of rakshasas were yelling, the
warriors were extremely pained. Their261 tongues and faces ﬂamed. Their teeth were sharp. They were ﬁerce.
Their bodies were like mountains. They were in the sky, with lances in their hands. They looked like clouds that
showered down rain. They262 were killed by the arrows, lances, spears, ﬁerce clubs, ﬂaming maces, vajras, tridents, thunder, chakras and shataghnis. They were crushed and fell down. On the soldiers of your son, they263
showered down long shafts, catapults, boulders, shataghnis and pillars made out of black iron and tied in cloth. It
was terrible and they264 were overcome by lassitude. Their weapons were ﬂung away. Their heads were severed.
Their limbs were mangled and the brave ones began to fall down. The horses, elephants and horses265 were shattered and routed. The chariots were shattered by the boulders. Terrible in form, the yatudhanas266 released a great
shower and they were created by Ghatotkacha, through the use of maya. Those who sought refuge and those who
were frightened were not spared. That terrible destruction was caused by destiny and the brave ones among the
Kurus were crushed. The kshatriyas were destroyed. They were shattered and violently driven away. All the
Kouravas wailed. As they ﬂed, the Kurus exclaimed, ‘For the sake of the Pandavas, Indra and the gods are killing
us.’ The Bharatas were thus submerged and none of them could ﬁnd a refuge. During that tumult and the carnage
and destruction of the Kuru soldiers, it was impossible to distinguish between the different divisions and differentiate between who was a Kuru and who was not. That cruel destruction was terrible. All the directions seemed to be
empty. O king! We could only see Karna there, submerged in that shower of weapons.
‘“He covered the sky with his arrows and sought to counter the divine maya with which the rakshasa fought. He
was modest and accomplished extremely difﬁcult and noble deeds. The son of a suta was not confounded in that
battle. O king! All the frightened Saindhavas and Bahlikas looked towards Karna. He was not confounded in that
battle and they worshipped him, while witnessing the rakshasa’s victory. He267 created a shataghni with wheels
and hurling it, killed his268 four horses at the same time. They lost their lives and sank down on their knees. They
lost their teeth, eyes and tongues. With the horses killed, he269 leapt down from the chariot and saw that the Kurus
were being driven away. His divine weapon had been destroyed by the maya. He began to think about what should
be the appropriate course of action. All the Kurus saw Karna and the terrible maya. They said, ‘O Karna! Quickly
kill the rakshasa now with your spear.270 The Kurus and the sons of Dhritarashtra are being destroyed. What can
Bhima and Arjuna possibly do to us? Kill the rakshasa who is destroying us in the night. We will be able to ﬁght
with the Parthas in the battle only if we escape from this terrible encounter. Therefore, kill the rakshasa, terrible in
form, with the spear that Vasava has given you. O Karna! All the Kouravas are like Indra. Let these warriors not be
destroyed in the night.’ O king! He saw that the army was being destroyed by the rakshasa in the night. He heard
the loud lamentations of the Kouravas.
‘“Karna made up his mind to use the spear. Unable to bear the assaults made in the battle, he was like an angry
and intolerant lion. That supreme spear was always victorious and he decided to use it to kill him.271 O king! He
had preserved it for many years, worshipping it for the sake of Phalguna. Shakra had given that supreme spear to
Karna in exchange for the earrings. That spear was resplendent and ﬂaming. It was tied with ropes and in the night,

looked like Death. Flaming like a meteor, it was like Death’s sister. Vaikartana released it towards the rakshasa.
That ﬂaming weapon was released from the arm of the son of a suta. It was supreme and was capable of destroying
the body of every enemy. O king! On seeing it, the rakshasa was frightened. He ﬂed, assuming a body that was as
large as the foothills of the Vindhya mountains. O Indra among kings! On seeing that spear in Karna’s hands, all
the beings in the sky roared loudly. O king! Turbulent winds began to blow. Bolts of thunder began to strike. Blazing away, it reduced the rakshasa’s maya to ashes and severely penetrated his heart. Then it blazed and ascended
up in the night, entering among the nakshatras.
‘“The brave rakshasa had fought in many colourful ways, using the weapons of gods, humans and rakshasas.
His life was robbed by Shakra’s spear and uttering many ﬁerce yells, he fell down. This was yet another wonderful
and extraordinary deed that he performed for the destruction of the enemy. At that time, his heart was shattered by
the spear. O king! He was as beautiful as a mountain or a cloud. The Indra among rakshasas fell down from the
sky, devoid of life. With his body shattered, he fell down on the ground. As he fell down dead, Ghatotkacha made
his body assume a gigantic form. With that ﬁerce form, Bhimasena’s son, the performer of terrible deeds, performed another terrible deed. He fell down on one part of your army and ﬁercely crushed the Kouravas. A loud uproar arose, mixed with the sounds of drums, conch shells, kettledrums and cymbals, and roars like lions’. With the
maya destroyed and the rakshasa killed, the Kouraveyas were delighted and roared in joy. Karna was honoured by
the Kurus, just as Shakra was by the Maruts, after the slaying of Vritra. He272 ascended your son’s chariot and
cheerfully entered the army.”’

Section Seventy-One
Drona-Vadha Parva
This parva has 692 shlokas and eleven chapters.
Chapter 1132(155): 30 shlokas
Chapter 1133(156): 33 shlokas
Chapter 1134(157): 44 shlokas
Chapter 1135(158): 62 shlokas
Chapter 1136(159): 50 shlokas
Chapter 1137(160): 37 shlokas
Chapter 1138(161): 51 shlokas
Chapter 1139(162): 52 shlokas
Chapter 1140(163): 49 shlokas
Chapter 1141(164): 159 shlokas
Chapter 1142(165): 125 shlokas
This section is named after the death or killing of Drona. The ﬁght continues in the night and day dawns on the ﬁfteenth day of the war. Drona
kills three of Drupada’s grandsons and Drupada and Virata. He causes great destruction. Bhima kills an elephant named Ashvatthama and
Bhima and Yudhishthira tell Drona that Ashvatthama has been killed. When Drona casts aside his weapons, he is killed by Dhrishtadyumna
and Ashvatthama is told the news.
CHAPTER 1132(155)

‘Sanjaya said, “On seeing that Hidimba’s son had been killed, like a shattered mountain, all the Pandavas were distressed in their minds and their eyes were full of tears. However, Vasudeva was overcome with great delight. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He roared like a lion and this pained them. He roared loudly and embraced Phalguna. Roaring loudly, he tied the horses. He danced in joy, like a tree stirred by the wind. Having embraced Partha
yet again, he slapped his arms against his breast. Achyuta climbed onto the chariot and let out a ﬁerce yell. O king!
On discerning that the immensely strong Vasudeva was in a delighted frame of mind, Arjuna was miserable and
spoke to him. ‘O Madhusudana! At this time of death today, you are extremely happy. The death of Hidimba’s son
is a time for great sorrow. On seeing that Ghatotkacha has been killed, the soldiers are retreating. Since Hidimba’s
son has been brought down, we are also extremely anxious. O Janardana! There must be a grave reason behind
your delight now. O supreme among the ones who are truthful! I am asking you. Tell me the truth. O scorcher of
enemies! If it is not a secret, you should tell me. O Madhusudana! Tell me why your calm has been disturbed so
much today. This is like the ocean drying up, or Mount Meru moving. O Janardana! I think that this act of yours
shows levity.’
‘“Vasudeva replied, ‘O Dhananjaya! I am overcome by great delight. Listen to me. I will tell you what will bring
supreme satisfaction to your mind. O immensely radiant one! Because of Ghatotkacha, the spear has been used up.
O Dhananjaya! Therefore, know that Karna has already been slain. Had Karna possessed the spear in his hand, no
man in the world would have been able to stand before him. He would have been stationed like Kartikeya in the
battle. It is through good fortune that his armour has gone. It is through good fortune that his earrings have been
robbed. It is through good fortune that the invincible spear has been used up on Ghatotkacha. Had he possessed the
armour and had he possessed the earrings, the powerful Karna would have been able to defeat everyone in the
three worlds, even the immortals. Vasava, Kubera, Varuna, lord of the waters, and Yama would not have ventured
against Karna in an encounter. Had that bull among men possessed those, you with your Gandiva and I with my
sudarshana chakra would not have had the capacity to defeat him in a battle. It is for your welfare that Shakra
used delusion to rob him of his earrings. The conqueror of enemy cities was also robbed of his armour. It is because he sliced off the armour and the sparkling earrings and gave them to Shakra that Karna came to be known as

Vaikartana.1 Karna is now like an angry snake, whose energy has been sapped through mantras. Therefore, Karna
is now like a ﬁre whose ﬂames have been paciﬁed. O mighty-armed one! Karna obtained a spear from the greatsouled Vasava, the one that has now been used against Ghatotkacha. This was obtained in exchange for the earrings and the celestial armour. Since the time he obtained it, Vrisha has always thought that you have been killed in
the battle. O unblemished one! O tiger among men! However, though that spear has now gone, I swear to you
truthfully that he is incapable of being killed by anyone other than you. He is devoted to brahmanas. He is truthful.
He has engaged in austerities. He is devoted to his vows. He is compassionate towards his enemies. It is for these
reasons that Karna is known as Vrisha.2 He is terrible in battle. He is mighty-armed. His bow is always raised. He
is like a lion in the forest, crushing the leaders of crazy herds of elephants. In the ﬁeld of battle, he crushes tigers
among the rathas. He is like the sun when it has attained midday and no one is capable of looking at him. O tiger
among men! He has fought with all the foremost and great-souled ones on your side. His nets of arrows are like the
thousand rays of the autumn sun. His incessant shower of arrows is like rain from the clouds, at the end of summer.
Karna is like a cloud with divine weapons, showering down rain. However, having been deprived today of what
was given to him by Shakra, he has become human. There is now an opportunity to kill him, one that the insolent
one has brought about through his own insolence. He will face a hardship when the wheel of his chariot sinks. That
is the time to kill him and I will signal the moment to you in advance. Jarasandha, the great-souled king of Chedi,
the immensely strong Ekalavya from Nishadha—all of these have been killed through my yoga, for your sake.3
Later, other Indras among rakshasas have been killed—Hidimba, Kirmira, Baka, the foremost among them,
Alayudha, the destroyer of enemy soldiers, and the spirited Ghatotkacha, the performer of ﬁerce deeds.’”’
CHAPTER 1133(156)

‘“Arjuna asked, ‘O Janardana! What objective of ours was served and what yoga did you use? How were Jarasandha and the other lords of the earth killed?’
‘“Vasudeva replied, ‘If Jarasandha, the king of Chedi and the immensely strong Nishadha4 had not been killed
earlier, they would have become terrible now. There is no doubt that Suyodhana would have chosen those supreme
among rathas.5 They have always harboured wicked intentions towards us and would have gone to the side of the
Kouravas. All of those great-souled ones were brave, skilled in the use of weapons and ﬁrm warriors. They would
have protected the army of the son of Dhritarashtra like the immortals. Resorting to the son of a suta, Jarasandha,
the king of Chedi and the son of Nishadha, Suyodhana would have been able to conquer the entire earth. O
Dhananjaya! They were killed by me through yoga. Listen to it. Without using yoga, they could not have been defeated in a battle, not even by the gods. O Partha! Each of them was separately capable of countering the army of
the gods in a battle, even if it were to be protected by the guardians of the world. Jarasandha was angered, incited
by Rohini’s son.6 To kill us, he hurled a club that was red at the tip. It was as resplendent as the ﬁre and it divided
the sky, like a parting.7 It was seen to descend, like the vajra released by Shakra. On seeing that the club was descending, Rohini’s son wished to counter it and released the weapon known as sthunakarna.8 Countered by the
force of that weapon, the club fell down on the ground. It shattered the goddess earth and made the mountains
tremble. There was a terrible rakshasi9 named Jara and she possessed great valour. O scorcher of enemies! She
united the infant and it came to be known as Jarasandha. Two separate parts were born from the bodies of two separate mothers. Since she united them, he came to be known as Jarasandha. O Partha! That rakshasi was slain by the
club and the weapon known as sthunakarna and entered the earth, together with her son and kin. O Dhananjaya!
Jarasandha was deprived of the club in the great battle and while you watched, was killed by Bhimasena. O
supreme among men! If the powerful Jarasandha had possessed that club in his hand, the gods, together with Indra,
would not have been able to kill him in an encounter. O one for whom truth is valour! It is also for your sake that
Drona adopted the disguise of a preceptor and severed Nishadha’s thumb.10 With his ﬁnger guards, the son of the
Nishadha was ﬁrm in his valour. He was as resplendent as a second Rama in the forest. O Partha! Had Ekalavya
possessed his thumb, the gods and the danavas, with the rakshasas and the serpents, would never have been able to
defeat him in a battle. His ﬁst was ﬁrm and he could continuously shoot, throughout the day and night. How could

a mere human have looked at him? It is for your sake that I killed him in the ﬁeld of battle. I killed the powerful
king of Chedi in your presence. He was capable of conquering all the gods and the asuras in a battle. O tiger
among men! I have been born to slay him and also all the others who hate the gods, with your help, and desiring
the welfare of the worlds. Hidimba, Baka and Kirmira have been brought down by Bhimasena. They were the
equals of Ravana and destroyed the sacriﬁces of brahmanas. Similarly, Alayudha, who used maya, was slain by
Hidimba’s son. And I thought of means to get Hidimba’s son killed by Karna’s spear. Had he not been killed by
Karna’s spear in the great battle, I would have had to kill Ghatotkacha, Bhimasena’s son, in the future. I did not kill
him earlier, because I wanted to ensure your pleasure. This rakshasa hated brahmanas and hated sacriﬁces. Because he caused the destruction of dharma and because he was evil in his soul, he would have had to be brought
down. O unblemished one! I thought of a means through what had been given by Shakra. O Pandava! Those who
are the destroyers of dharma, deserve to be killed by me. I have taken a pledge that I will establish dharma. I am
always present wherever the brahman, truthfulness, self-control, purity, dharma, humility, prosperity, fortitude and
forgiveness exist. You should not have any anxiety about Karna Vaikartana. I will tell you the means so that you
can destroy him. In the battle, Suyodhana will also be killed by Vrikodara. O Pandava! I will tell you about the
means whereby that death can be ensured. There is a tumultuous uproar that has arisen in the direction of the enemy’s army. Your soldiers are ﬂeeing in the ten directions. Having attained their objective, the Kouravas are destroying your army. Drona, supreme among strikers, is scorching our soldiers.’”’
CHAPTER 1134(157)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “The son of the suta possessed a spear that could only be used to kill one person. Why did he
not forget everyone else and hurl it at Partha? Had he been slain, all the Pandavas and Srinjayas would have been
killed too. Had that brave one alone been killed, why should victory in the battle not have been ours? He is great in
his vows and does not retreat when he is challenged. The son of the suta should have challenged Phalguna himself.
O Sanjaya! Tell me. Why did Vrisha not challenge Phalguna to a duel and kill him with what he had obtained from
Shakra? There is no doubt that my son lacks both intelligence and advisers. How can he obtain victory if he is frustrated by the enemy in every way? That spear was a supreme weapon and our victory depended on it. Vasudeva has
ensured that the spear was wasted on Ghatotkacha. This is like a powerful person snatching a bilva fruit from the
hands of someone with a withered arm. In that fashion, because of Ghatotkacha, that infallible spear has been rendered fallible. In a ﬁght between a boar and a dog, when either one dies, the hunter gains.11 O learned one! Like
that, I think that Vasudeva has gained from the battle between Karna and Hidimba’s son. Had Ghatokacha slain
Karna, it would have been a supreme gain for the Pandavas. And had Vaikartana slain him, it would still have been
a gain, because the spear would have been rendered useless. The wisest among wise ones thought in this way about
the encounter between Ghatotkacha and the son of a suta. Though Vasudeva, lion among men, is not ﬁghting in
this battle, he is engaged in ensuring the welfare of the Pandavas.”
‘Sanjaya said, “O king! The slayer of Madhu knew what Karna desired to do. The immensely intelligent Janardana instructed the immensely valorous Ghatotkacha, lord of the rakshasas, to engage in that duel. The intention
was to make the infallible weapon useless. O king! All this happened because of your evil policy. O extender of
the Kuru lineage! We would certainly have been successful, had not Krishna protected Partha from maharatha Karna. O Dhritarashtra! In the battle, with his horses, standard and chariot, Partha would have fallen down on the
ground, but for Janardana, the lord and master of all yoga. O king! He has been protected in many different ways.
Protected by Krishna, Partha has advanced against the enemy and obtained victory. It was indeed Krishna who protected Partha from that infallible weapon. Kounteya would have been swiftly destroyed by the spear, like a tree by
thunder.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “My son is proud of his wisdom. But he quarrels and has evil advisers. He has thus overlooked the means for killing Jaya.12 O son of Gavalgana! Why did you also forget that objective? O immensely
intelligent one! Why did you not remind him about it?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “Night after night, this used to be the topic of discussion between Duryodhana, Shakuni,
Duhshasana and me. ‘O Karna! Tomorrow, abandon all the other soldiers and kill Dhananjaya. We will then enjoy
the Pandus and the Panchalas, as if they are our slaves. Or, after Partha has been killed, if Varshneya appoints one

of the other sons of Pandu as the warrior, we will bring down Krishna. Krishna is the root of the sons of Pandu.
Partha is the trunk. The Parthas13 are the branches. The Panchalas can be thought of as leaves. Krishna is the
refuge of the Pandavas. Krishna is the strength. Krishna is the protector. They are devoted to Krishna, like the stellar bodies to the moon. O son of a suta! Therefore, forget the leaves, branches and trunk. Bring down Krishna, who
has always been the root of the Pandava in every way.’14 O king! Had Dasharha Krishna, the descendant of the
Yadava lineage, been slain, there is no doubt that this entire earth would have come under your control. O Indra
among kings! Had the great-souled one, loved by the Yadu and Pandava lineages, been killed and made to lie
down on the ground, there is no doubt that the earth, with its mountains, oceans and forests, would have come under your control. Every morning, we arose with that resolution about the lord of the thirty gods, the immeasurable
Hrishikesha. But at the time of the battle, we forgot about it. Keshava has always protected Kounteya Arjuna. In
the battle, that is the reason he didn’t allow him to be stationed before the son of the suta. Achyuta stationed other
supreme rathas there. O lord! He acted so that the infallible spear might become fallible. The mighty-armed Satyaki, tiger among rathas, for whom truth was his valour, had asked Krishna about maharatha Karna. ‘This has been
the inﬁnitely valorous Karna’s resolution. Why did the son of a suta not use the spear against Phalguna?’
‘“Vasudeva replied, ‘Duhshasana, Karna, Shakuni and Saindhava always conversed about this, with Duryodhana
at the forefront. “O Karna! O Karna! O great archer! O one who is inﬁnitely valiant in battle! O supreme among
victorious ones! This spear should not be used against anyone else, with the exception of maharatha Partha
Dhananjaya, Kunti’s son. Among them,15 he is the most illustrious, like Vasava among the gods. If he is killed, all
the other Pandavas, together with the Srinjayas, will lose their selves, like the gods without ﬁre.”16 O bull among
the Shini lineage! Accordingly, Karna gave his pledge. The thought of killing the wielder of Gandiva was always
in Karna’s heart. O foremost among warriors! But I confused Radheya. That is the reason he did not release the
spear at Pandava, the one with the white horses. O Yuyutsu! It would have brought about Phalguna’s death. O
supreme among warriors! I could not sleep and there was no happiness in my mind. O bull among the Shini lineage! Then I saw that it had been rendered unsuccessful by Ghatotkacha. Today, I see that Dhananjaya has been
rescued from the jaws of death. In a battle, the protection of my father, my mother, you, my brothers and my life is
not as important as that of Bibhatsu. O Satvata! If there is anything that is more precious than the kingdom of the
three worlds, I do not desire it without Partha Dhananjaya. O Yuyudhana! I am extremely delighted today. I can
see that Partha Dhananjaya has returned from the dead. It is because of this that I sent the rakshasa to ﬁght with
Karna. No one else was capable of countering Karna during this battle in the night.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “This is what Devaki’s son told Satyaki then. He has always been engaged in Dhananjaya’s welfare and doing that which brings him pleasure.”’
CHAPTER 1135(158)

‘Dhritarashtra said “O son!17 What Karna, Duryodhana and the others, Shakuni Soubala and especially you have
done, is greatly injurious. You have always known that the spear could only kill a single person in the battle. It was
incapable of being countered even by the gods, with Vasava. Why did Karna not use it in the battle earlier? O Sanjaya! Why did he not release it at Devaki’s son or Phalguna?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O lord of the earth! O best of those in the Kuru lineage! Returning from the battle, all of us
used to converse about this in the night. We always said, ‘O Karna! O Karna! When it is morning tomorrow, hurl
the spear at Keshava or Arjuna.’ O king! This was destiny. When it became morning, the intelligence of Karna and
the other warriors was destroyed. I think that destiny is supreme. Though he had it in his hands, in the battle, Karna
did not use it to kill Partha or Krishna, the son of Devaki. That spear was in his hand, arising like the night of destruction. However, his intelligence was destroyed by destiny and Karna did not release it. O lord! He was confounded by the delusion of destiny and did not use it to kill Krishna, the son of Devaki, or Partha, the equal of
Shakra.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “You have been slain through destiny and through Keshava’s intelligence. What was given
by Vasava has gone, wasted on Ghatotkacha, who was like a blade of grass. Because of this undesirable act, Karna,
my sons and all the other kings have been conveyed to Vaivasvata’s eternal abode. Tell me about how the battle

continued thereafter between the Kurus and the Pandavas, after Hidimba’s son had been killed. How did those
strikers attack Drona’s battle formation? What did the Srinjayas and the Panchalas do in the battle? After the death
of Somadatta’s son and Saindhava, Drona must have become intolerant and prepared to give up his own life. He
must have immersed himself in the army. He must have been like a yawning tiger or Death with a gaping mouth.
As Drona advanced, how did the Pandus and Srinjayas counter him? O son! What did Drona’s son, Karna and Kripa do in that battle? With Duryodhana at the forefront, how did they protect the preceptor? Savyasachi and Vrikodara wished to kill Bharadvaja’s son in that battle. How did those on my side envelop them with arrows? O Sanjaya! Tell me that. After the death of the king of Sindhu and after the death of Ghatotkacha, they must have been
intolerant and extremely angry. How did the battle rage during the night?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! When the rakshasa Ghatokacha was killed by Karna in the night, the warriors on your
side were delighted and roared. They descended with great force and began to slaughter the soldiers.18 The night
was dark and the king19 was overcome by supreme misery. The mighty-armed one, the scorcher of enemies, spoke
to Bhimasena. ‘O mighty-armed one! Check the army of Dhritarashtra’s son. With the death of Hidimba’s son, I
have become overcome by great confusion.’ Having been instructed, Bhima sat down on his own chariot. The
king’s face was full of tears and he sighed repeatedly. On witnessing Karna’s valour, he was overcome by great lassitude. On seeing that he was distressed, Krishna spoke these words to him. ‘O Kounteya! Do not be miserable.
This is not deserving of you. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Like an ordinary man, you should not yield to
impotence. O king! Arise and ﬁght. O lord! Bear the heavy burden. If you yield to impotence, there will be an uncertainty about victory.’
‘“On hearing Krishna’s words, Dharmaraja Yudhisthira wiped his eyes with his hands and spoke these words to
Krishna. ‘O mighty-armed one! You know that dharma is the supreme objective. The fruits of killing a brahmana
devolve on those who do not acknowledge a service. O Janardana! When we were in the forest, Hidimba’s greatsouled son, though he was but a child, performed many services for us. O Krishna! On learning that Pandava, the
one with the white horses, had left in search of weapons, the great archer20 had come to me in Kamyaka. He lived
with us, until Dhananjaya returned. When we journeyed to Gandhamadana, he saved us from many hardships.
When Panchali was exhausted, the great-souled one carried her on his back.21 O lord! For my sake, the greatsouled one performed diverse difﬁcult deeds in the battle. O Janardana! I bear a natural affection towards Sahadeva. But my affection towards Ghatotkacha, Indra among the rakshasas, is twice that. O mighty-armed one! He was
devoted to me. I loved him and he loved me. O Varshneya! Because of that, I am tormented by sorrow and overcome with lassitude. O Varshneya! Behold. The soldiers are being driven away by the Kouravas. Behold! Maharatha Drona and Karna are making great efforts in the battle. Behold! In the night, the Pandava soldiers are being
crushed. It is as if two crazy elephants are demolishing a large forest of reeds. O Madhava! The Kouravas are
showing no regard for the strength of Bhimasena’s arms, or the colourful weapons and valour that Partha possesses. On seeing that the rakshasa has been killed in the encounter, Drona, Karna and King Suyodhana are roaring
with delight in the battle. O Janardana! When we are alive, and so are you, how could Hidimba’s son have encountered his death in the clash with the son of a suta? O Krishna! While all of us looked on, and so did Savyasachi,
he22 blunted us and killed Bhimasena’s son, the immensely strong rakshasa. O Krishna! When Abhimanyu was
killed in the battle by the evil-souled sons of Dhritarashtra, maharatha Savyasachi wasn’t present there. The evilsouled Saindhava barred all of us. Drona and his son became the instruments of that act. The preceptor himself told
Karna about the means whereby he23 might be killed. When he was ﬁghting with the sword, it was he24 who severed that sword into two. When he was ﬁghting, Kritavarma cruelly and violently killed his horses and his two
parshni charioteers. The other great archers brought down Subhadra’s son in the battle. O Krishna! O best of the
Yadava lineage! It was only for a small reason that the wielder of Gandiva killed Saindhava.25 This did not bring
me pleasure. If Pandava wished to kill the enemy in accordance with what was fair, in my view, he should have
killed Drona and Karna ﬁrst. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those two are the source of our hardships. Having
resorted to those two, Suyodhana has been conﬁdent against the enemy in the battle. When Drona and the son of a
suta, with his followers, should have been killed, the mighty-armed one killed Saindhava, whose connection was
distant. It is certainly my task to chastise the son of a suta. O brave one! Therefore, I will myself kill Karna now.

The mighty-armed Bhimasena is engaged with Drona’s formation.’ Having said this, Yudhishthira advanced,
quickly and violently. He stretched his great bow and blew ﬁercely on his conch shell.
‘“Shikhandi quickly followed the king from the rear. He was surrounded by one thousand chariots, three hundred elephants, ﬁve thousand horses and three thousand Prabhadrakas. Drums were beaten and the armoured ones
blew on their conch shells. The Panchalas and Pandavas advanced, with Yudhishthira at the forefront. The mightyarmed Vasudeva spoke to Dhananjaya. ‘Yudhishthira is overcome with anger and is swiftly advancing. He wishes
to kill the son of a suta. One should not depend on him for this.’ Having said this, Hrishikesha swiftly urged the
steeds. The king was already far ahead and Janardana followed him. He26 was advancing swiftly, wishing to kill
the son of a suta. His resolution was determined by sorrow and he was tormented, as if by a ﬁre. On seeing that
Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, was advancing, Vyasa approached and said, ‘Though he has clashed against Karna in
the battle, it is through good fortune that Phalguna is still alive. He preserved the spear, wishing to kill Savyasachi.
O bull among the Bharata lineage! It is good fortune that Jishnu did not engage in a duel with him. Rivalling each
other, they would have released all their divine weapons. O Yudhishtira! When his weapons were destroyed in the
battle, the son of a suta would certainly have used the spear given by Vasava. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! That would have led to a terrible calamity. O one who grants honours! It is good fortune that the rakshasa
has been killed in the battle by the son of a suta. The rakshasa was killed by destiny. What was given by Vasava
was only an instrument. O best of the Bharata lineage! Do not be angry. You should not have any sorrow in your
mind. O son!27 It is for your sake that the rakshasa has been killed in the battle. O Yudhishthira! This is the end of
all beings. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With your brothers and with all the great-souled kings,
ﬁght against the Kouravas in the battle. On the ﬁfth day from now, the earth will be yours.28 O tiger among men!
Always think of dharma. O Pandava! Always practise non-violence, austerities, generosity, forgiveness and truth
with supreme cheerfulness. Where there is dharma, victory exists there.’ Having said this to Pandava, Vyasa disappeared from the spot.”’
CHAPTER 1136(159)

‘Sanjaya said, “When Ghatotkacha was killed by the son of a suta in the night, Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, was
overcome by sorrow and intolerance. On seeing that your large army had been checked by Bhima, he spoke to
Dhrishtadyumna. ‘Check the one who was born in a pot.29 O scorcher of enemies! For Drona’s destruction, you
have arisen from the ﬁre, with bows and arrows, armour and sword. You should not be frightened. In the battle, attack cheerfully. Let Janamejaya, Shikhandi and Durmukha’s son,30 Yashodhana, happily surround the one who has
been born in a pot from all sides. Let Nakula, Sahadeva, Droupadi’s sons, the Prabhadrakas, Drupada and Virata,
with their sons and brothers, Satyaki, the Kekayas and Dhananjaya powerfully attack Bharadvaja’s son, wishing to
kill him. Let all the rathas, all the elephants we have and the foot soldiers advance against maharatha Drona.’ Having been thus instructed by the great-souled Pandava, all of them forcefully advanced against the one who had
been born in a pot, wishing to ﬁght with him. Drona was supreme among the wielders of weapons. When the Pandavas violently advanced, making every effort in the battle, he received them. When the Pandavas angrily attacked,
King Duryodhana wished to ensure that Drona remained alive and made efforts to counter them. Though the
mounts and the soldiers were exhausted, a battle commenced between the Pandavas and the Kurus, and they roared
at each other.
‘“O great king! The maharathas were blind with sleep. They were exhausted from ﬁghting and did not know
what efforts they should make in the battle. The triyama night was terrible and generated fear.31 It was destructive
of lives and seemed equal to one thousand yamas.32 In particular, those on their side were killed and wounded.
Especially when it was midnight, they were blind with sleep. All the kshatriyas lost their enterprise and were distressed in their hearts. Your soldiers, and those of the enemy, no longer possessed any more weapons or arrows.
Because they were modest, they passed the time there, following their own dharma. They did not abandon their
own divisions. But other people were blind with sleep. They discarded their weapons and lay down. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Some lay down on the backs of elephants, others on chariots, still others on the backs of
horses. Some kings were blind with sleep and lost all sense of movement. In that battle, other warriors seized the

chance to send them to Yama’s eternal abode. In their sleep and dreaming and unconscious, others killed those on
their own side, as well as the enemy. In that great battle, they were blind with sleep and uttered many sounds. They
fought in that battle, though their eyes were heavy with sleep. Some moved in that battle, and though blind with
sleep, killed each other. O king! In the course of ﬁghting in that terrible darkness, some brave ones killed many on
their own side, as well as those on the enemy’s side. Because they were overcome by severe sleep in that battle,
they could not distinguish.
‘“O bull among men! On discerning that this was the state of affairs, Bibhatsu spoke loudly. ‘All you, and the
mounts, are exhausted and blind with sleep. The soldiers are covered in darkness and a lot of dust. If you so think,
let the soldiers desist from ﬁghting. In the ﬁeld of battle, let them close their eyes for a while. Let them sleep and
rest until the moon rises. Then, for the sake of heaven, let the Kurus and Pandavas ﬁght again.’ Having heard the
words of the one who observed dharma, the soldiers who knew about dharma found this acceptable and loudly
spoke to each other.33 ‘O Karna! O Karna! O King Duryodhana! The Pandus have stopped attacking the army. Let
us desist.’ O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing Phalguna’s words, the Pandus ceased to attack your
army. The gods, the rishis and even the inferior soldiers were overjoyed and applauded the great-souled one’s
words. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those benevolent words were applauded by all the soldiers. O king!
O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those on our side, and on the side of the enemy, began to rest for some time. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having obtained some rest and sleep, your soldiers also honoured the brave Arjuna and said, ‘The Vedas and all weapons are vested in you. You possess intelligence and valour. O mighty-armed
one! O unblemished one! You have dharma and compassion for beings. O Partha! Since we have obtained assurance from you, may you be prosperous. O brave one! May you swiftly obtain all those things that are dear to your
heart.’ In this way, maharathas praised that tiger among men. O lord of the earth! They swiftly went to sleep and
there was silence. Some were on the backs of horses. Others were on the seats of chariots. Some lay down on the
backs of elephants. Others lay down on the ground. The men slept separately, with their weapons, their clubs, their
swords, their battleaxes, their lances, their armour and their horses. The elephants possessed trunks like serpents,
decorated with dust. They were blind with sleep and cooled the earth with their inhalation and exhalation. As the
elephants breathed on the ground, it was beautiful. They looked like scattered mountains, on which, large serpents
were breathing. There were horses with golden harnesses, their manes intertwined with their reins. They stamped
the level ground with their hooves and made it uneven. O Indra among kings! Everyone there slept, with his
mount. Without speaking, the armies slept there and it looked like a wonderful picture drawn by a skilled painter.
The kshatriyas were young and adorned in earrings. They had injured each other’s limbs through arrows. They
slept against the temporal lobes of elephants, as if against the breasts of beautiful women.
‘“The moon, the lord of lotuses that bloom in the night,34 arose and its complexion was as fair as the cheeks of
a maiden. It was a delight to the eyes and decorated the direction presided over by the great Indra.35 In a short
while, the illustrious one with the mark of a hare36 showed his red light. The lord outshone the light of the stellar
bodies. The red light yielded to the complexion of gold. Slowly, the great moon’s net of rays spread everywhere.
The radiance of the moon’s rays dispelled the darkness. They slowly covered all the directions, the sky and the
earth. In a short while, the world became illuminated. The darkness that could not be described quickly vanished.
The world was illuminated by the moon, as if it was day. O king! Some creatures that travel in the night continued
to roam, while others ceased. O king! The soldiers were awakened by the rays of the moon. They awoke like a
grove of lotuses,37 when the great day dawns. When the moon arose, it was as if the ocean was agitated. When the
moon arose, the armies became like oceans. O lord of the earth! The battle commenced again. Desiring to attain
worlds and destroying the world,38 the people began to kill the enemy.”’
CHAPTER 1137(160)

‘Sanjaya said, “At that time, Duryodhana was overcome by intolerance. He approached Drona, and wishing to inject joy and energy into him, said, ‘In the battle, one should not have shown mercy to the exhausted ones, while
they were resting, especially because they are successful in their objective. The enemy was distressed in mind. We
showed them mercy only because we wished to bring you pleasure. The Pandavas have now rested and have be-

come stronger. But we are losing energy and strength in every way. They are protected by you and are prospering.
You, in particular, possess all the divine weapons and the brahmastras and all of them are vested in you. I tell you
truthfully that the Pandavas, or we, or no other archers in the world, are your equals in ﬁghting. O supreme among
brahmanas! You are knowledgeable about all weapons. There is no doubt that, with your divine weapons, you can
destroy all the worlds, with the gods, the asuras and the gandharvas. They are especially frightened of you. But you
are not angry with them, perhaps because you remember that they were your students. Or perhaps it is my misfortune.’ Having been thus incited by your son, Drona became angry.
‘“O king! He wrathfully spoke these words to Duryodhana. ‘O Duryodhana! Though I am old, in this battle, I
am ﬁghting to the utmost of my capacity. All of them do not know about these weapons. But desiring victory, I
cannot perform an inferior deed and kill those who are unacquainted with weapons. O Kouravya! But I give you
my word and it will not be otherwise. I will do whatever is in your mind, be it good or bad. O king! I tell you truthfully that I will exhibit my valour and take off my armour and weapons only after I have killed all the Panchalas.
You think that Kounteya Arjuna was exhausted in the battle. O mighty-armed one! O Kourava! Listen to what I
truthfully have to say about his valour. When Savyasachi is enraged in a battle, the gods, the gandharvas, the yakshas and the rakshasas cannot stand before him. In Khandava, he countered the illustrious lord of the gods
himself.39 The great-souled one countered him with a shower of arrows. There were many other yakshas, serpents
and daityas, intoxicated of their strength. The Indra among men killed them and all this is known to you. At the
time of the expedition with the cattle, the gandharvas, Chitrasena and the others, were vanquished by him.40 The
wielder of the ﬁrm bow freed you from bondage. The nivatakavachas were the enemies of the gods and could not
be killed by the gods in battle. They were defeated by that brave one. There were thousands of danavas who lived
in the city of Hiranyapura. That tiger among men vanquished them.41 How can humans withstand him? O lord of
the earth! You have yourself seen how your entire army made every effort, but was destroyed by the son of Pandu.’
O king! While he was thus praising Arjuna, your son was enraged.
‘“He again spoke these words to Drona. ‘I, Duhshasana, Karna and my maternal uncle, Shakuni, will kill Arjuna
in the battle. We will divide the army of the Bharatas into two parts.’42 Hearing this, Bharadvaja’s son laughed,
but agreed to what the king had proposed and said, ‘My blessings are with you. What kshatriya can slay that undecaying bull among kshatriyas? He is the wielder of Gandiva and blazes in energy. The lord of riches,43 Indra,
Yama, the lord of the waters,44 the asuras, the serpents and the rakshasas, with their weapons, cannot kill him. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Such words are only spoken by fools like you. After having encountered Arjuna
in a battle, who can safely return home? You yourself are suspicious of everybody. You are cruel. Your resolution
is wicked. You censure even those who speak for your own welfare. Without any delay, for your own sake, advance against Kounteya. You are the one who desires the ﬁght. You have been born in a noble lineage. You are a
kshatriya. All these kings have caused no offence. Why are you getting them killed? You are the root of the enmity.
Therefore, advance against Arjuna. This maternal uncle of yours is wise and is devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. O Gandhari’s son! He is addicted to deceitful gambling. Let him advance against Arjuna in the battle. He is
skilled in playing with the dice. He is crooked, deceitful in gambling and a cheat. Skilled in deceitful gambling, he
has often said that he will defeat the Pandavas. Because of your stupidity and delusion, together with Karna, you
have often cheerfully said in Dhritarashtra’s presence, “O father! I, Karna and my brother, Duhshasana—these
three will unite and kill the sons of Pandu in the battle.” This was what you boasted, in the hearing of the assemblage in the assembly hall. Accomplish that pledge now and make your words come true. This Pandava, your
worst enemy, is stationed in front of you. Follow the dharma of a kshatriya. Death at Jaya’s hands would also be
praiseworthy. You have given donations. You have pleasured. You have studied. You have obtained the prosperity
that you desired. You have been successful. You do not have any debts. You should not be frightened of Pandava.’
Having spoken these words in the battle, Drona desisted from ﬁghting the enemy. With the soldiers divided into
two, the battle commenced.”’
CHAPTER 1138(161)

‘Sanjaya said, “O lord of the earth! When three-fourths of the night had passed, the battle again commenced between the delighted Kurus and Pandavas. Dispelling the rays of the moon, the sun was in the front and Aruna became manifest.45 The sky became coppery red. The soldiers46 were divided into two. Drona, with Duryodhana at
the forefront, advanced against the Vatsas47 and the Panchalas. On seeing that the Kurus were divided into two,
Madhava was delighted and spoke to Arjuna. ‘Place this division of the army on your left and the other one on the
right.’48 Dhananjaya acted in accordance with Madhava’s words. He placed himself to the left of the great archers,
Drona and Karna.49 Discerning Krishna’s intention and on seeing that he50 was stationed at the front, the destroyer of enemy cities, Bhimasena, approached and spoke these words.
‘“Bhimasena said, ‘O Arjuna! O Bibhatsu! O Arjuna! Listen to the words that I am telling you. The time for
which kshatriya ladies bear sons has now arrived. At this time, you must strive for what is best. If you do not act
accordingly, you will perform a cruel deed. You must resort to your valour and pay the debts to truth, prosperity,
dharma and fame. O best of warriors! Penetrate this division and keep that one to your left.’”51
‘Sanjaya said, “Thus urged by Bhima and Keshava, Savyasachi passed over Karna and Drona and attacked the
army from all sides. Bulls among kshatriyas placed themselves at the forefront and were scorched. Those bulls
among kshatriyas were brave. They resorted to their valour. But none of them were capable of resisting that raging
conﬂagration. Duryodhana, Karna and Shakuni Soubala showered down storms of arrows on Dhananjaya, Kunti’s
son. O Indra among kings! However, he was supreme among those who possessed knowledge of weapons. With
his shower of arrows, he countered them and rendered all their weapons unsuccessful. Displaying the dexterity of
his hands, Dhananjaya countered all those weapons with his own weapons. He pierced each of them with ten sharp
arrows. A dust arose and the shower of arrows was like rain. In that darkness, a great and tumultuous sound arose.
The sky, the earth and the directions could no longer be distinguished. Covered in darkness, the soldiers were confused and all of them seemed to be blind. O king! We could no longer distinguish each other, friend or foe. The
kings continued to ﬁght, on the basis of guessing. O king! As they clashed against each other, rathas lost their chariots. They were submerged in a mass of hair, armour and arms. Horses were slain. Charioteers were killed. The
rathas lost all enterprise. When they were alive, they were seen to be afﬂicted by fear. Deprived of their lives, horses and their riders were seen to lie down against slain elephants that were like mountains.
‘“Drona abandoned that ﬁeld of battle and moved towards the northern direction. He was stationed in that battle,
like a ﬁre without smoke. O lord of the earth! On seeing him stationed there, in the forefront of the battle, the Pandava soldiers lost their peace of mind and trembled. He dazzled in his resplendence, ﬂaming in his energy. O venerable one! On seeing Drona, they abandoned their weapons and were rendered immobile. He challenged the enemy soldiers, like an elephant with a shattered temple. They lost hope of defeating him, like the danavas against
Vasava. Some lost all their initiative. Other spirited ones became angry. Others were astounded. And still others
were ﬁlled with intolerance. Some kings rubbed one hand against the other. Others lost their senses because of
anger and bit their lower lips. Some whirled their weapons. Others slapped their arms. There were others who possessed great energy and were ready to give up their lives. They attacked Drona. In particular, the Panchalas were
afﬂicted by Drona’s arrows. O Indra among kings! Though they were in severe pain, they continued to try in that
battle. In that encounter, Virata and Drupada advanced against Drona, as the one who was invincible in battle was
roaming around in the ﬁeld of battle. O lord of the earth! Three of Drupada’s grandsons and the great archers
among the Chedis advanced to ﬁght against Drona. With three sharp arrows, Drona robbed the three of Drupada’s
grandsons of their lives. Slain, they fell down on the ground. In that encounter, Drona then defeated the Chedis, the
Kekayas, the Srinjayas and the Matsyas. Bharadvaja’s maharatha son defeated all of them. O great king! In that
battle, Drupada became angry and countered Drona with a shower of arrows and so did Virata. However, Drona,
the scorcher of enemies, used a couple of yellow-hued and broad-headed arrows. With these, he dispatched Drupada and Virata to Vaisvasvata’s52 eternal abode. Virata and Drupada were slain and so were the Kekayas, the
Chedis, the Matsyas and the Panchalas. Three of Drupada’s brave grandsons were also killed.
‘“On witnessing Drona’s deeds, the great-minded Dhrishtadyumna took a pledge in the midst of those rathas,
having become overcome with anger and sorrow. ‘Let the fruits of my sacriﬁces and all my kshatriya and brahmana qualities be destroyed, if Drona escapes from me today, as long as Drona does not retreat from the battle.’ He

thus took an oath in the midst of all the archers. With his soldiers, Panchala, the destroyer of enemy heroes, advanced against Drona. The Panchalas attacked Drona from one side and the Pandavas from the other. Duryodhana,
Karna, Shakuni Soubala and the other foremost brothers53 protected Drona in the battle. When Drona was thus
protected by those great-souled ones in the battle, the Panchalas made efforts, but were incapable of glancing at
him. O venerable one! At this, Bhimasena became angry with Dhrishtadyumna. O bull among men! The eloquent
one wounded him with these ﬁerce words. ‘You have been born in the lineage of Drupada. You are supreme among
those who have knowledge of all weapons. You are honoured as a kshatriya. How can such a person merely look
on, when his enemy is stationed before him? Having seen his father killed, what man leaves the task unﬁnished,
especially when he has taken a pledge in the midst of the assembly of kings? With his bow and arrows as kindling,
Drona is like a ﬁre, which is growing because of his energy. He is consuming the kshatriyas with his energy. He
will soon destroy all the Pandava soldiers. All of you remain here as spectators and behold my deeds, as I myself
advance against Drona.’ Having said this, Vrikodara angrily penetrated Drona’s army. He ﬁrmly drew his bow
back all the way and routed your army. Panchala Dhrishtadyumna also penetrated that large army. A battle commenced with Drona and a great and tumultuous sound arose. A battle like that has not been seen earlier, nor heard
of. O king! When the sun arose, the great battle commenced. O venerable one! Large numbers of chariots were
seen to be engaged. Living beings were slain and their bodies were strewn around. Others wished to go elsewhere,
but were attacked along the way. There were those who ﬂed and were struck on their backs. Others were struck on
their sides. That extremely terrible engagement and ﬁght continued. In a short while, it became morning and the
sun arose.”’
CHAPTER 1139(162)

‘Sanjaya said, “O great king! It was morning and with its one thousand rays, the sun arose. The one with the thousand rays arose and its complexion was like that of molten gold. In the forefront of the battle, the armoured ones
worshipped it and as the world became illuminated, the battle commenced again. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those who were engaged with each other earlier, continued to ﬁght with each other after the sun arose.
Rathas fought with horse riders, horse riders with elephant riders, infantry with elephants, horses clashed with
horses and foot soldiers with foot soldiers. In that battle, the warriors attacked, sometimes together and sometimes
separately. They were exhausted because of the deeds they had performed during the night. The sun’s energy made
them hungry and thirsty. Many of them lost all sensation in their limbs. There was the sound of conch shells,
drums and battle drums, together with the trumpeting of elephants. There was the sound of bows being stretched
and drawn. O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! The sound that was generated seemed to touch the sky.
‘“The foot soldiers ﬂed and weapons descended. The horses neighed and the chariots rattled. There were angry
roars and there was a great and tumultuous sound. That loud and ﬁerce noise spread and reached up into the sky.
As warriors were brought down, there were woes of lamentation. That great and piteous wail could be heard all
over the ground. Foot soldiers, horses, chariots and elephants fell down, or were falling down. All the battle formations clashed against each other and there was a general melee. Some killed those on their own side, as well as that
of the enemy. Some engaged with their own side. Others engaged with the enemy. Swords could be seen, hurled
from the brave arms of warriors, or from the backs of elephants. They looked like garments amassed for washing.
As they were raised up in the arms of brave warriors, the swords made a sound like that of garments being beaten
at the time of washing. There were daggers,54 swords, lances and battleaxes. They were used in that clash and
there was a great and fearful sound. The brave ones created a river out of the blood of elephants and horses and the
bodies of men ﬂowed along. It was full of ﬁsh in the form of weapons. The ﬂesh and blood was the mire. The
lamentations were the roar and the ﬂags and garments were the foam. It ﬂowed along to the world of the hereafter.
They were afﬂicted by arrows and spears. They were exhausted from the night. They were confused and senseless.
All their limbs were motionless. The elephants and horses were weak. The faces of the brave ones were dry,
though their heads were decorated with beautiful earrings. Here and there, diverse implements of war could be
seen. The place was full of carnivorous beings and those who were dead and dying. There was no space for the
chariots or the warriors to pass. The wheels of chariots got stuck and the horses which bore them depended on their
spirits. But some of them were extremely tired. The horses trembled and were afﬂicted by the arrows, though they

were spirited and born in noble lineages, possessing strength and sizes like those of elephants. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! At that time, everyone was distracted and agitated. With the exception of Drona and Arjuna, both
armies were overtaken by fright. These two became the refuges of the distressed ones on their respective sides.
Others55 encountered them and departed for Vaivasvata’s eternal abode. The entire large army of the Kouravas
was shattered. The Panchalas gathered together and one could not distinguish one from the other. That ﬁerce carnage increased the fear of those who were cowards. O king! There was a great destruction and the earth was like a
cremation ground. Karna, Drona, Arjuna, Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, the twins, Panchala, Satyaki, Duhshasana,
Drona’s son, Duryodhana, Soubala, Kripa, the king of Madra, Kritavarma, the others, one’s own self, the earth or
the directions, could not be seen there. O king! When the soldiers clashed, everything was covered in dust. A ﬁerce
and terrible cloud of dust arose. We thought that a second night had arrived there. One could not distinguish the
Kouraveyas from the Panchalas and the Pandavas. The directions, the sky, heaven and earth and plain and uneven
terrain could not be distinguished. In that battle, desiring victory, men brought down others through the touch of
the hand, without differentiating the enemy from those on one’s own side. However, a wind arose and dispelled the
dust, which was also paciﬁed through the sprinkling of blood. The dust that arose from the earth was paciﬁed and
was soon driven away by the wind. With blood ﬂowing from their wounded limbs, the elephants, horses, warriors,
rathas and foot soldiers there looked as beautiful as a grove of parijata56 blossoms.
‘“Duryodhana, Karna, Drona and Duhshasana—these four rathas clashed against four on the Pandava side.
Duryodhana and his brother clashed against the twins, Vrikodara against Radheya and Bharadvaja’s son against
Arjuna. Everyone else looked on at that great and terrible wonder. It was a ﬁerce and superhuman encounter between those bulls among rathas. Their chariots traversed wonderful paths. The chariots executed diverse motions.
Those warriors were colourful in ﬁghting and all the warriors witnessed that wonderful battle. They57 were brave
and made endeavours to vanquish each other. They showered down arrows, like a cloud at the end of summer.
Those bulls among men were stationed on chariots that were as radiant as the sun. They were as beautiful as a
mass of clouds during autumn. The great archers challenged each other. They made efforts in wielding their bows.
They attacked each other, like crazy bull elephants.
‘“It is true that one does not discard one’s body until the time has come, since those maharathas were not simultaneously killed in that battle. Arms and feet were severed and so were heads with beautiful earrings.58 There
were hollow arrows and razor-sharp arrows, iron arrows, nails, lances and javelins and many other kinds of sharp
and supreme weapons. There was diverse and colourful armour for the body. Many chariots were shattered. Many
elephants and horses were slain. With the standards brought down, the chariots looked like empty cities. Bereft of
men, the frightened horses dragged the chariots here and there, with a speed like that of the wind. There were
brave warriors with ornaments, whisks, mail and standards. They were brought down. There were umbrellas, ornaments, garments and fragrant garlands. There were necklaces, crowns, diadems, headdresses and large numbers of
bells. There were gems on the breasts and jewels worn on golden headgear. With these beautiful objects scattered
around, the place looked like the sky, adorned by a large number of stars.
‘“Duryodhana was intolerant and angry. He clashed against Nakula, who was also intolerant and angry. Madri’s
son cheerfully struck your son on his right side with a large number of arrows and a loud roar broke out. In that
battle, he was struck on his right ﬂank by his cousin brother59 and became intolerant. Thus angered, he also struck
back on the right ﬂank. Having been thus attacked by your son from the right ﬂank, the energetic Nakula executed
wonderful circles and countered him. However, he60 repulsed all these and afﬂicted him with his net of arrows.
Having forced Nakula to retreat, he was honoured by the soldiers. However, Nakula asked your son to wait, remembering all the hardships that had been caused by your evil counsel.”’
CHAPTER 1140(163)

‘Sanjaya said, “Duhshasana angrily attacked Sahadeva. The terrible force of his chariot made the earth tremble.
However, on seeing him advance, Madri’s son, the destroyer of enemies, swiftly severed the helmeted head of his
charioteer. Sahadeva performed this act with such great speed that Duhshasana and none of the soldiers noticed
that the charioteer’s head had been cut off. Without the reins being controlled by anyone, the horses ran around as

they willed. At this, Duhshasana got to know that the charioteer had been killed. He61 was skilled in the handling
of horses and grasping the reins of the horses himself, fought colourfully, with dexterity and skill. He was foremost
among rathas and in that encounter, this deed of his was applauded, by those on his own side, as well as by the enemy. With the charioteer slain, he was still astride the chariot and roamed around without any fear. Sahadeva
pierced those horses with sharp arrows and afﬂicted by those arrows, they swiftly ran away in different directions.
To grasp the reins, he62 had to cast aside his bow. Then he took up the bow to use it, casting aside the reins. Seizing the opportunity, Madri’s son covered him with arrows.
‘“To protect your son, Karna rushed there. At this, Vrikodara drew his bow back up to his ears and carefully
piercing Karna in the arms and in the chest with three broad-headed arrows, roared. Karna stopped,63 like a snake
that has been struck by a staff. A tumultuous encounter commenced between Bhima and Radheya there. They were
as angry as bulls and dilated their eyes in rage. They struck each other with great force and attacked in rage. They
found great delight in ﬁghting and were very close to each other. They were so close to each other that they could
not shoot showers of arrows. The duel continued with clubs. O king! Bhimasena used his club to swiftly shatter the
pole of Karna’s chariot and it was extraordinary. The valiant Radheya picked up a club and hurled it towards Bhima’s chariot, but he64 shattered the club with his own club. Bhima again picked up a heavy club and hurled it towards Adhiratha’s son. Exercising great care, Karna used ten gold-tufted arrows to strike it. He struck it with more
arrows and sped it back towards Bhima. It descended and brought down Bhima’s giant standard. Struck by that
club, his charioteer also lost his senses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He65 was senseless with anger and
shot eight arrows at Karna, striking his standard, his bow and his quiver. Radheya used his arrows to swiftly kill
his horses, with complexions like those of bears, and his two parshni charioteers. When his chariot faced this difﬁculty, Bhima climbed onto Nakula’s chariot. That scorcher of enemies was like a lion leaping onto the peak of a
mountain.
‘“Meanwhile, maharatha Drona and Arjuna fought in wonderful ways. O Indra among kings! They were preceptor and student and warriors who were skilled in the use of weapons. They were dexterous and ﬁrm in aim and in
that encounter, their chariots roamed around. They confounded the eyes and the minds of men. All the warriors, on
our side and on theirs, desisted, to watch the encounter between the preceptor and the student, the likes of which
had not been seen earlier. In the midst of those soldiers, those two brave ones executed wonderful motions of the
chariot, wishing to place each other on the right.66 The warriors witnessed their prowess and were struck with
supreme wonder. There was a great battle between Drona and Pandava. O great king! It was like that between two
hawks in the sky, ﬁghting over a piece of meat. Whenever Drona tried to do something to defeat Kunti’s son, he
was swiftly nulliﬁed by the striving Pandava. Drona could not establish his superiority over Pandava in any way.
The one who was skilled about the motions of weapons then invoked special weapons—aindra, pashupata, tvashtra, vayavya and varuna.67 However, as soon as these were released from Drona’s bow, Dhananjaya destroyed
them. When his weapons were duly destroyed by Pandava’s weapons, Drona released supreme and divine weapons
towards Partha. However, every weapon that was invoked with a desire to vanquish Partha, was duly destroyed by
Arjuna with another weapon. When those weapons, including the divine ones, were duly destroyed by Arjuna,
Drona honoured Arjuna in his mind. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Since, in the midst of everyone, his student had countered him, he considered himself to be better than all those who knew about weapons on earth.
Partha repulsed him in the midst of those great-souled ones. Pleased at Arjuna’s enterprise, he countered him in
turn. There were gods, thousands of gandharvas, rishis and masses of siddhas in the sky, assembled as spectators.
There were also many apsaras, yakshas and rakshasas. The sky was beautiful, as if with a mass of clouds. An invisible voice was repeatedly heard in the ﬁrmament. It praised Drona and great-souled Partha. ‘The ten directions
seem to be ﬂaming, because of the weapons that have been released. It is evident that this is not a battle involving
a man, an asura, a rakshasa, a god or a gandharva. There is no doubt this is one with the qualities of the brahman.
This is wonderful and extraordinary. We have not seen, or heard of, something like this. The preceptor seems to
prevail over Pandava. Then Pandava seems to prevail over Drona. No one is capable of distinguishing between the
weapons they are using. If Rudra divides himself into two and those two parts ﬁght with each other, one may be
able to ﬁnd a parallel, not otherwise. The preceptor possesses knowledge. Pandava possesses knowledge and yoga.

The preceptor possesses valour. Pandava possesses strength and valour. No enemy is capable of withstanding either of these great archers in battle. If they so wish, they can destroy the entire world, with the immortals.’ O great
king! On beholding those bulls among men, all the visible and invisible beings spoke such words.
‘“The immensely intelligent Drona invoked brahmastra. It scorched Partha and all the invisible beings. The
earth, with all its mountains and trees, began to tremble. Turbulent winds began to blow and the oceans were agitated. When the great-souled one invoked that weapon, there was terror among the Kuru and Pandava soldiers and
all the beings and a great uproar arose. O Indra among kings! However, Partha was not frightened. He countered
that weapon with his own brahmastra and everything became peaceful again. Neither of them could establish his
superiority over the other. The general battle continued, causing anxiety. O lord of the earth! While the tumultuous
engagement between Drona and Pandava was going on in the course of the battle, nothing could again be seen.
The sky was covered with nets of arrows, as if with nets of clouds. Creatures which travelled through the air could
not ﬁnd a passage.”’
CHAPTER 1141(164)

‘Sanjaya said, “O great king! While that destruction of men, horses and elephants was going on, Duhshasana
fought with Dhrishtadyumna, who was astride a golden chariot. Afﬂicted by Duhshasana’s arrows, he became angry and pierced your son’s horses with arrows. O great king! Covered by Parshata’s arrows, in a short while, his
chariot, his standard and his charioteer could no longer be seen. O Indra among kings! Oppressed by that net of arrows, Duhshasana was incapable of remaining before the great-souled Panchala. Having used his arrows to force
Duhshasana to retreat, Parshata attacked Drona in the battle and showered down thousands of arrows. At that time,
Hardikya Kritavarma arrived with three of his brothers and surrounded him.68 However, the twins, bulls among
men, protected his rear as he advanced towards Drona, blazing like a ﬁre. All those seven69 maharathas began to
strike. They were angry and spirited and had set upon death as an objective. O king! They were pure in soul and
pure in conduct and had heaven as an objective. Wishing to kill each other, they performed noble deeds in the battle. Those lords of men were stainless in their deeds. They were intelligent. They fought in accordance with the
dharma of engagement, with a view to attaining the supreme objective. The weapons that were used for the battle
there were in accordance with dharma. There were no barbed arrows, or hollow ones. They were not smeared or
injected.70 They were not needle-sharp at the tip, nor reddish brown.71 They were not made out of the bones of
cattle, or the bones of elephants. The arrows used were not blended together.72 Nor did they possess foul smells or
curved paths. All of them used weapons that were straight and pure. Desiring virtuous worlds in the hereafter and
fame, they fought fairly. There was a tumultuous battle between the four warriors on your side and the three on the
Pandava side. But it was devoid of all taints.
‘“O king! Dhrishtadyumna saw that the bulls among rathas on your side had been checked by the twins. He
swiftly used his weapons to advance against Drona. Checked by those two lions among men, the four brave ones
on your side surrounded them, like winds around mountains. Each of the twins, a bull among rathas, was engaged
with two rathas. Meanwhile, Dhrishtadyumna advanced and clashed against Drona. Panchala, indomitable in battle, was advancing against Drona and the twins were engaged with those on your side.
‘“O great king! On seeing this, Duryodhana went to the spot, showering arrows that drank up blood. At this,
Satyaki swiftly attacked him. Those two, of the Kuru and Madhava lineages, approached and clashed against each
other. As they clashed, those tigers among men were not frightened. They smiled. They remembered all their childhood deeds and felt affectionate towards each other. They glanced at each other and smiled repeatedly. Then King
Duryodhana censured his own self and addressed Satyaki, who had always been his beloved friend. ‘O friend!
Shame on anger. Shame on avarice. Shame on delusion. Shame on intolerance. Shame on the conduct of kshatriyas! Shame on the strength in my heart. O bull among the Shini lineage! You are aiming towards me and I am
aiming towards you. You have always been dearer to me than my own life. I remember all those childhood deeds
of ours. With us facing each other in this ﬁeld of battle, all those have been destroyed. O Satvata! Because of anger
and greed, I am ﬁghting with you today.’ O king! Having been thus addressed, Satyaki, who was supreme in the
knowledge of weapons, laughed and picked up some sharp arrows. He replied, ‘O prince! O king! This is not an

assembly hall, nor the abode of our preceptor,73 where we used to gather together and play earlier.’ Duryodhana
said, ‘O bull among the Shini lineage! Where has that childhood playing of ours gone? Why does this battle face
us? Destiny is difﬁcult to cross. We desire riches. All of us have assembled to ﬁght, because of our greed for
wealth. What will we accomplish with that wealth?’ Having been thus addressed by the king, Madhava said, ‘This
has always been the conduct of kshatriyas. They have to ﬁght, even with their preceptors. O king! If I am dear to
you, kill me without any delay. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Through your deed, I will then go to worlds
meant for those with virtuous deeds. Swiftly show me your strength and prowess. I do not wish to witness this
great calamity that confronts my friends.’ O lord of the earth! Having been thus addressed and given his reply,
Satyaki quickly advanced, eager and indifferent.74
‘“On seeing that he was advancing, your son received him. O king! Your son countered Shini’s descendant with
arrows. A battle commenced between the lions of the Kuru and Madhava lineages. They were enraged with each
other and that terrible encounter was like that between an elephant and a lion. Duryodhana drew his bow all the
way back and pierced back Satvata, indomitable in battle, with ten sharp arrows. Satyaki pierced him back with ten
arrows and pierced him again with ﬁfty arrows, then with thirty, and again with ten. Satyaki swiftly showered him
with arrows and severed his75 bow, with an arrow still afﬁxed to it. O great king! Duryodhana was afﬂicted by
Dasharha’s arrows. He was severely wounded and pained and sought refuge on another chariot. Having regained
his composure, your son attacked Satyaki again. He showered a net of arrows in the direction of Yuyudhana’s chariot. O king! At this, Satyaki shot arrows towards Duryodhana’s chariot and because those arrows were shot and descended on all sides, the place became violent. A great sound arose, like that of a ﬁre burning a great forest.
‘“On seeing that Madhava, supreme among rathas, was proving to be superior, Karna desired to protect your son
and quickly advanced. However, the immensely strong Bhimasena could not tolerate this. He swiftly advanced
against Karna and released many arrows. Karna severed those sharp arrows and laughed. He used his arrows to
sever his76 bow and arrows and killed his charioteer. Pandava Bhimasena angrily grasped a club and in that battle,
used it to crush the standard, bow and charioteer of his enemy. Karna could not tolerate this and continued to ﬁght
with Bhimasena. In that battle, he used diverse nets of arrows and many kinds of weapons.
‘“When that ﬁerce encounter was going on, the king who was Dharma’s son spoke these words to the bulls
among men, the tigers among men from the Panchalas and the Matsyas. ‘They are our lives. They are our heads.
They are immensely strong warriors. Those bulls among men are engaged with the sons of Dhritarasthra. Why are
all of you stationed here, like foolish people who are bereft of their senses? Go there, where the rathas on my side
are ﬁghting. All of you should place the dharma of kshatriyas at the forefront. Get rid of your fever.77 Whether
you are victorious, or whether you are slain, you will go towards the supreme objective. If you win, you will perform many sacriﬁces and offer large quantities of donations at these sacriﬁces. If you are slain, you will be united
with the gods and attain sacred worlds.’ Having been thus urged by the king, those brave maharathas started to
ﬁght. They divided themselves into four formations and quickly advanced against Drona. The Panchalas advanced
from one side and struck Drona with many arrows. With Bhimasena at the forefront, others surrounded him from
another side. The sons of Pandu had three cunning maharathas—the twins and Bhimasena. They loudly addressed
Dhananjaya. ‘O Arjuna! Quickly attack the Kurus who are following Drona. If the protectors are killed,
Panchala78 will kill him.’ At this, Partha violently attacked the Kouraveyas and Drona attacked the Panchalas,
with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront.
‘“Then Drona caused a great carnage among the Panchalas. He was like an enraged Shakra causing destruction
among the danavas in earlier times. O great king! The enemy warriors were slaughtered by Drona’s weapons.
However, because those maharathas were spirited, they were not frightened of Drona in the battle. O great king!
Though they were slaughtered and confounded, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas fought against maharatha Drona.
The Panchalas surrounded him from all directions and roared loudly, as they were killed by his arrows and lances.
On seeing that the great-souled Panchalas were being killed in the battle and shattered because of Drona’s
weapons, the Pandavas were overcome by fear. O great king! There was a great destruction of large numbers of
horses and men in that battle. On seeing this, the Pandaveyas lost all hope of victory. ‘Drona knows about supreme

weapons. He will probably destroy all of us. He is like a raging ﬁre amidst dry kindling, when winter is over. In
this battle, there is no one who is even capable of glancing at him.’79
‘“On seeing that the sons of Kunti were frightened and afﬂicted by Drona’s arrows, the intelligent Keshava, who
wished to ensure their welfare, spoke these words to Arjuna. ‘He is incapable of being defeated in an encounter,
even if the slayer of Vritra advances to do battle, at the head of a large number of chariots. O Pandava! Therefore,
to ensure victory, abandon dharma and resort to yoga.80 The one with the golden horses will kill all of us in this
battle. It is my view that if Ashvatthama is killed, he will not ﬁght. Let some virtuous man tell him that he81 has
been killed in the battle.’ O king! But this idea did not please Dhananjaya, Kunti’s son. However, the others accepted it. And so did Yudhishthira, after some reluctance. O king! There was a gigantic elephant in his army and it
was named Ashvatthama. With his club, the mighty-armed Bhima killed it. In the battle, Bhimasena then approached Drona, as if ashamed. He began to loudly exclaim, ‘Ashvatthama has been killed.’ The elephant known
by the name of Ashvatthama had been killed. Knowing this in his mind, Bhima uttered a falsehood. On hearing
these extremely unpleasant words from Bhima, Drona thought about this. His limbs swooned, like sand in water.
But knowing about the valour of his son, he doubted that this was the truth. On hearing about the death, he did not
lose his fortitude, or tremble. Having recovered his senses in a short while, Drona was comforted. He remembered
that his son was incapable of being routed by enemies.
‘“He attacked Parshata, wishing to kill the one who was destined to kill him. He enveloped him with thousands
of sharp arrows tufted with the feathers of herons. Twenty thousand bulls among men from the Panchalas covered
him with arrows from every direction, as he roamed around in that battle. Drona, the scorcher of enemies, invoked
a brahmastra in great anger, for the sake of killing those brave ones. Drona roamed around, killing all the Somakas.
In that great battle, he brought down the heads of the Panchalas. He severed their arms, which were like clubs and
were adorned with golden ornaments. In that encounter, the kings were killed by Bharadvaja’s son. They were
strewn around on the ground, like trees brought down by a storm. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Elephants
and large numbers of horses were brought down. The earth became impassable because of the mire resulting from
the ﬂesh and blood. Having killed twenty thousand Panchalas, Drona roamed around on his chariot. He was stationed in that battle, ﬂaming like a ﬁre without smoke. Again enraged, Bharadvaja’s powerful son used a broadheaded arrow to sever Vasudana’s head from his body.82 He next killed ﬁve hundred Matsyas, six thousand Srinjayas, ten thousand elephants and ten thousand horses. Drona was stationed in the battle, for the sake of the destruction of the kshatriyas. On seeing this, the rishis—Vishvamitra, Jamadagni, Bharadvaja, Goutama, Vasishtha,
Kashyapa, Atri, others who lived in Brahma’s world, the Sikatas, the Prishnis, Garga, the Balakhilyas,83 the
Marichis, the Bhrigus, the Angirases and other maharshis with subtle forms—quickly arrived, led by the god of
ﬁre. All of them spoke to Drona, the adornment of a battle. ‘You are ﬁghting a battle characterized by adharma.
The time for your death has arrived. O Drona! Look at all of us assembled here and cast aside your weapons in this
battle. You should not perform cruel deeds like these yet again. You know about the Vedas and the Vedangas.84
You are devoted to the dharma of truth. In particular, you are a brahmana. You should not perform such acts. Cast
aside this veil of ignorance and base yourself on the eternal. The time that you were to spend in the world of men
is now over.’ Having heard their words and also the words of Bhimasena, he became distressed in that battle and
looked towards Dhrishtadyumna.
‘“He was tormented and pained and asked Yudhishthira, Kunti’s son, whether his son had indeed been killed or
not. Drona was ﬁrm in his mind that Partha85 would not utter a falsehood, even for the sake of all the prosperity in
the three worlds. It is for this reason that he asked him and no one else. Since the days of childhood, he had always
hoped to hear the truth from Pandava. Knowing that Drona, the lord of a battle, was capable of emptying the earth
of the Pandavas, Govinda was pained and spoke to Dharmaraja. ‘If Drona is enraged and ﬁghts for even half a day,
I tell you truthfully that your army will be annihilated. Save us from Drona. In this situation, falsehood is superior
to truth. If one utters a lie for the sake of saving lives, one is not touched by the taint of falsehood.’ When they
were conversing, Bhimasena said, ‘O great king! As soon as I heard about the means for killing the great-souled
one, I immersed myself in the Malava soldiers of Indravarma. There was an elephant named Ashvatthama and it
was like Shakra’s elephant. Exhibiting my valour, I killed it in the battle and told Drona that it had been killed. “O

brahmana! Ashvatthama has been killed. Stop ﬁghting.” O bull among men! He did not believe that I had spoken
the truth. Desiring victory, pay attention to Govinda’s words. O king! Tell Drona that Sharadvati’s86 son has been
killed. O king! If those words come from you, the bull among brahmanas will not ﬁght any more. O lord of men!
In the world of men, you are renowned as one who speaks the truth.’ O great king! Hearing his words and urged by
Krishna’s words, he decided to say what he had been asked to speak. Yudhishthira feared a lie, but was also immersed in the prospect of victory. O king! He said that he had been killed, but added the words elephant indistinctly.87 Before this, his chariot used to be borne four ﬁngers above the ground. However, after he uttered that falsehood, his chariot started to touch the earth. On hearing Yudhishthira’s words, maharatha Drona was tormented by
sorrow on account of his son. He no longer wished to live. He thought that he had caused injury to the great-souled
Pandavas. In his mind, he thought about the words of the rishis and about what he had heard about his son’s death.
He lost his senses and was supremely anxious.
‘“O king! The scorcher of enemies glanced towards Dhrishtadyumna and was no longer capable of ﬁghting as
he had done earlier. On seeing that he was extremely anxious and that he had lost his senses because of sorrow,
Dhrishtadyumna, the son of the king of Panchala, attacked him. Drupada, Indra among kings, had performed a
great sacriﬁce and had obtained him for Drona’s destruction, from the bearer of sacriﬁcial oblations.88 He now
picked up a terrible bow that rumbled like the clouds. The bowstring was ﬁrm and he afﬁxed a divine arrow that
was like a venomous serpent. Wishing to kill Drona, Panchala afﬁxed the arrow, which was like a venomous serpent, on the bow. The form of the arrow, ﬁxed on the circle of the bow, was like that of an immensely radiant ﬁre.
The bow looked like the sun in the sky, when summer is over. Parshata stretched that ﬂaming bow. The soldiers
saw this and thought that the time of destruction had come. On seeing it aimed towards him, Bharadvaja’s powerful son thought that the end of his bodily life had arrived. O Indra among kings! The preceptor made efforts to
counter it, but the great-souled one’s weapons no longer manifested themselves.89 Though he had used them for
four days and a night, they had not been exhausted. However, with one-third of the day90 having passed, the arrows were exhausted. His arrows were exhausted and he was overcome by grief on account of his son. The diverse
divine weapons no longer appeared before him. Therefore, he decided to cast aside his weapons, as the sages had
asked him to. But he still possessed energy and could ﬁght like a superman. He picked up a divine bow given to
him by Angirasa. With arrows that were like a brahmana’s curse, he continued to ﬁght with Dhrishtadyumna. Angry and intolerant, he enveloped Dhrishtadyumna with a great shower of arrows. Using his sharp arrows, Drona
severed his arrows into a hundred fragments and brought down his standard, bow and charioteer. Dhrishtadyumna
laughed and picked up another bow. Using sharp arrows, he pierced him back between the breasts. Having been
severely pierced, the great archer was frightened in that encounter. However, with a broad-headed arrow that was
sharp at the edges, he sliced down that great bow.91 O lord of the earth! He severed his bow and arrows and everything that the invincible one possessed, with the exception of a club and a sword. Extremely angry, the scorcher of
enemies assumed a wrathful form and pierced Dhrishtadyumna with nine sharp arrows that were capable of robbing lives. Maharatha Dhrishtadyumna, immeasurable in his soul, mixed up his horses and his chariot with the
horses and chariot of his adversary and then invoked a brahmastra. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The horses
were as ﬂeet as the wind and those with the complexion of pigeons were mixed with those that were red.92 It was
beautiful. They were like clouds tinged with lightning, roaring at the advent of the monsoon. O great king! They
were thus mingled in the ﬁeld of battle and looked beautiful. The brahmana, immeasurable in his soul, sliced down
the joints of Dhrishtadyumna’s arrows, wheels and chariot. His bow was severed. He was without a chariot. His
horses were killed. His charioteer was slain. Facing a grave difﬁculty, the brave one grasped a supreme club. As it
was being hurled towards him, the angry maharatha Drona, for whom truth was his valour, used his sharp arrows
to strike it down.
‘“On seeing that Drona, tiger among men, had destroyed it with his arrows, he grasped a sparkling sword that
was as radiant as the sun and was decorated with the signs of one hundred moons. The virtuous ones thought that
there was no doubt that the time had come for the great-souled Panchala to kill the foremost among preceptors.
Maharatha Dhrishtadyumna attacked with the sword that was as radiant as the sun and was decorated with the
signs of one hundred moons. He stood on the seat of his chariot and on the other chariot.93 He wished to perform

an extremely difﬁcult task and shattered the breast of Bharadvaja’s son in the battle. He stationed himself on the
pole of the chariot and on the yoke. He killed half of those red horses and was applauded by the soldiers. Since he
was stationed under those red horses, Drona could not ﬁnd an opportunity to strike him and it was extraordinary.
He roamed around swiftly, like a hawk desiring meat. That is how he sought to strike Drona in that encounter. Angry, the valiant Drona used iron javelins to slay, one by one, all the horses with the complexions of pigeons that
were yoked to the chariot.94 Having been slain, Dhrishtadyumna’s horses fell down on the ground. O lord of the
earth! The red horses were freed from that mingling of chariots. On seeing that the horses had been killed by the
foremost of brahmanas, maharatha Parshata, Yajnasena’s son and foremost among warriors, could not tolerate this.
He was without a chariot. The supreme among wielders of the sword grasped a sword. O king! He descended on
Drona, like Vinata’s son95 swooping down on a serpent. O king! Wishing to kill Bharadvaja’s son, his appearance
was beautiful. It was like Vishnu’s supreme form when he killed Hiranyakashipu.96 He traversed diverse paths and
exhibited twenty-one techniques.97 He whirled and leapt up. He struck and sprung forward. He lunged forward
and retreated. With the sword and the shield, he circled and turned the other way. In excitement, Parshata descended and exhibited these.
‘“The brahmana shot one thousand arrows and struck down Dhrishtadyumna’s sword and the shield decorated
with one hundred moons. Those arrows were called vaitastikas98 and were used for ﬁghting at close quarters.
Drona used such arrows. Other than him, only Sharadvata, Partha, Drona’s son, Vaikartana, Pradyumna, Yuyudhana and Abhimanyu possessed such arrows. The preceptor wished to kill his student,99 who was like his own
son, and carefully afﬁxed a ﬁrm and supreme arrow. However, while your son and the great-souled Karna looked
on, the descendant of the Shini lineage sliced it down with ten sharp arrows and rescued Dhrishtadyumna, who
was about to be devoured by the preceptor’s mouth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Satyaki, for whom truth
was his valour, roamed around in the paths of the chariots and was within the reach of Drona, Karna and Kripa. On
seeing this, the great-souled Vishvaksena100 and Dhananjaya honoured Varshneya101 and applauded him, since
the undecaying one had repulsed the divine weapons of all the warriors. Vishvaksena and Dhananjaya descended
on the soldiers. Dhananjaya told Krishna, ‘O Keshava! Behold. Satyaki, for whom truth is his valour, and who is
the extender of the Madhu lineage, is sporting around before the preceptor. This gives me great delight and also to
Madri’s two sons, Bhima and King Yudhishthira. Satyaki is roaming around in this battle, with skills acquired
through learning. The extender of the deeds of the Vrishni lineage seems to be toying with those maharathas. The
siddhas and the soldiers are astounded. On seeing that Satvata is invincible in battle, they are honouring him and
applauding him. All the warriors on both sides are honouring his deeds.’”’
CHAPTER 1142(165)102

‘Sanjaya said, “As those kings clashed, that ﬁeld of battle became cruel. It was as if an enraged Rudra was killing
animals. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Arms, heads, bows, shattered bows and whisks were strewn around
in the battle. There were shattered wheels and chariots. Giant standards were brought down. Brave riders were
killed and scattered around on the ground. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! Warriors were mangled by descending arrows. In that great battle, they were seen to make many different kinds of attempts to move. The terrible battle that raged was like that between the gods and the asuras. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira spoke to the kshatriyas there. ‘O maharathas! Control yourselves and attack the one who was born in a pot. The brave Parshata has
engaged with Bharadvaja’s son. To the best of his strength, he is trying to kill Bharadvaja’s son. From what we can
see of his form in the great battle today, in this encounter, the angry Parshata will bring down Drona. Unite and
protect him from the one who was born in a pot.’ Thus commanded by Yudhishthira, the maharatha Srinjayas
wished to kill Bharadvaja’s son and attacked in unison. On seeing that all of them were descending, the maharatha
who was Bharadvaja’s son powerfully attacked them, knowing that he was mortal. As he advanced, unwavering in
his aim, the earth trembled. Turbulent winds began to blow, inspiring fear in the soldiers. Giant meteors seemed to
issue from the sun and fell down. They were blazing in their heat and seemed to indicate great fear. O venerable
one! The weapons of Bharadvaja’s son blazed. Chariots rattled loudly. Horses shed tears. The maharatha who was

Bharadvaja’s son seemed to have been robbed of his energy. The rishis, knowledgeable about the brahman, had
spoken to him about ascending to heaven. He decided to give up his life by ﬁghting a fair battle. Drupada’s soldiers surrounded him from all four directions. But Drona roamed around in that battle, consuming the kshatriyas.
The scorcher of enemies killed twenty thousand kshatriyas. With his sharp, pointed and ﬁerce arrows, he killed another one hundred thousand. He was stationed in that battle, like a ﬁre without smoke. To destroy the kshatriyas, he
based himself on his brahmana qualities.
‘“Bhima saw that Panchala was without a chariot. He was without his weapons and powerless. The great-souled
one was distressed. Therefore, the scorcher of enemies swiftly advanced and took Panchala up on his own chariot.
Glancing towards Drona, he said, ‘With your exception, there is no other man who can venture to ﬁght with the
preceptor. Kill him quickly. The burden of his death has been placed on you.’ Thus addressed, the mighty-armed
one swiftly picked up a new, ﬁrm and supreme weapon103 that was capable of bearing all loads. In that encounter,
he angrily shot arrows towards the irresistible Drona. Wishing to counter the preceptor, he enveloped him with a
shower of arrows. Those angry and foremost ones, ornaments of a battle, countered each other. They released brahmastras and many other divine weapons. O great king! Parshata covered Drona with great weapons in that battle
and destroyed all the weapons of Bharadvaja’s son. The undecaying one began to kill the Vasatis, Shibis, Bahlikas
and Kouravas, who were protecting Drona in the battle. O king! At that time, Dhrishtadyumna covered all the directions with his nets of arrows. He was as resplendent as the sun in the sky, with all its rays. Drona severed his
bow and pierced him with arrows sharpened on stone. Pierced severely in his inner organs, he felt supreme pain.
‘“O Indra among kings! In great anger, Bhima grasped Drona’s chariot and slowly spoke these words to him.
‘There are those who are brahmanas only in name.104 They are not satisﬁed with their own indicated duties. They
are skilled. But had they not fought, this destruction of kshatriyas would not have occurred. It is known that nonviolence towards all beings is supreme dharma. Brahmanas are the source of this. You are supreme among all those
who know about the brahman. However, you have killed large numbers of shvapakas,105 mlecchas and many others. O brahmana! You are ignorant and stupid. You have done this for your son and your wife and because you desire riches. For the sake of a single person, you have killed many. Though you know about dharma, you have done
this for your son. They have been engaged in their own indicated duties. But you have acted against your own indicated duties. Why are you not ashamed? He106 has been brought down and is lying down, behind your back, and
you do not know. Dharmaraja told you about this and you should not doubt his words.’ Having been thus addressed by Bhimasena, Drona cast aside his bow. Wishing to cast aside all his weapons, the one with dharma in his
soul loudly said, ‘O Karna! O Karna! O great archer! O Kripa! O Duryodhana! Make careful efforts in this battle. I
am saying this repeatedly. May you be safe from the Pandavas. I am going to cast aside my weapons.’ O great
king! Having said this, he loudly began to call out to Drona’s son. In that battle, he abandoned his weapons and
sank down on the ﬂoor of his chariot. He gave assurance to all beings and resorted to yoga.
‘“On detecting that opportunity, Dhrishtadyumna arose. He leapt down from his chariot, grasped a sword and
violently attacked Drona. A great lamentation arose among all beings, humans and inferior species, when they saw
that Drona had come under Dhrishtadyumna’s control. They loudly lamented and also uttered words of shame.
Having abandoned his weapons, Drona was established in supreme tranquility. Having spoken those words, the
immensely ascetic one resorted to yoga and was a mass of brightness. The preceptor ascended to heaven, which is
so difﬁcult for even virtuous ones to attain. As he ascended, it seemed to us that there were two suns in the sky.
The entire sky seemed to be full of one mass of brightness and it seemed to be night when Bharadvaja’s son disappeared. In an instant, that mass of energy vanished. Confused sounds of delight were heard from the residents of
heaven. Drona ascended to Brahma’s world and Dhrishtadyumna was confused.107 There were only ﬁve of us,
born in the wombs of humans, who saw the great-souled one, united with yoga, attain that supreme objective. They
were I, Partha Dhananjaya, the brahmana Kripa Sharadvata, Varshneya Vasudeva and Dharmaraja Pandava. O
great king! None of the others could see Bharadvaja’s intelligent son. They did not know that the great one had departed, united with yoga. All the other men did not know that he had attained the supreme objective. None of them
saw that he had left, in the company of the bulls among the rishis. The preceptor, the scorcher of enemies, resorted
to yoga and went to Brahma’s world.

‘“His limbs were mangled with hundreds of arrows and he had cast aside his weapons. All the beings were
supremely pained and censured Parshata. Though they spoke to him in this way, he grasped the body, which was
bereft of life, by the hair and dragged it. With the sword, he severed the head from the body. Since Bharadvaja’s
son had been brought down, he was ﬁlled with great delight. In that battle, he roared like a lion and whirled his
sword. His108 grey hair hung down, up to his ears. He was dark. He was eighty-ﬁve years in age. But he had
roamed around on the ﬁeld of battle like one who was sixteen years old. The mighty-armed Dhananjaya, Kunti’s
son, said, ‘O Drupada’s son! Let the preceptor remain alive. Do not kill him. He should not be killed.’109 The soldiers had also said that he should not be killed. Arjuna, overcome with compassion, had said this repeatedly. Arjuna was overcome with compassion and so were all the kings. But disregarding them, Dhrishtadyumna killed
Drona, bull among men, on the ﬂoor of his chariot. Covered with blood, that scorcher of enemies then jumped
down from the chariot. His limbs were red, he was as difﬁcult to look at as the sun, and the soldiers and others saw
that he had been killed in the battle.110 O king! Before those on your side, Dhrishtadyumna, the great archer, ﬂung
down Bharadvaja’s son’s large head. O king! On seeing the head of Bharadvaja’s son, those on your side lost all
enterprise. Making up their minds to run away, they ﬂed in all the directions. Drona followed the path of the stars
and ascended to heaven. O king! I witnessed the nature of Drona’s death, because of the favours of the rishi
Krishna, Satyavati’s son.111 He ascended like a ﬂaming and smokeless meteor. I saw the immensely radiant one
ascend to heaven.
‘“When Drona was killed, the Kurus, the Pandavas and the Srinjayas were distressed. They ran away at great
speed and the soldiers were dispersed. In that battle, many horses were killed with sharp arrows. When Drona was
killed, those on your side lost their spirits. They were defeated and suffered from great fear about what would happen next. They lost control over their selves and thought that they had lost both.112 The kings searched for the
severed body of Bharadvaja’s son. O king! But because the ﬁeld was covered with headless torsos, they could not
ﬁnd it. Having obtained victory, the Pandavas thought about the great fame that would follow. They made loud
sounds with their arrows and roared like lions. O king! In the midst of the soldiers, Bhimasena and Parshata
Dhrishtadyumna were seen to embrace each other. Bhima spoke to Parshata, the scorcher of enemies. ‘O Parshata!
I will embrace you again, as the victorious one, when the wicked son of a suta and Dhritarashtra’s evil son have
been killed in the battle.’ Having said this, Bhima was ﬁlled with great joy. Pandava made the earth tremble with
the slapping of his arms. Terriﬁed by that sound, those on your side ﬂed from the battle. They abandoned the dharma of kshatriyas and devoted themselves to running away. O lord of the earth! Having obtained victory, the Pandavas were delighted. Because their enemies were destroyed in the battle, they were overjoyed. O king! When
Drona was killed, the Kurus were afﬂicted with arrows. With their leader slain, they were shattered. They were
overcome with supreme sorrow. They lost their senses and lost their enterprise. With their energy destroyed, they
were full of lassitude.
‘“They lamented loudly and surrounded your son. They were covered with dust. They trembled and glanced in
the ten directions. Their voices were choked with tears, like the daityas after Hiranyaksha’s city was destroyed.113
They surrounded the king, like small animals that were terriﬁed. Your son was unable to remain amidst them and
moved away. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Your warriors were overcome by hunger and thirst and were
exhausted. They were severely scorched by the sun and were cheerless in their hearts. They were enraged on seeing the fall of Bharadvaja’s son, which was like the sun falling down or the ocean drying up, or Meru moving or
Vasava being defeated. O king! The Kouravas were frightened and began to run away. On seeing that the one on
the golden chariot had been killed, Shakuni, the king of Gandhara, ﬂed with the other frightened rathas, but faster
than the others. The son of a suta also ﬂed with his large army and the army ran away with great force, with its
standards. Shalya, the lord of Madra, glanced here and there and ﬂed out of fear, with an army that had chariots,
elephants and horses stationed in front. While many of the foremost ones had been slain, Sharadvata ﬂed with the
many elephants and foot soldiers that remained, saying that this was a great calamity. O king! Kritavarma ﬂed on
swift horses, surrounded by the remnants from the divisions of the Bhojas, the Kalingas, the Arattas and the
Bahlikas. O king! On seeing that Drona had been brought down, Uluka was terriﬁed and ﬂed with large numbers
of frightened infantry. Duhshasana was handsome and young. He possessed valour and all the good signs. Howev-

er, he was also extremely anxious and ﬂed, surrounded by elephants. O great king! Maharatha Duryodhana ﬂed,
surrounded by elephants, horses, chariots and infantry. The remnants of the army were routed and ran away, astride
elephants, chariots and dark horses. The men lost their enterprise and their energy and thought that the army had
been destroyed. O lord! Abandoning their armour, those on your side ran away. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
The soldiers loudly called out to each other, ‘Stay. Remain.’ But they themselves did not remain there. They abandoned their chariots and their ornamented charioteers. Other warriors climbed onto their horses, or swiftly ﬂed on
foot. The soldiers were frightened and lost all their energy. They were terriﬁed.
‘“Drona’s son was the only one who advanced against the enemy, like a crocodile against a current. Indomitable
in battle, he killed many kinds of Pandu soldiers. He was like a crazy elephant in his valour and freed himself from
many difﬁcult situations. When he saw that the soldiers were running away, having made up their minds to ﬂee,
Drona’s son approached Duryodhana and spoke to him. ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Why are the soldiers
running away and why are they frightened? O Indra among kings! They are running away in the battle. Why are
you not restraining them? O lord of men! You do not seem to be your natural self either. Karna and the other kings
are also not stationed here. In no other encounter have the soldiers run away in this fashion. O mighty-armed one!
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Why have your soldiers been reduced to this state? O king! Has a lion among
rathas in your army been killed? O Kourava! Tell me everything about why this state has come to pass.’ Having
heard what Drona’s son said, Duryodhana, the bull among kings, was incapable of telling him the terrible and unpleasant news. Your son was immersed in an ocean of grief, like a shattered boat. On seeing Drona’s son stationed
on his chariot, his voice choked with tears. The king shame-facedly told Sharadvata, ‘O fortunate one! Before all
the others, you explain why all the soldiers are running away.’ The king went to Sharadvata and repeatedly entreated him that he should tell Drona’s son about how Drona had been brought down.
‘“Kripa said, ‘We placed Drona, supreme among rathas on earth, ahead of us and began to ﬁght with only the
Panchalas. A battle with a melee of the Kurus and the Somakas then commenced. They roared at each other and
brought down weapons on each other’s bodies. Drona, bull among men, released the brahmastra and killed hundreds and thousands of enemies with his broad-headed arrows. In particular, goaded by destiny, Pandavas,
Kekayas, Matsyas and Panchalas approached Drona’s chariot in that battle and were destroyed. With his brahmastra, Drona consumed and sent one thousand lions among rathas and two thousand elephants to the land of the dead.
His grey hair hung down up to his ears. He was dark. He was eighty-ﬁve years old. However, in that encounter, the
aged Drona roamed around like one who was sixteen years old. He destroyed the soldiers and killed the kings.
Though the Panchalas were angered, they were made to retreat. Part of the forces was shattered and retreated. The
conqueror of enemies114 invoked a divine weapon that was as resplendent as a sun that has arisen. The powerful
one reached amidst the Pandus, with his arrows as rays. Your father was like the midday sun and was difﬁcult to
look at. They were scorched by Drona, as if by the blazing sun. Their valour was scorched. They lost their enterprise. They were bereft of their senses. On seeing that they were afﬂicted by Drona’s arrows, Madhusudana, who
wished for the victory of the sons of Pandu, spoke these words. “He is supreme among the wielders of weapons.
He is like the leader of a herd of leaders. He is incapable of being vanquished by the enemy in battle, even if it
were to be the slayer of Vritra himself. O Pandavas! Therefore, abandon dharma and seek to ensure victory. Otherwise, the one on the golden chariot will kill all of you in the battle. It is my view that he will not ﬁght if Ashvatthama has been killed. Therefore, let someone utter a falsehood and tell him that he115 has been killed in the
battle.” Dhananjaya, Kunti’s son, did not approve of these words. But all the others approved, Yudhishthira with
great difﬁculty. Bhimasena shame-facedly told your father that Ashvatthama had been killed, but your father did
not believe him. Suspecting that this was a lie, your father, who was devoted to his son, asked Dharmaraja whether
you had actually been killed or not. Yudhishthira was scared of speaking a lie, but was addicted to the prospect of
victory. He said that Ashvatthama had been killed and indistinctly added that it was an elephant. This belonged to
Indravarma from Malava and was as large as a mountain. It was killed by Bhima. He116 approached Drona and
spoke these words. “You are wielding weapons for Ashvatthama’s sake. You live for the sake of beholding him. He
has always been your beloved son. But he has been brought down.” On hearing this extremely unpleasant news,
the preceptor was distressed. He gave up his divine weapons and no longer fought, as he had earlier. He was extremely anxious and his senses were numb with grief. On seeing this, the son of the king of Panchala, the per-

former of cruel deeds, attacked. The one who knew about the nature of the worlds117 saw the one who was destined to be the cause of his death. In the battle, he abandoned his divine weapons and decided to die.118 Parshata
grasped his hair with his left hand. Ignoring the loud words spoken by the brave ones, he severed his head. Everyone said, “Do not kill the one who should not be killed.” Arjuna jumped down from his chariot and quickly ran,
with his arms raised. He repeatedly exclaimed, “O one who knows about dharma! Let the preceptor remain alive.
Do not kill him.” O bull among men! But though he was restrained by the Kouravas and by Arjuna, he cruelly
killed your father. That is the reason all the soldiers are running away, afﬂicted by fear. O unblemished one! With
your father slain, we have also lost all initiative.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “On hearing of his father’s death in the battle, Drona’s son was overcome by ﬁerce rage, like a
snake that has been stepped on, by the foot.”’

Section Seventy-Two
Narayana Astra Moksha Parva
This parva has 538 shlokas and eight chapters.
Chapter 1143(166): 60 shlokas
Chapter 1144(167): 50 shlokas
Chapter 1145(168): 39 shlokas
Chapter 1146(169): 62 shlokas
Chapter 1147(170): 61 shlokas
Chapter 1148(171): 69 shlokas
Chapter 1159(172): 94 shlokas
Chapter 1150(173): 103 shlokas
This section is named after the release (moksha) from the divine narayana weapon. Angry at Drona’s death, Ashvatthama invokes the
naryana astra, which was obtained from Narayana. This weapon cannot be countered by ﬁghting and Krishna advises the Pandavas to lay
down their weapons. Ashvatthama then kills Pourava Vriddhakshatra, Sudarshana from Malava and the prince of Chedi. Asvatthama’s divine
weapons are countered by Krishna and Arjuna. The section ends with the praise of Shiva. This section also ends Drona Parva and the ﬁfteenth day of the war.
CHAPTER 1143(166)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! On hearing that his aged brahmana father had been killed by Dhrishtadyumna
through adharma, what did Ashvatthama say? Human, varuna, agneya, brahma, aindra and narayana weapons were
always vested in the valiant one.1 O Sanjaya! He was always devoted to dharma. On hearing that the preceptor had
been killed by Dhrishtadyumna through the use of adharma, what did Ashvatthama say? The great-souled one obtained his knowledge of Dhanurveda from Rama.2 Wishing to be like a preceptor towards his son, he gave him all
these divine weapons. There is only one person in the world whom men desire to possess qualities that are superior
to those in their own selves. That is the son. There is no one else. All great-souled preceptors pass on the secrets to
their sons and to their devoted students. O Sanjaya! He especially obtained all those skills. In a battle, Sharadvati’s
brave son has become like a second Drona. He is like Rama in knowledge of the sacred texts and like Purandara in
battle. He is Kartavirya’s equal in valour and Brihaspati’s equal in intelligence.3 The young one is like a mountain
in his fortitude and like the ﬁre in his energy. He is like the ocean in gravity and like a serpent’s venom in his
anger. He is ﬁrm in wielding the bow and has conquered exhaustion. He is the foremost among rathas in the world.
He is as swift as the wind in speed. He roams around like an enraged Yama. When he is stationed in battle, the
earth itself seems to suffer. Truth is his valour and the brave one is not distressed in battle. He has learnt the Vedas.
He knows about sacriﬁces. He is skilled in Dhanurveda. Like the great ocean and like Rama, Dasharatha’s son, he
is not agitated. In the battle, a person who followed dharma was killed by Dhrishtadyumna through the use of adharma. On hearing about the preceptor’s death, what did Ashvatthama say? The great-souled one was created for
Dhrishtadyumna’s death, just as Panchala, Yajnasena’s son, was generated for Drona’s destruction. He4 was killed
violently by a cruel and wicked one who did not possess foresight. On hearing about the preceptor’s death, what
did Ashvatthama say?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O bull among men! On hearing that his father had been killed through deception by the
wicked one, Drona’s son’s eyes ﬁlled with tears and he was angry. O Indra among kings! Because of the rage, his
body seemed divine. It was like that of the Destroyer, wishing to consume beings at the end of a yuga. He repeatedly wiped his eyes, which were full of tears. He sighed in anger and spoke these words to Duryodhana. ‘My father was brought down by inferior ones after he had cast aside his weapons. A wicked act has been committed by

those who should have upheld the standard of dharma. Dharma’s son acted ignobly and cruelly. I have heard
everything about all that now. If one is engaged in a battle, there will either be victory, or there will be defeat. O
king! Of the two, death is always praised. If death results in a battle where the ﬁght is according to norms of fairness, there should not be sorrow. This is what brahmanas have said. There is no doubt that my father has gone to
the world reserved for heroes. I should not sorrow for that tiger among men because he has been slain. However,
though he was engaged in dharma, his hair was seized while all the soldiers looked one. That is tearing out my vitals. Because of desire, anger, ignorance, insolence and folly, acts of adharma are performed to subdue others. In
that way, Parshata has performed this great act of adharma. The evil-souled one has acted cruelly and has certainly
disregarded me. Dhrishtadyumna will witness the extremely terrible consequences of that. He has performed an
extremely ignoble deed and so has the liar Pandava. They resorted to deception against the preceptor, when he had
cast aside his weapons. That is the reason the earth will drink Dharmaraja’s blood today. I will use every means to
kill Panchala. I will kill Dhrishtadyumna, the perpetrator of a wicked deed, in the battle, whether the task be a gentle or a violent one. O Kourava! Having killed Panchala, I will obtain peace. O tiger among men! This is the reason
men desire sons, so that they may be saved from great calamities in this world and the next. My father was reduced
to a miserable state, as if he had no relatives, and this was while I, his son and his student, was still alive, like a
mountain. Shame on my divine weapons. Shame on my arms. Shame on my valour. Though he possessed a son,
Drona’s hair was seized. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! I will act so that I am freed of the debt I owe to
my father, who has now gone to the world hereafter. Noble ones never praise themselves. However, because I am
angry at my father’s death, I am now speaking about my manliness. The Pandavas, with Janardana, will witness
my valour today. I will crush all the soldiers, as if it is the end of a yuga. O bull among men! While I am stationed
on my chariot, gods, gandharvas, asuras and rakshasas will be incapable of defeating me in the battle today. In the
world, there is no one superior to me and Arjuna in use of weapons. I will blaze amidst the soldiers, like the rays of
the sun, and use weapons created by the gods. In the battle today, I will use them against the son of the one with
the lean horses.5 I will exhibit my valour and crush the Pandavas. O king! Today, all the directions will be enveloped with showers of my sharp arrows and those on our side will see this. I will shroud everything with nets of
arrows that make a fearful noise. I will bring down the enemy, like trees uprooted by a violent storm. O Kouravya!
Bibhatsu, Janardana, Bhimasena, the twins, King Yudhishthira, the evil-souled Parshata, Shikhandi and Satyaki do
not know the weapons that I possess, or techniques for releasing and withdrawing them. In earlier times, Narayana
appeared before my father in the form of a brahmana, who worshipped him in accordance with the proper rites and
tendered him offerings. Having received them himself, the illustrious one offered to grant him a boon. My father
asked for the supreme narayana weapon. O king! The illustrious one, supreme among the gods, told him,6 “There
will never be another man who will be as great a warrior as you. O brahmana! However, you must never use this
suddenly. This weapon never returns without killing the enemy at whom it has been aimed. O lord! But it is impossible to know whom it will not kill. It might even slay those who should not be killed. Therefore, it should not be
used.7 O scorcher of enemies! In a battle, this great weapon must not be used to kill those who are running away,
those who have cast aside their weapons, enemies who have yielded and those who have sought refuge. In a battle,
if it is used to kill those who should not be slain, it will always oppress the user himself.” My father received it.
The lord also told me, “In a battle, with this weapon, your energy will blaze and you will be able to shower down
many divine weapons.” Having said this, the illustrious lord went to heaven. That is how my relative8 obtained the
narayana weapon. With it, I will drive away the Pandavas, Panchalas, Matysas and Kekayas in the encounter, like
Sachi’s consort9 against the asuras. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With this, my arrows will be showered
wherever I wish and destroy the valour of the enemy. I will be stationed in the battle and bring down innumerable
showers of stones and use arrows with iron heads to drive away the maharathas. There is no doubt that I will bring
down many different kinds of battleaxes. O scorcher of enemies! With the great narayanastra, I will destroy the
enemy and repulse the Pandavas. The wicked Panchala hates his friends, brahmanas and his preceptor. He has performed an extremely despised deed and will not escape from me with his life.’ Having heard Drona’s son, the army
returned.

‘“Those supreme among men blew on giant conch shells. Cheerfully, they sounded drums and thousands of
smaller drums. The earth roared with the sound of hooves and wheels. That tremendous sound echoed on earth, the
sky and heaven. The Pandavas heard that sound, which was like the thunder of clouds. Those best of rathas united
and consulted each other. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having spoken those words, Drona’s son touched
water and invoked the divine narayana weapon.”’
CHAPTER 1144(167)

‘Sanjaya said, “When the narayana weapon was invoked, violent winds mixed with rain began to blow, though
there were no clouds in the sky. The earth trembled and the great oceans were agitated. Instead of ﬂowing towards
the ocean, the rivers ﬂowed in an opposite direction. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The summits of mountains were shattered. Small animals kept the sons of Pandu to the right.10 There was darkness and the sun became
dim. Different kinds of carnivorous beings cheerfully descended there. O lord of the earth! The gods, danavas and
gandharvas were terriﬁed. On seeing ferocity, all the kings became extremely anxious. They were pained and lost
their senses on witnessing the terrible and fearful form of the weapon used by Drona’s son.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! In that battle, Drona’s son was angry because his father had been killed. He was
tormented by severe sorrow and made the soldiers11 rally again. On seeing that the Kurus were attacking, what
consultations did the Pandavas hold, so that Dhrishtadyumna might be protected? Tell me everything.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “Earlier, Yudhishthira had seen that the sons of Dhritarashtra were running away. Now he
heard them make a tremendous noise and spoke to Arjuna. ‘The preceptor, Drona, has been killed by Dhrishtadyumna in the battle, like the great asura, Vritra, slain by the one with the vajra in his hand. O Dhananjaya! The
Kurus lost all hope of being victorious in the battle. They were miserable in their minds. They ﬂed, making up
their minds to protect themselves. With their parshnis and charioteers slain, some swiftly ﬂed on their chariots. The
kings were without ﬂags, standards and umbrellas and the poles of their chariots were shattered. The seats of the
chariots were broken. Some lost their senses and climbed onto horses. Some were frightened and themselves urged
the horses of their chariots with their feet. With the yokes, wheels and axles broken, some were distressed and
quickly ﬂed. Others were dislodged from the backs of elephants and pinned there by iron arrows. Elephants were
killed by the storms of arrows and driven away in the ten directions. Others lost their weapons and armour and
their mounts took to the ground. Others were crushed by broken wheels and horses and elephants. As they ﬂed
from the enemy in fear, they loudly called out to fathers and sons. They lost their energy and were overcome by
depression. They could no longer recognize each other. Some removed the armour from the severely wounded
bodies of sons, fathers, friends and brothers and washed them with water. After Drona was killed, the army was
quickly reduced to such a state. How has it returned again? If you know this, tell me. There are the sounds of horses neighing and elephants trumpeting. This is mingling with the loud sound from the roaring of chariot wheels.
This great and ﬁerce sound has arisen in the ocean of the Kurus. It is repeatedly arising and is making those on my
side tremble. It is my view that this will swallow up the three worlds, together with Indra. I think that this ﬁerce
and loud roar is being made by the wielder of the vajra himself. On Drona being killed, Vasava is appearing on the
side of the Kouravas. Our body hair is standing erect and the rathas and elephants are anxious. O Dhananjaya!
What is this extremely ﬁerce uproar that can be heard there? The Kouravas were in a shattered state. Which maharatha, like the lord of the gods, has rallied them for the sake of ﬁghting in this battle?’
‘“Arjuna said, ‘They are ready to perform ﬁerce deeds, basing themselves on patience. The Kouravas are making a noise and blowing on conch shells, depending on the valour of a person. After the preceptor cast aside his
weapons and was slain, there should be no doubts about who that person is. The sons of Dhritarashtra have resorted to him and are roaring. The mighty-armed one is modest. He is like a crazy elephant in his gait. His face is
glossy and he is the performer of ﬁerce deeds. He has freed the Kurus from their fear. When he was born, Drona
gave the wealth of one thousand cows to brahmanas. That Ashvatthama is roaring. As soon as he was born, the
brave one neighed like Uchchaihshrava and the earth and the three worlds trembled because of this. On hearing
this, an invisible voice named him Ashvatthama then.12 O Pandava! That brave one is roaring now. There was the
one13 who was killed by Parshata, as if he was without a protector. It was an extremely cruel deed and his protec-

tor is now stationed there. Panchala grievously seized my preceptor’s hair. Because of that, and because of his own
manliness, Drona’s son will not forgive him. Because of the kingdom, you have also spoken a falsehood to the preceptor. Though you know about dharma and are known as a virtuous person, you have performed an extremely
grave deed of adharma. “Pandava knows about all forms of dharma. He is also my student. He will not utter a lie.”
Thinking this, he14 believed what you said. You spoke a lie, though you garbed it in the guise of truth when you
spoke to the preceptor, since you said that an elephant had been killed. At this, he discarded his weapons and became indifferent. O king! He was bereft of his senses and became distracted. O lord! You saw what happened. Affectionate towards his son, he was unwilling to ﬁght and was full of sorrow. Abandoning eternal dharma, the preceptor was killed by the student.15 Though he had cast aside his weapons, your preceptor was killed and this was
adharma. If you can, protect Parshata with all your advisers. With his relative slain, he will now be devoured by
the preceptor’s angry son. Even if all of us try, we will not be able to protect Parshata today. He16 is extremely affectionate towards all beings. On hearing that his father was seized by the hair, he will destroy us in the battle today. I loudly exclaimed that the preceptor should be protected. However, transgressing his own dharma, the student
slew the preceptor. We have already spent most of our lives and only a little bit is left. But now, even that little bit
has been tainted by this great act of adharma. He17 was always like a father in his affection. According to dharma,
he was also our father.18 To obtain the kingdom for a brief period, we have killed our preceptor. O lord of the
earth! Dhritarashtra gave the entire earth to Bhishma and Drona and his sons, who were even more valuable. Having obtained such a livelihood from him, he always treated the others19 well. The preceptor always loved us, even
more than his son. He was not subjugated by us in the battle. He was killed by your words, when he cast aside his
weapons. Had he fought, even Shatakratu20 would not have been able to kill him. The preceptor was aged. He always did what was good for us. But we injured him. We have performed an ignoble deed for the sake of the kingdom and because of our limited intelligence. My preceptor had always known that I, Vasava’s son, would have given up everything out of affection for him—sons, brothers, fathers, wives, and even life itself. But because of desire
for the kingdom, I ignored him when he was being killed. O king! O lord! Because of that, I am covered with
shame and have attained hell. He was a brahmana. He was an aged preceptor. He had cast aside his weapons. He
was like a sage. We have killed him today, for the sake of the kingdom. It is better for us to be dead than to remain
alive.’”’
CHAPTER 1145(168)

‘Sanjaya said, “O great king! On hearing Arjuna’s words, the maharathas there did not say anything to Dhananjaya, pleasant or unpleasant. O bull among the Bharata lineage! However, mighty-armed Bhimasena was angry and
spoke these words, censuring Kounteya Arjuna. ‘O Partha! You speak words full of dharma, like a hermit who has
retired to the forest, or like a brahmana rigid in his vows raising his staff. Saving others from injury, protecting
one’s own life from injury and exhibiting forgiveness towards women and the virtuous—with these qualities, a
kshatriya swiftly obtains the earth and attains dharma, fame and prosperity. O extender of the lineage! You are
vested with all the qualities of kshatriyas. It is not proper that you should now speak like one who is ignorant. O
Kounteya! Your valour is like that of Shakra, Shachi’s consort. Like the ocean does not cross the shoreline, you do
not transgress dharma. Which person amongst us will not applaud you? Serving dharma, you pushed back your
rage for thirteen years. O son!21 It is through good fortune that your mind has turned towards your own dharma
today. O one without decay! It is through good fortune that your mind has turned towards non-violence today. With
the kingdom deprived through adharma, you have turned towards dharma. Droupadi was supremely afﬂicted when
she was brought into the assembly hall by the enemy. We were exiled to the forest, with bark and deerskin as garments. We did not deserve this, but we were made to endure it for thirteen years by the enemy. O unblemished one!
These are reasons for anger, but you have abandoned your rage. Yet, you say that you are devoted to the dharma of
kshatriyas in every way. “Remembering all those acts of adharma, I have united with you today. I will kill the inferior ones who have robbed us of the kingdom, together with their followers.” This is what you said earlier, when
we assembled to do battle. “I will strive to the utmost of my capacity.” But you are censuring us now. You have

said that you wish to abide by your own dharma, but you are falsifying those words now. We are afﬂicted by fear
and your words are striking us in our inner organs. O destroyer of enemies! You are pouring a corrosive onto the
sores of those who are wounded. My heart has been shattered, afﬂicted by the stakes of your words. You are great
in your adharma. You do not know what it means to follow dharma. You have not praised us, though we have been
praiseworthy. You have praised one who is not even one-sixteenth part of you.22 You have spoken about your own
self, but not about those who are vested with all the qualities. In my anger, I can rend the earth and shatter the
mountains. I can hurl the terrible and heavy club that is garlanded with gold, and with it I can shatter trees that are
as large as mountains and uproot them like the wind. O bull among men! You should know that your brother is
such a person. O one with inﬁnite valour! You should not be frightened of Drona’s son. O Bibhatsu! Otherwise,
stay here, with all the bulls among men. With the club in my hand, I will defeat him in this great battle.’
‘“Then the son of the king of Panchala spoke to Partha, like Hiranyakashipu speaking to an angry and roaring
Hari.23 ‘O Bibhatsu! The learned ones have laid down certain tasks for brahmanas—ofﬁciating at sacriﬁces, teaching, donations, performance of sacriﬁces, receiving gifts and sixth, studying. O Partha! You have reproached me.
To which of these was Drona, who has been slain by me, devoted? He transgressed his own dharma and devoted
himself to the dharma of kshatriyas. The performer of inferior deeds killed us through the use of superhuman
weapons. He said that he was a brahmana, but resorted to the use of maya. O Partha! He has himself been slain
through the use of maya today. So what? If Drona has been punished by me and his son roars loudly and ﬁercely in
anger, how do I suffer because of that? I do not think it is extraordinary that Drona’s son should only roar in this
way. He is incapable of protecting the Kouravas and will cause their death. You say that you are devoted to dharma
and have described me as my preceptor’s killer. But it was for that reason that I was born from the ﬁre, as the son
of Panchala. O Dhananjaya! How can you describe him as a brahmana or a kshatriya? When he fought in the battle, he thought good and evil acts were the same. Overcome by anger, he used the brahmastra to even kill those
who were unacquainted with the use of weapons. O supreme among men! Why should we not use any means to
kill him? Those who know about dharma say that those who are for adharma are like poison. O Arjuna! You know
about dharma and artha. Why are you censuring me? He was violent and I brought him down from his chariot. O
Bibhatsu! Why are you reproaching me? You should congratulate me. O Partha! In the battle, I have severed the
terrible Drona’s head. He was like the blazing sun and like poison. I should be praised, but you are not praising me.
In the battle, he slew my relatives and not those of anyone else. Having only severed his head, my fever24 has not
been assuaged. My heart is still suffering, because I did not hurl his head, like Jayadratha’s head, into the land of
the nishadas.25 O Arjuna! It has been instructed that not killing one’s enemy is tantamount to adharma. Yet again,
the dharma of kshatriyas is to kill, or be killed. O Pandava! In accordance with dharma, I have killed my enemy in
the battle. This is just as you killed the brave Bhagadatta, your father’s friend.26 Having struck your grandfather27
in the battle, you thought that you were acting in accordance with dharma. When I killed my wicked enemy, why
do you not think that it is dharma? O Arjuna! The eldest Pandava is not a liar. Nor have I acted in accordance with
adharma. The wicked one slew his disciples. Fight and victory will be yours.’”’
CHAPTER 1146(169)

‘Dhritarashtra said, “The great-souled one had studied the Vedas and their branches in the proper way. The complete mastery of Dhanurveda and humility were vested in him. The wicked, violent and evil-souled one, the slayer
of his preceptor, injured such a Drona, the son of a maharshi. In that battle, it was through his favours that those
bulls among men performed superhuman deeds, difﬁcult for the gods and the asuras.28 The evil-acting one injured
Drona while they looked on. Were there no kshatriyas who were enraged? Did they not shame him because of this
wrath? All the Parthas were there and all the kings of the earth who were archers. O Sanjaya! On hearing this, what
did they tell Panchala? Tell me that.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O lord of the earth! On hearing the words of the evil-acting son of Drupada, all the kings of
the earth were silent. They glanced at Arjuna and censured Parshata with their sight. With tears and sighs, they
said, ‘Shame! Shame!’ Yudhishthira, Bhima, the twins, Krishna and the others were shame-faced. O king! But
Satyaki spoke. ‘Is there no man here who will quickly kill this wicked man, the worst of men? He is speaking un-

pleasant words. How are his tongue and head not shattering into a hundred fragments? When the inferior one committed the act of adharma by injuring his preceptor, why was he not brought down? Having performed this evil
deed, he deserves the censure of the Parthas and all the Andhakas and Vrishnis. But he is praising himself in this
assembly of men. Having performed a deed that should not have been performed, you are again showing hatred
towards your preceptor. Because of that, you should be killed by us. You should not remain alive for a single instant. Who other than this wretch among men would kill a virtuous preceptor, who had dharma in his soul, and
then seize him by the hair? O deﬁler of the lineage! You have degraded seven generations of your ancestors and
seven generations of your descendants and deprived them of all their fame. You have spoken to Partha, bull among
men, about Bhishma, but that great-souled one himself decided the means of his death. It was your evil-acting
brother29 who killed him. There is no one on earth who is as wicked as these two sons of Panchala. Your father
truly created Shikhandi for Bhishma’s destruction and the great-souled one only protected him from his death.30
The Panchalas are inferior and have deviated from dharma. They hate their friends and their preceptors. You and
your brother have only obtained censure from virtuous people. If you again speak such words in my presence, I
will bring down your head with this club, which is like the vajra.’ Thus addressed by Satvata Satyaki, Parshata became angry.
‘“He laughed and addressed the enraged one in these harsh words. ‘O Madhava! I have heard you. I have heard
you. But I forgive you. You are yourself ignoble and evil, but are censuring men who are righteous. In this world,
forgiveness is praised. But the wicked should not be forgiven. Evil-souled ones think that forgiving people are
powerless. You are inferior in conduct. You are inferior in your soul. You are wicked in your resolution, from the
tips of your hair to your toes. You wish to censure others. But Bhurishrava’s arm had been severed and he was fasting to death. You were restrained from striking him. What can be more evil than that? In the battle, Drona used his
divine weapons and cornered me in a vyuha. I killed him when he had cast aside his weapons. O cruel one! What
was wicked about that deed? He31 was not ﬁghting. He had cast aside his weapons and was fasting to death, like a
sage. O Satyaki! His arm was severed and he was killed by someone else.32 What about that? The valiant one exhibited his prowess and forced you down on the ground then. Why did you not kill that supreme among men then?
The noble one had already been vanquished by Partha. You then killed Somadatta’s powerful and valiant son.
Wherever Drona scattered the Pandu soldiers, those were the places I ventured to and shot thousands of arrows.
However, you yourself performed an act that is worthy of a chandala.33 You should be reproached. Why are you
censuring me with these harsh words? O worst of the Vrishni lineage! You are the one who has performed a terrible deed, not I. You are the abode of wicked deeds. Do not speak to me again. Hold your tongue. You should not
speak to me after this. This is what I am telling you with my lips. If you again speak to me foolishly in harsh
words, I will ﬁght against you and dispatch you to Vaivasvata’s eternal abode with arrows. O foolish one! One cannot triumph only with dharma. Listen to the acts of adharma they34 have performed. They have earlier deprived
Pandava Yudhishthira through adharma. O Satyaki! They have oppressed Droupadi through adharma. They have
exiled all the Pandavas, with Krishna,35 to the forest. O foolish one! All their possessions were robbed through adharma. It was through adharma that the enemy deprived us of the king of Madra.36 On this side, Bhishma, the
grandfather of the Kuru lineage, was brought down through adharma. O one acquainted with dharma! Bhurishrava
was slain by you through adharma. O Satvata! This is the way the enemy and the Pandaveyas have conducted
themselves in this battle. Though they are brave and knowledgeable about dharma, they wished to ensure victory.
Supreme dharma is difﬁcult to discern. In that way, adharma is extremely difﬁcult to determine. Fight with the
Kouravas. Do not return to your father’s abode.’ Having heard these harsh and cruel words, the handsome Satyaki
seemed to tremble. When he heard these words, Satyaki’s eyes became coppery red with anger. He grasped his
club and sighed like a serpent.
‘“He laid his bow down on his chariot and advanced towards Panchala. In great anger he said, ‘I will not speak
harsh words to you. You deserve to be killed and I will slay you.’ The immensely strong one descended violently,
in rage, on Panchala. His wrath was like that of an enraged Yama. Urged by Vasudeva, the immensely strong Bhimasena leapt down from his chariot and quickly seized him by the arms. The angry and powerful Satyaki was advancing and dragged the powerful Pandava with him, as he tried to hold him back. Bhima, supreme among strong

ones, planted his feet ﬁrmly on the ground and used force to stop the bull among the Shini lineage at the sixth step.
O lord of the earth! As he was seized by the strong one,37 Sahadeva descended from his chariot and spoke these
gentle words. ‘O tiger among men! O Madhava! Among our friends, there are none who are superior to the Andhakas, Vrishnis and Panchalas. The Andhakas and the Vrishnis, especially you and Krishna, do not have any
friends who are superior to us. O Varshneya! Even if they look till the frontiers of the ocean, the Panchalas will not
ﬁnd any friends who are superior to the Pandavas and the Vrishnis. He38 cannot think of a friend who is like you
and you of someone like him. You are to us, as we are to you. You know everything about dharma. Remember the
dharma that one must show towards friends. O bull among the Shini lineage! Control your anger towards Panchala
and be paciﬁed. You should forgive Parshata and let Parshata forgive you. We will also practise forgiveness. There
is nothing superior to forgiveness.’ O venerable one! Shini’s descendant was paciﬁed by Sahadeva. The son of the
king of Panchala laughed and spoke these words. ‘O Bhima! Release Shini’s grandson. Free him. He prides himself in ﬁghting. Let him advance against me, like the wind against mountains. I will destroy his pride with my
sharp arrows. O Kounteya! In the encounter, I will rob him of his love for ﬁghting and of his life. The Kouravas
are advancing. I am alone capable of performing the grave task that has arisen, one that the sons of Pandu have
taken up. Else, let Phalguna counter all of them in battle and I use my arrows to bring down his39 head. He thinks
that I am like the armless Bhurishrava in the battle. Release him. Let him kill me, or let me kill him.’ On hearing
Panchala’s words, the powerful Satyaki sighed like a serpent and trembled, seized by Bhima’s arms. O venerable
one! Vasudeva and Dharmaraja swiftly made great efforts to restrain those two brave ones. Though their eyes were
red with rage, they were restrained by those two great archers. Wishing to ﬁght, those bulls among kshatriyas then
advanced against the enemy in the battle.”’
CHAPTER 1147(170)

‘Sanjaya said, “Drona’s son caused a great carnage among the enemy. He was like the Destroyer, created by destiny to destroy all beings at the end of a yuga. He killed the enemy with his broad-headed arrows. The standards
were like trees. The weapons were like mountain peaks. The slain elephants were like giant mountains. The horses
were strewn around like kimpurushas.40 The bows were like clumps of reeds. There were spears and the roars of
carnivorous creatures. The place was full of large numbers of demons and yakshas. He created a mountain of
corpses. The bull among men then roared powerfully and loudly and again made your son hear his oath. ‘Dharma’s
son, Yudhishthira, disguised himself in the cloak of dharma. While the preceptor was ﬁghting, he made him cast
aside his weapons. Therefore, while he looks on, I will drive away his soldiers. I tell you truthfully that I will rout
them and kill the wicked Panchala. I will kill all of them, if they ﬁght against me in the battle. Know this to be the
truth. Therefore, make your soldiers return.’ On hearing these words, your son made his soldiers return, dispelling
their great fear with a loud roar, like that of a lion. O king! The Kuru and Pandava soldiers clashed again. There
was a ﬁerce encounter, like that between two swelling oceans. Drona’s son incited and rallied the Kouravas. At
Drona’s death, the Pandus and the Panchalas also became ﬁerce. Both sides were extremely cheerful and saw
themselves as victorious. They were enraged, and with great force, advanced on that ﬁeld of battle. O Indra among
kings! It was like a mountain clashing against a mountain, or an ocean against another ocean. That was the way the
Kurus and the Pandavas rushed against each other. The Kuru and Pandava soldiers were delighted and blew on
thousands of conch shells and sounded tens of thousands of drums. The great roar that arose from the soldiers was
like the roar of the ocean when it is churned. It was extraordinary.
‘“Then, Drona’s son invoked the narayana weapon. He aimed it at the Pandu and Panchala armies. Thousands of
arrows, ﬂaming at the tips, appeared in the sky and devoured the Pandavas, like serpents with ﬂaming mouths. O
king! In that great battle, the directions, the sky and the soldiers were enveloped in an instant, like the world being
engulfed by the blazing rays of the sun. O lord of the earth! After this, iron balls appeared, like blazing stellar bodies in the clear sky. The four directions were covered by wonderful shataghnis that were like the ﬁre. They possessed wheels and were sharp as razors. They formed circles and blazed. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The
sky was densely covered with these weapons. On seeing this, the Pandus, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas became
anxious. O lord of men! Wherever the maharatha Pandavas fought, in those spots, that weapon increased in power.

They were slain by that narayana weapon. All of them were consumed, as if by a ﬁre, and became frightened in
that battle. O lord! At the end of the winter, a conﬂagration burns down dry wood. Like that, that weapon consumed the Pandu soldiers. On every side, the soldiers were destroyed by that weapon. On seeing this, the lord Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, was overcome by supreme terror. He saw that his soldiers were running away and in the
midst, the Parthas were bereft of their senses.
‘“Dharma’s son spoke these words. ‘O Dhrishtadyumna! Run away with the Panchala soldiers. O Satyaki! Run
away home, surrounded by the Vrishnis and the Andhakas. Vasudeva, with dharma in his soul, will himself think
of means of saving himself. He is capable of instructing the entire world. How can I say anything to him? We
should no longer ﬁght. I am saying this to all the soldiers. With my brothers, I will enter the ﬁre. In this battle, we
have crossed the ﬁerce oceans that are Bhishma and Drona, extremely difﬁcult for cowards to cross. With all our
soldiers, we are now being submerged in this triﬂe that is Drona’s son.41 Since the preceptor, who was beneﬁcial
towards us, was brought down by me in the battle, let Bibhatsu’s wishes towards me swiftly come true.42 The
child who was Subhadra’s son was unskilled in ﬁghting. He was slain by many skilled and cruel ones and was not
protected by him.43 When she was brought into the assembly hall and sought to be made a slave girl, Krishna44
asked him a question. But he,45 together with his son, ignored her. When everyone was exhausted, he46 gave
Dhritarashtra’s son armour so that he might kill Phalguna and protect Saindhava. He possessed knowledge about
brahmastra and used it against the Panchalas, headed by Satyajit.47 They were making endeavours for your sake
and were completely destroyed. We were exiled and robbed of our kingdom through adharma. Though those devoted to us sought to restrain him, he48 asked us to leave. Our supreme well-wisher, who has performed many
beneﬁcial deeds for us, has been killed.49 Since he has been slain, with all my relatives, I will advance towards my
death.’ When Kounteya had spoken in this way, Dasharha waved his arms and quickly restrained the soldiers from
running away.
‘“He spoke these words. ‘Swiftly lay down your weapons and descend from your mounts and your horses. This
is the method of countering, decreed by the great-souled one.50 All of you descend from the elephants, the horses
and the chariots onto the ground. If you are on the ground and without weapons, this weapon will not kill you.
Wherever warriors ﬁght against the strength of this weapon, in those spots, the Kouravas will become stronger. But
those men who ﬂing away their weapons and descend from their mounts, will not be slain by this weapon in the
battle. But all those who seek to counter it, even in their minds, will be killed, even if they descend to the nether
regions.’ O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing Vasudeva’s words, all of them ﬂung away their weapons
and cast aside any thought of ﬁghting, even in their minds.
‘“O king! On seeing that they wished to cast aside their weapons, Pandava Bhimasena cheerfully spoke these
words. ‘No one should, under any circumstances, cast aside weapons. I will use my arrows to quickly counter the
weapon of Drona’s son. My heavy club is decorated with gold. In this battle, I will roam around like Death and use
it to destroy the weapon of Drona’s son. There is no man who is my equal in valour, just as there is no stellar body
that is equal to the sun. Behold my ﬁrm arms. They are like the trunk of a king of elephants. These are capable of
bringing down a mountain, with its summit. I am the only man who has the might of ten thousand elephants. I am
without a peer, just as the renowned Shakra is amidst the gods in heaven. Let them behold the strength of my arms
and my broad chest in the battle, as I repulse the ﬂaming and blazing weapon of Drona’s son. While the Kurus and
the Pandus look on, if there is no one else who is capable of countering the narayana weapon, I will repulse it today.’ Having thus spoken, Bhima, the scorcher of enemies, advanced against Drona’s son on a chariot that was as
radiant as the sun and roared like the clouds. Kunti’s son was dexterous, swift and valiant and in a short instant,
enveloped him51 with a net of arrows. Drona’s son laughed at this and addressed him.52 He invoked mantras and
shrouded him with arrows that ﬂamed at the tips. In that battle, Partha was enveloped with these. They were like
blazing serpents, with ﬂames emerging from their mouths. They were like golden sparks. O king! In that encounter, Bhimasena’s form was like that of a mountain when the day is done, covered with ﬁreﬂies. O great king!
That weapon of Drona’s son was aimed and increased in its inﬂuence, like a ﬁre fanned by the wind. On seeing
that the weapon, terrible in its power, was increasing in its inﬂuence, all the Pandu soldiers were overcome by

great fear, with the exception of Bhima. All of them laid down their weapons on the ground. All of them alighted
from their chariots, elephants and horses. When they had thrown down their weapons and descended from their
mounts, the great power of that weapon descended on Bhima’s head. All beings, especially the Pandavas, uttered
sounds of lamentation, when they saw that Bhimasena was covered by the energy of that weapon.”’
CHAPTER 1148(171)

‘Sanjaya said, “On seeing that Bhimasena was shrouded by that weapon, Dhananjaya released the varuna weapon
to counter its energy. However, because of Arjuna’s dexterity and because he was covered by energy, no one noticed that he had been covered by the varuna weapon.53 Bhima, with his horses, charioteer and chariot, was covered by the weapon of Drona’s son. He was like a blazing ﬁre in the midst of another ﬁre and it was extremely difﬁcult to look at him. O king! Just as all stellar bodies head towards Mount Asta54 when night is over, all those arrows descended towards Bhimasena’s chariot. O venerable one! Bhima, his chariot, his horses and his charioteer
seemed to be in the midst of a ﬁre created by Drona’s son. It was as if the entire universe, with its mobile and immobile objects, was consumed by a ﬁre at the appointed time,55 which then entered the mouth of the Creator. Thus
did that weapon enter Bhima. It was like the sun entering the ﬁre, or like the ﬁre entering the sun. Such was the energy with which it penetrated that no one could see anything. The power of that weapon extended in the direction
of Bhima’s chariot. And in that battle, the power of Drona’s son increased and there was no one to counter him. All
the soldiers of the Pandus had laid down their weapons and were bereft of their senses. All the maharathas, with
Yudhishthira at the forefront, had turned their faces away.
‘“On seeing all this, the brave and immensely radiant Arjuna and Vasudeva quickly descended from their chariot
and dashed towards Bhima. There was an energy created from the strength of the weapon of Drona’s son. Those
two immensely strong ones resorted to their power of maya and immersed themselves in it. Because they had cast
aside their weapons, because of the use of the varuna weapon and because of their own energy, those two Krishnas
were not burnt by the ﬁre of that weapon. To pacify the narayana weapon, Nara and Narayana56 forcefully
dragged Bhima away, together with all his weapons. While he was being dragged away, maharatha Kounteya57
continued to roar loudly and this fanned the extremely invincible and ﬁerce weapon of Drona’s son. Vasudeva said,
‘O son of Pandu! O Kounteya! Though you have been restrained, why are you not retreating from this battle? If the
descendants of the Kourava lineage could have been defeated through ﬁghting, then we, and all these bulls among
men, would have fought. All those on your side have descended from their chariots. O Kounteya! Therefore, descend from your chariot too.’ Having thus addressed him, Krishna brought him58 down from his chariot, though
he sighed like a serpent and his eyes were red with rage. When he was brought down from the chariot onto the
ground and forced to cast aside his weapons, the narayana weapon, the scorcher of enemies, was paciﬁed. The energy, which was difﬁcult to withstand, became paciﬁed. All the directions and the sub-directions became clear.
Auspicious winds began to blow and the animals and birds were calmed. O lord of men! The mounts and the warriors became cheerful. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When its59 ﬁerce energy was dispelled, the intelligent
Bhima looked resplendent, like the sun that arises at the end of the night. On seeing that the supreme weapon was
paciﬁed, the remnants of the Pandava army stationed themselves, wishing to kill your sons.
‘“O great king! When the weapon was countered and the soldiers were stationed thus, Duryodhana spoke to
Drona’s son. ‘O Ashvatthama! Quickly use that weapon again. The Panchalas are stationed again, desiring
victory.’ O venerable one! Having been thus addressed by your son, Ashvatthama sighed in great distress and
spoke to the king. ‘O king! This weapon cannot be brought back.60 It cannot be used a second time. If brought
back, there is no doubt that it will kill the person who uses it. O lord of men! Vasudeva devised the means for repulsing the weapon. Otherwise, it would have slain the enemy in the battle. There can be defeat or death. But death
is superior to defeat. Having been defeated and forced to cast aside their61 weapons, they are as good as dead.’
Duryodhana replied, ‘O son of the preceptor! O one who is supreme in the knowledge of weapons! If that weapon
cannot be invoked a second time, let the slayers of the preceptor be killed with some other weapon. All the divine

weapons are vested in you, just as weapons are vested in Tryambaka.62 If you so wish, even an enraged Purandara
cannot escape from you.’”
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “When Drona was killed in that inferior way, that weapon was countered and Duryodhana
spoke those words, what did Drona’s son do next? He saw that the Parthas were stationed for battle and were
roaming around at the head of the army, having been freed from the narayana weapon.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “Knowing the manner in which his father had been killed, the one with the tail of the lion on
his banner63 was extremely angry. He cast aside all fear and attacked Parshata. That bull among men struck that
bull among men64 with twenty kshudraka arrows and then powerfully pierced him with another ﬁve. O king!
Dhrishtadyumna was like a powerful ﬁre. O king! He pierced Drona’s son with sixty-three arrows. He used twenty
gold-tufted arrows sharpened on stone to pierce his charioteer and pierced his four horses with four sharp arrows.
Having been pierced and pierced again, Drona’s son made the earth tremble with his roars, as if he was going to
rob all beings of their lives in that great battle. O king! Parshata was powerful, skilled in the use of weapons and
ﬁrm in his resolution. Deciding on death rather than retreat, he attacked Drona’s son. Panchala, supreme among
rathas and possessing an immeasurable soul, showered down arrows on the head of Drona’s son. Enraged in that
battle, Drona’s son enveloped him with arrows. Remembering the death of his father, he pierced him with ten arrows. He used a couple of well-aimed and razor-sharp arrows to sever his standard and his bow. Then, Drona’s son
struck the prince of Panchala with other arrows. In that great battle, Drona’s son deprived him of his horses, charioteer and chariot. He angrily shrouded all his followers with arrows. O lord of the earth! At this, the Panchala soldiers began to ﬂee. They were frightened, distressed and wounded by those arrows.
‘“On seeing that the warriors were retreating and that Dhrishtadyumna was afﬂicted, Shini’s descendant quickly
urged his chariot towards the chariot of Drona’s son. He struck Ashvatthama with eight sharp arrows. He again
struck him violently with twenty arrows that had many different forms. He pierced his charioteer and struck his
four horses with four arrows. The great archer was thus violently struck by arrows of many different forms. However, Drona’s son laughed and spoke these words to Yuyudhana. ‘O Shini’s descendant! I know your preference for
the slayer of the preceptor.65 But when he has been grasped by me, you will not be able to save him.’ Having spoken these words, Drona’s son released a supreme arrow with excellent tufts. It was as radiant as the sun and it was
just as Hari had released his vajra towards Vritra.66 That arrow pierced his armour and having passed through it,
penetrated the ground, like a hissing snake entering a hole. With his armour shattered, the brave one was like an
elephant struck by a goad. Copious quantities of blood ﬂowed from his wounds and he let go of his bow and arrows. He was senseless and covered with blood. He sank down on the ﬂoor of his chariot. On seeing this, his charioteer swiftly bore him away, away from the chariot of Drona’s son.
‘“With another well-tufted arrow with drooping tufts, the scorcher of enemies67 struck Dhrishtadyumna between the eyebrows. He had already been struck and was severely pierced again. Panchala was weak and grabbed
the pole of his standard. O king! He was like a crazy elephant, assailed by a lion. On seeing this, ﬁve brave Pandava rathas quickly advanced—Kiriti, Bhimasena, the Pourava Vriddhakshatra,68 the prince of the Chedis and Sudarshana from Malava. Each of the ﬁve simultaneously struck him with ﬁve arrows. However, Drona’s son shot
twenty-ﬁve arrows and simultaneously severed the ﬁve arrows, which were like venomous serpents, that each of
the ﬁve had released. Drona’s son struck Pourava with seven sharp arrows, Malava with three, Partha69 with one
and Vrikodara with six. O king! All of those maharathas pierced Drona’s son. Together, and separately, they used
gold-tufted arrows that had been sharpened on stone. The prince pierced Drona’s son with twenty arrows, Partha
with eight and each of the others with three arrows. Drona’s son struck Arjuna with six arrows, Vasudeva with ten
and Bhima with ten. He struck the prince with four arrows and used two more to sever his bow and his standard.
Piercing Partha again with a shower of arrows, Drona’s son roared ﬁercely, like a lion. Drona’s son used extremely
sharp and yellow arrows in torrents and covered the front and the rear. The earth, the sky, the ﬁrmament, the directions and the sub-directions were covered with these arrows, which were terrible in form. He was ﬁerce in his energy. He was like Indra in his valour. With three arrows that were released at the same time, he severed the head and
the two arms, which were like Indra’s standard, of Sudarshana, who was stationed on his own chariot. He killed

Pourava with a spear70 and used his arrows to shatter his chariot into fragments. With broad-headed arrows, he
severed his71 arms, which were smeared with excellent sandalwood paste, and his head from his body. The youthful and beloved prince of Chedi was like the blue lotus72 in complexion. Using supreme arrows that were like
blazing ﬂames of ﬁre, he73 laughed and pierced him, dispatching him, with his horses and his charioteer, towards
death. Having slain those two brave warriors in the battle, the lord who was Drona’s son remained unvanquished
and delightedly blew on his large conch shell. All the Panchalas and Pandava Bhimasena were frightened. They
abandoned Dhrishtadyumna’s chariot and ﬂed in different directions. When they were running away in this way,
Drona’s son pursued them and showered down arrows from the rear. He attacked them with great force and was
like Death amidst the Pandu soldiers. In that battle, those kshatriyas were slaughtered by Drona’s son. O king! Terriﬁed of Drona’s son, they ﬂed in all the directions.”’
CHAPTER 1149(172)

‘Sanjaya said, “On seeing that the army was routed, Kunti’s son, Dhananjaya, immeasurable in his soul, advanced
against Drona’s son, wishing to kill him. O king! Rallied because of the efforts of Govinda and Arjuna, those soldiers remained stationed there. It was Vibhatsu alone, supported by the Somakas, the Matsyas and some others,
who returned against the advancing Kouravas. Savyasachi quickly approached the great archer, who bore the mark
of the lion’s tail on his banner. He spoke to Ashvatthama. ‘Show me your strength, your valour, your knowledge,
your manliness, the affection that you bear towards the sons of Dhritarashtra, the hatred you bear towards us and
the great and supreme energy you possess. Parshata, Drona’s killer, will shatter your insolence today. He is like the
ﬁre of destruction and slaughters his enemies in a battle. Clash against him, or against me and Keshava.’”
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O Sanjaya! The preceptor’s son deserves honour and is powerful. He bears affection towards Dhananjaya and Vasava’s son74 bears affection towards him. Bibhatsu has never used such harsh words earlier. Why did Kounteya use such harsh words towards his friend?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “When the prince,75 Pourava Vriddhakshatra and Sudarshana from Malava, who were duly
skilled in the use of weapons, were killed, and Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki and Bhima were defeated, the lord Bibhatsu suffered from great grief, the likes of which he had not felt before. He also remembered the heart-rending
words Yudhishthira had addressed towards him and their hardships and felt miserable in his mind. It was because
of this internal ﬁre that he used indecent and unpleasant words towards Drona’s son. The preceptor’s son deserved
honour and should not have been addressed in such harsh words, deserving of a coward. O king! Having been thus
addressed by Partha in harsh words that struck at the inner chords, the supreme of great archers sighed in rage.
Drona’s son became angry with Partha, and especially with Krishna.
‘“Stationed on his chariot, the valiant one touched the wind.76 He invoked the agneya weapon, which is extremely difﬁcult for even the gods to resist. The preceptor’s son directed this at the masses of enemies, whether
they were visible or invisible. He used mantras to invoke that weapon on a ﬂaming arrow that was like a ﬁre without smoke. The destroyer of enemy heroes was overcome with rage and released it in all the directions. At this, a
tumultuous shower of arrows was generated from the sky. Cold winds began to blow and the sun ceased to radiate
heat. Vultures shrieked hideously in all the directions. With a great roar, blood showered down from the sky. Birds,
animals, cattle and even sages who were rigid in their vows and supremely careful in controlling their souls, lost
all sense of peace. All the great elements were agitated and the sun was dislodged from its course. The three
worlds were tormented, feverish and distressed. Tormented by the energy of that arrow, elephants lay down on the
ground. Desiring to free themselves from that ﬁerce energy, they sighed deeply. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The waterbodies were scorched and beings that lived in the water were burnt and could ﬁnd no peace. Arrows showered down from the sky, the directions and the sub-directions. They descended on the high and the low,
with the force of Garuda or that of the wind. The enemies were burnt and fell down, like trees scorched by a ﬁre.
Giant elephants were burnt and fell down in every direction, shrieking in woe. Their loud lamentation was like the
thunder of the clouds. Other giant elephants were burnt and ﬂed. There were others that were terriﬁed, as if when a
forest is burnt and enveloped by a ﬁerce ﬁre. O venerable one! O lord! Large numbers of horses and large numbers
of chariots were seen to be burnt and looked like the tops of trees consumed in a conﬂagration. Large numbers of

chariots fell down here and there, in thousands. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, it was as if
those soldiers were being burnt by the illustrious Agni. It was like the ﬁre of destruction77 that destroys all beings
at the end of a yuga. O king! On seeing that the Pandava soldiers were being consumed in that great battle, those
on your side were delighted and roared like lions. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those on your side wished
for victory and were cheerful. They quickly sounded thousands of trumpets of many different kinds. O king! In
that great battle, everything was covered in darkness and nothing could be seen, the entire akshouhinis or Pandava
Savyasachi. O king! We have not seen, or heard of, the likes of the weapon that Drona’s son angrily released.
‘“O great king! At this, Arjuna invoked brahmastra. The one who was born from a lotus78 has decreed that this
is capable of repulsing all weapons. That darkness was dispelled in an instant. Auspicious winds began to blow
and the directions became clear. We then beheld an extraordinary sight. An entire akshouhini had been killed, burnt
by the maya of that weapon and their forms could not be distinguished.79 Freed from the darkness, the brave and
great archers, Keshava and Arjuna, were seen together, as if in the sky.80 They were freed and were stationed on a
chariot that was terrible to those on your side. With their ﬂags, standard, horses and supreme weapons, they were
uninjured and resplendent. Immediately, there were sounds of delight among the Pandavas. There were slapping
sounds and those of conch shells and drums. Both the armies had formed the view that they had been killed and
now saw that they had been freed. On seeing that they were uninjured, those on the side of the Parthas were delighted and cheerfully blew on supreme conch shells. Those on your side were distressed. On seeing that those
great-souled ones had been freed, Drona’s son was extremely miserable. O venerable one! He reﬂected for a short
while about what should be done. O Indra among kings! Having thought for some time, he was overcome with sorrow. He released deep and warm sighs and was distracted. Drona’s son cast aside his bow and descended violently
from his chariot. He said, ‘Shame on everything. It is all false.’ Saying this, he ran away.
‘“As he ran away, he encountered the gentle and unblemished Vedavyasa, with the complexion of a cloud. He
saw Vyasa, the abode of Sarasvati.81 Drona’s son saw the extender of the Kuru lineage82 stationed in front of him.
His voice choked with tears and he was extremely miserable. He honoured him and spoke these words. ‘O honoured one! Is this maya? Is this a wish?83 I do not know what has happened. Why have my weapons become fruitless? What have I contravened? This is completely unnatural and is like a defeat of the worlds by the two Krishnas,
who remain alive. It is impossible to cross destiny. This weapon that has been used by me cannot be countered by
asuras, gandharvas, pishachas, rakshasas, serpents, yakshas, birds and men. But having killed only one akshouhini,
this ﬂaming weapon used by me has been calmed. Keshava and Arjuna are mortal. Why have they not been killed
by it? O illustrious one! I am asking you. Give me the complete answer.’
‘“Vyasa replied, ‘You have asked me a question in wonder and the answer is extremely deep. I will tell you
everything. Listen with an attentive mind. The one who is known as Narayana is older than the ancient ones. To
accomplish the objective of the universe, he was born as Dharma’s son.84 Stationing himself on Mount Mainaka,
he performed severe austerities. The immensely energetic one stood there, with his arms upraised. He blazed like
the sun. He was there for sixty-six thousand years. The lotus-eyed one dried his body and subsisted only on air. He
then tormented himself with other great austerities for twice that period. The space between heaven and earth was
ﬁlled with his energy. O son!85 Because of those austerities, he became like Brahma. He then saw the lord of the
world and the universe, the lord who is the creator of the universe. He is supremely difﬁcult to look at and is the
lord of all the gods. He is smaller than the smallest and larger than the largest. This is the wise and supreme Rudra,
bull among the gods. He is mobile and immobile. He is stationed in the hearts of all beings. He is difﬁcult to resist.
He is difﬁcult to look at. His anger is ﬁerce. He is the great-souled one. He is the one who destroys everything. But
he is the one who is generous. He wields a celestial bow and quivers. His armour is golden and his valour is inﬁnite. He holds the Pinaka,86 the vajra, a ﬂaming trident, a battleaxe, a club and a large sword. His brows are excellent. His hair is matted. He wears the circular moon on his head. He is clad in tiger skin. He has a mace and a staff
in his hand. His armlets sparkle. His sacred thread is made up of snakes. He is surrounded by large numbers of
ganas from the universe and innumerable bhutas.87 He is the single one. He is the recipient of austerities. He is
worshipped well by aged and eloquent ones. He is water, heaven, sky, the earth, the moon, the sun, wind and ﬁre.

He is the measure of the universe. He is the one who has not been born. Those who deviate from their vows cannot
see him. Nor can those who hate brahmanas or kill them. He is the source of immortality. Brahmanas, those who
are virtuous in their vows, those who have been cleansed of sin and those who have banished sorrow can see him
in their minds. Because he was established in austerities and because his dharma did not decay, he88 could see the
one with the universal form. Having beheld the lord of the gods, he was delighted in his speech, his mind, his intelligence and his body. Having beheld the origin of the universe, Narayana worshipped the one who wore a garland
of berries89 and was the recipient of supreme radiance. The pervasive lord was the granter of boons and was with
the fair-limbed Parvati. He was Ishana and had not been born. He was without decay. He was the supreme cause.
He did not fade. He worshipped Rudra, the slayer of Andhaka.90 With great reverence, the lotus-eyed one91 worshipped Virupaksha.92
‘“‘“O one who should be worshipped!93 All the beings originate in you. You are the protector of the universe.
You are ﬁrst among all the gods. You are the one who created the earth in earlier times and protected it. You have
penetrated it now. The gods are your creation. Gods, asuras, serpents, rakshasas, pishachas, men, birds, gandharvas, yakshas and other masses of beings and the entire universe—have all been created from you. We know this.
All the deeds done for Indra, Yama, Varuna, the lord of riches, Mitra, Tvashtra and Soma are actually being offered
to you.94 Form, light, sound, the sky, wind, touch, taste, water, scent, desire, Brahma, the brahman, the brahmanas,
everything that is immobile and everything that is mobile originate in you. Vapour rises from bodies of water and
becomes separate raindrops. At the time of destruction, they unite and become one again. Those who are learned
know the separate and united nature of water and beings. Through your divine mind, you have created two birds95
and a pippala tree with words as branches and seven guardians.96 There are ten others that hold up the city.97
They have been created by you. But you are distinct from them. The past, the present and the future cannot be tampered with. However, they have originated from you and so have this earth and this universe. I am devoted to you.
Favour the one who is worshipping you. Do not harm me through that which is pleasant or that which is unpleasant. You are the soul of all souls. You are beyond comprehension. Learned ones who know you as the seed attain
the brahman. I wish to satisfy you through my worship. O one who is worshipped by the gods! I desire to think
about you. Grant me the boons that I desire, even if they are extremely difﬁcult to obtain. I am worshipping you.
Do not hide yourself from me.”’
‘“Vyasa said, ‘Nilakantha,98 the wielder of Pinaka, the one whose soul cannot be thought of, granted the boons
that the foremost among the gods,99 who deserved them, desired. Nilakantha said, “O Naryana! Through my
favours, your strength and soul will be immeasurable, among men, gods and gandharvas. Gods, asuras, giant serpents, pishachas, gandharvas, men, rakshasas, birds, snakes and other beings born in this universe will not be able
to withstand you. The gods will not be able to defeat you in a battle. Through my favours, no one will ever be able
to cause you injury through weapons, the vajra, ﬁre, wind, an object that is wet or dry, or an object that is mobile
or immobile. Even if you advance in battle against me, you will be superior.” In ancient times, these were the
boons that were obtained by Shouri. It is that god who is roaming around now,100 confounding the earth with his
maya. It is through his austerities that the great sage named Nara was born. He is equal to that god and always
know him to be Arjuna. Those two supreme rishis are said to be older than the gods. To accomplish the objectives
of the world, they are born from one yuga to another. O immensely intelligent one! You have also performed all
the great deeds and austerities. Know that your energy and anger have also been born from Rudra. You were as
wise as a god. Knowing that the universe is pervaded by Bhava,101 you yourself emaciated yourself so as to
please him. O one who grants honours! You created a new and pure idol of that great being and worshipped him
with homage, offerings and meditation. Having been thus worshipped by you in earlier times, the god was satisﬁed. He granted you many splendid boons that you desired in your heart. Like them, from one yuga to another, you
worshipped that god in the form of a linga102 and the splendid outcome is your birth, deeds, austerities and yoga.
Knowing all the forms of Bhava, one who worships the lord in the form of a linga, obtains eternal knowledge
about his own self and about the sacred texts. This is the way the siddhas and the supreme rishis have worshipped

him, desiring a supreme and eternal station in the world hereafter. Keshava is devoted to Rudra and has been generated from Rudra. The eternal Krishna should be worshipped in all sacriﬁces. He who knows Bhava to be the origin of all beings and worships the lord in the form of a linga, he is the one who pleases the one with the bull on his
banner the most.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “On hearing these words, Drona’s maharatha son bowed in obeisance before Rudra and came to
show Keshava the greatest reverence. With his soul under control and with his body hair standing up, he showed
his respects to the maharshi. He glanced towards the soldiers and asked them to withdraw.103 O lord of the earth!
When Drona had been brought down in the battle, the Kouravas were distressed and withdrew. So did the Pandavas. O king! Having fought for ﬁve days and having killed many soldiers, the brahmana, learned in the Vedas,
went to Brahma’s world.”’
CHAPTER 1150(173)

‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O Sanjaya! When the atiratha Drona was killed there, what did those on my side and the
Pandavas do next?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “When atiratha Drona was killed by Parshata and the Kouravas were routed, Dhananjaya,
Kunti’s son, saw a great wonder that signiﬁed his victory. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He went to Vyasa,
who had come there, and asked him about this. ‘O great sage! In the battle, while I was slaying the enemy with my
bright arrows, I saw a man advancing in front of me. His complexion was like that of the ﬁre. In whatever direction he advanced, with a blazing and upraised spear, in that direction, the enemy was seen to be shattered. His feet
did not touch the earth and he did not hurl his spear. But because of his energy, thousands of spears were released
from that spear. He is the one who routed the entire enemy, though people think I routed them. From the rear, I
only pursued the soldiers whom he had scorched. O illustrious one! O great Krishna!104 Who was that supreme
being? Tell me. He had a spear in his hand and his energy was like that of the sun.’
‘“Vyasa replied, ‘That being is the ﬁrst among the Prajapatis. He is the lord of all energy. He is the god of the
earth, the sky and heaven. He is the lord and god of all the worlds. O Partha! You have seen Shankara, Ishana, who
is the granter of boons. Seek refuge with the god who is the origin of everything. He is the lord of the universe. He
is Mahadeva. He is great-souled. He is Ishana. He is the matted Shiva. He is the three-eyed one. He is the mightyarmed Rudra. He is the one with the tuft on his head. He is the one who is attired in rags. He is the one who is generous towards his devotees. Boons are obtained through his favours. The lord’s companions are divine and have
many different forms. There are dwarfs, those with braided hair, those whose heads are shaved, those who are
short in the neck and large in the stomach. Others are giant in form, great in endeavour and some with large ears. O
Partha! Their faces and feet are distorted and their garments are strange. These are the ones who worship Mahadeva Maheshvara. O son!105 He is Shiva. He is the energetic one. O Partha! In that ﬁerce battle, when the body hair
stood up, it is he who preceded you through his favours. That army was protected by great archers and strikers like
Drona, Karna and Kripa. O Partha! Who other than that great archer and god could think of countering it, even in
the mind? When Maheshvara strides around in that form, who can venture to stand in front of him? He was the one
who was stationed in front of you. There is no being in the three worlds who is his equal. When he is enraged in a
battle, even his scent causes the enemy to lose its senses, tremble and fall down, slain in large numbers. The gods
who are stationed in heaven bow down before him. So do other men in this world and men who wish to attain
heaven. The god grants boons to his devotees. He is Rudra and Shiva, the consort of Uma. Through him, one can
obtain happiness in this world and attain the supreme objective in the hereafter. O Kounteya! Bow down before
him. He is eternal peace. He is Rudra. He is the one with the dark blue throat. He is the most subtle. He is extremely radiant. He is the one with knotted hair. He is ﬁerce. His eyes are tawny. He is the one who grants boons. He is
the one who is towards the south. He is not manifest. He is the one with the hair. He is the one with virtuous conduct. He is Shankara. He is the object of desire. He is tawny-eyed. He is the being known as Sthanu. His hair is
tawny. He is shaven. He is lean. He is broad. He is the one who gives light. He is an excellent place of pilgrimage.
He is the lord of the gods. He is impetuous. He has many forms. He is Sharva. He is beloved. He wears excellent
garments. He wears a headdress. He has a handsome face. He has a thousand eyes. He is gentle. He dwells in the

mountains. He is peace. He is the guardian. He is attired in bark. His arms are golden. He is ﬁerce. He is the lord of
the directions. He is the lord of rain. He is the lord of beings. Bow down before him. He is the lord of trees. He is
also the lord of waters. His form is covered in trees. He is in the midst of the soldiers. He is the one who bears
oblations to the gods. He is the archer. He is Bhargava.106 He has many forms. He is the lord of the universe. He
is attired in rags. He has a thousand heads. He has a thousand faces. He has a thousand arms. He has a thousand
feet. O Kounteya! Seek refuge with him. He is the granter of boons. He is the lord of the universe. He is the consort of Uma.
‘“‘He is Virupaksha. He is the one who destroyed Daksha’s sacriﬁce. He is the lord of subjects. He is terrible.
He is the lord of beings. He is without decay. His locks are matted. He moves like a bull. His navel is like that of a
bull. He has a bull on his banner. He is as proud as a bull. He is the lord of bulls. He is horned like a bull. He is a
bull among bulls. He bears the signs of a bull. He is as generous as a bull. He is a bull. His eyes are like those of a
bull. A bull is his weapon. His arrows are a bull. Bulls were created from him. He is Maheshvara. He possesses a
giant stomach. He possesses a gigantic form. He is seated on the skin of a leopard. He is the lord of the worlds. He
is generous. His head is shaven. He is the brahman. He is devoted to brahmanas. He has a trident in his hand. He is
the granter of boons. The lord wields a sword and a shield. He wields the Pinaka and a broken battleaxe.107 He is
the protector and the lord of the worlds. I seek refuge with that god. I seek refuge with the one who is attired in
skins. I bow down before the lord of the gods, who is the friend of Vaishravana.108 I bow down before the one
who is well attired, whose vows are excellent and who is a great archer. He is the one who bears oblations to the
gods with his hands. He is the one who cheerfully wields a bow. He is the archer. He is the arrow. He is the bow.
He is the preceptor in using the bow. He is the archer. He is the god who is ﬁerce in his weapons. I bow down before the supreme among the gods. I salute the one with many forms. I salute the one who has many bows. I bow to
Sthanu, to the one who always has excellent vows, to the excellent archer. I bow to the one who destroyed Tripura.
I bow to the one who struck Bhaga.109 I bow to the lord of trees and the lord of men. I bow to the one who is always the lord of waters and the lord of sacriﬁces. He is the one who uprooted Pusha’s teeth.110 He is three-eyed.
He is the granter of boons. He is Nilakantha. I bow before the one who is tawny and whose hair is golden. The intelligent Mahadeva’s deeds are divine. I will recount them, as I know them and as I have heard them. When he is
enraged, the gods, the asuras, the gandharvas and the rakshasas in the world can ﬁnd no happiness, even if they
hide in caverns. Bhava destroyed the sacriﬁce111 in his wrath and later granted them freedom from fear. He released an arrow from his bow and roared loudly. At that time, the prosperous gods could ﬁnd no peace. In his violent rage, Maheshvara destroyed the sacriﬁce. All the worlds were anxious when his bowstring thundered against
his palms. O Partha! The gods and the asuras succumbed and fell down. The waters were agitated and the entire
earth trembled. The mountains were shattered and the elephants in charge of the directions were confused. The
world was blind because of darkness and the light could not be seen. The radiance of the sun and all the stellar
bodies was destroyed. The rishis were frightened and sought peace and happiness for themselves, as well as for all
beings. They performed auspicious rites. Shankara laughed and advancing towards Pusha, who was then eating the
sacriﬁcial cake, he uprooted his teeth. At this, the gods trembled and ﬂed. They bowed down before him. He again
afﬁxed and aimed a ﬂaming arrow towards the gods and they decided that they would assign a special share for
Rudra in sacriﬁces. O king! In fright, the thirty gods sought refuge with him. Once his anger had been paciﬁed, he
restored the sacriﬁce again. Because of that, the gods are afraid of him, even now. In ancient times, the brave asuras had three cities in the sky. They were large and splendid. One was made out of iron, another out of silver, and
the last out of gold. The iron one belonged to Tarakaksha, the silver to Kamalaksha and the splendid golden one to
Vidyunmali. With all his weapons, Maghavan was incapable of penetrating them. Oppressed, all the immortals
then went to Rudra and sought refuge with him. All those great-souled gods, together with Vasava, said, “O Rudra!
The animals ﬁercely slaughtered in all the rites will belong to you. O lord of the universe! Therefore, bring down
these asuras.” Having been thus addressed and with the welfare of the gods in mind, he remained immobile for a
thousand years.112 When the three cities came together in the sky, he shattered them with an arrow that had three
barbs and three joints. The danavas in the cities were incapable of glancing at the arrow. It was made out of the ﬁre
of destruction and the essences of Vishnu and Soma.

‘“‘Uma had a child on her lap and he had ﬁve tufts of hair on his head.113 She asked the gods, “Who is this?”
The lord paralysed the arms of the angry Shakra, with the vajra in his hand.114 This is the illustrious god. He is the
lord and master of all the worlds. With Prajapati,115 all the gods then went to the god who is the lord of the universe. He was like the rising sun in his splendour. Brahma approached Maheshvara. On seeing him and on knowing that he was supreme, the grandfather worshipped him. The gods gratiﬁed Uma and Rudra. The arm of the
wielder of the vajra regained its natural state. With his wife, the illustrious one, with the mark of the bull on his
banner, the destroyer of Daksha’s sacriﬁce, the foremost among the gods, was pleased with the gods. He is Rudra.
He is Shiva. He is Agni. He is Sharva. He is everything. He is Indra. He is Vayu. He is the Ashvins. He is lightning. He is Bhava. He is Parjanya. He is Mahadeva. He is the unblemished one. He is the moon. He is Ishana. He
is the sun. He is Varuna. He is Time. He is the Destroyer. He is Death. He is Yama. He is day. He is night. He is the
month. He is the fortnight. He is the season. He is the twilight. He is the year. He is the Creator. He is the Ordainer.
He is the soul of the universe. He is the one who performs all deeds in the universe. Though he has no form, he is
the one who has the forms of all the gods. The god is praised by all the gods. He is one and he is many. He is in
hundreds. He is in thousands. He is in hundreds of thousands. Such is Mahadeva. He is the illustrious one who has
not been born. I am incapable of reciting all the qualities of the illustrious one. Those who are grasped by all the
planets,116 those who are full of all kinds of sin, if they seek refuge with the one who is the recourse, will be freed
by the one who is easily gratiﬁed. He grants life, health, prosperity, wealth and splendid objects of desire to men,
and takes them away again. He pervades the world, engaged in good and bad for mankind. He is known as the lord
who grants objects of desire and prosperity. He is Maheshvara. He is the supreme lord for all beings. He pervades
the universe in many diverse kinds of forms. He is established in the ocean as the mouth of the gods.117 This god
always resides in cremation grounds. This lord is worshipped in places where only brave ones go.118 His many
forms are ﬂaming and terrible. In this world, men speak about them and worship them. In this world, he possesses
many names, signifying grave importance. They are based on his greatness, his power and his deeds. In the Vedas,
the great-souled and inﬁnite Rudra has been praised in the supreme shatarudiya hymn.119 The god is the lord of
all desire, whether they are divine or human. The illustrious one is the lord of all the gods. He pervades the universe in his greatness. Brahmanas and sages praise him as the ﬁrst among beings. He is the ﬁrst among the gods.
The wind was created from his mouth. He always protects all animals and sports with them. Because he is their
lord, he is known as Pashupati.120 He is always stationed in the linga, engaged in brahmacharya. Because he
brings greatness to the world, he is known as Maheshvara.121 The rishis, the gods, the gandharvas and the apsaras
worship his linga, which is stationed in an upwards direction. Because of this worship, Maheshvara is gratiﬁed. He
is happy and gratiﬁed. Shankara is delighted. He has many forms, in the past, the present and the future, in the mobile and the immobile. That is the reason he is known as Bahurupa.122 One of his eyes blazes and he seems to
have eyes in all directions. He consumes all the worlds in his anger. That is the reason he is known as Sarva.123
Because he adopts the form of smoke, he is known as Dhurjati.124 Because he is the god of the universe, he is
known as Vishvarupa.125 The three goddesses, the sky, the water and the earth, worship him as the lord of the universe. He is known as Tryambaka.126 He is always engaged in everything that is beneﬁcial and every kind of
deed, desiring the welfare of men. That is the reason he is known as Shiva.127 He possesses a thousand eyes. He
possesses an inﬁnite number of eyes. His eyes are in every direction. Because his greatness is in the universe, he is
known as Mahadeva.128 He is stationed in his linga form, ﬂaming at the top. He is always the source of life and its
preservation. That is the reason he is known as Sthanu.129 He is in the bodies of beings, whether they are sound or
unsound. He is stationed in the wind and as the prana and apana breath of life in beings.130 He who worships the
image of the linga, always obtains great prosperity, having worshipped the linga. Below his thighs, the lower half
of his body is ﬁery. The upper half is cool and auspicious.131 Half of his body is said to be Agni and half is said to
be Soma. His auspicious and great form blazes most in energy, among all the gods. Among men, his resplendent
and ﬁerce form is known as Agni. He practises brahmacharya in that auspicious form. With his other terrible form,

he is the lord who destroys everything. He is the consumer. He is ﬁerce. He is the powerful Agni, the consumer of
ﬂesh, blood and marrow. That is the reason he is known as Rudra.132
‘“‘O Partha! This was the god Mahadeva who was stationed in front of you. You saw the wielder of Pinaka in
the battle, destroying the enemy. In the battle, this was the illustrious god who advanced in front of you. He is the
one who gave you the weapons with which you destroyed the danavas.133 O Partha! The sacred shatarudiya in the
Vedas praises the god of the gods. It is excellent, famous and brings life and all that is auspicious. It accomplishes
all desire. It is sacred and destroys all sin. It destroys all wickedness and dispels all kinds of misery. The hymn is
always heard by men in four different forms.134 They triumph over all their enemies and attain the great world of
Rudra. The great-souled, auspicious and divine one acted thus in battles. He who reads the shatarudiya, or hears it,
is always uplifted. The god is the lord of the universe. A man who is always devoted to him, obtains the boon of
getting all the objects of desire. Such a man pleases Tryambaka. O Kounteya! Advance towards the battle. You
will not confront defeat. Janardana, your adviser and your protector, is by your side.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “O destroyer of enemies! O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Having addressed Arjuna in the
battle, Parashara’s son135 went away to the spot he had arrived from.”’
This concludes Drona Parva.

