Chapter 1151(1)
said, ‘O king! After Drona had been killed, the kings, with Duryodhana at the forefront, were
V aishampayana
extremely anxious in their minds. They went to Drona’s son. They sorrowed and were dispirited because the
inﬁnitely energetic Drona had been killed. In their grief, they surrounded the son of Sharadvati.2 For some time,
they comforted him by recounting the reasons given in the sacred texts. However, once night arrived, those lords
of the earth went to their own camps. But, in particular, the son of the suta,3 King Suyodhana, Duhshasana and
Shakuni could not sleep. In their camps, the Kouravyas and the lords of the earth found no cheer. They thought of
that terrible destruction and could not sleep. Together,4 they spent the night in Duryodhana’s camp and thought
about the extremely ﬁerce enmity that they had unleashed on the great-souled Pandavas. They had oppressed
Krishna5 at the time of gambling with the dice and had brought her to the assembly hall. They thought of that and
repented. They became extremely anxious. They thought of the hardships the Parthas had confronted on account of
the gambling match. O king! As they thought about these difﬁculties, the moment seemed to last for a hundred
years. Then, the clear morning dawned and they went through the prescribed rites. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All of them performed these necessary tasks and having performed these necessary tasks, they were somewhat reassured. When the sun arose, they instructed that the soldiers should be yoked and departed. Karna was
made the overall commander and the auspicious ceremonies were performed. The foremost among brahmanas
were praised and given vessels full of curds, clariﬁed butter, parched rice, golden coins, cattle, gold and extremely
expensive garments. Bards, raconteurs and minstrels prayed that their victory and prosperity might increase. O
king! In similar fashion, the Pandavas also performed all the morning rites. O king! Making up their minds to ﬁght,
they emerged from their camps. As the Kurus and the Pandavas wished to kill each other, a tumultuous battle commenced and it made the body hair stand up. O king! When Karna was the overall commander, the battle between
the Kuru and Pandava soldiers lasted for two days. It was wonderful to see. After having caused a great slaughter
of the enemy in the battle, Vrisha6 was brought down by Phalguna, while all the sons of Dhritarashtra looked on.
Sanjaya then went to the city of Nagasahvya7 and told Dhritarashtra everything that had transpired in
Kurujangala.’8
Janamejaya said, ‘Having heard that Drona had been killed by the enemy in the battle, the aged king, Ambika’s
son,9 had been overcome by supreme grief. O supreme among brahmanas! On hearing that Karna, Duryodhana’s
well-wisher, had been slain, he must have been miserable. How could he sustain his life? The king’s hopes for the
victory of his sons had been based on him. On hearing that he had been killed, how could Kouravya sustain his
life? Even when there is a hardship, I think that it is very difﬁcult for men to die, since, despite hearing that Karna
had been slain, the king did not give up his life. O brahmana! That was also true of Shantanu’s aged son,10 Bahlika, Drona, Somadatta and Bhurishrava. Many other well-wishers, sons and grandsons were also brought down. O
brahmana! On hearing this, I think that it must have been very difﬁcult for the king to remain alive. O one rich in
austerities! Tell me everything about this in detail. I am not satisﬁed with hearing about the great conduct of my
ancestors.’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O great king! When Karna was slain, with a distressed mind, Gavalgana’s son11 set out in
the night for Nagapura,12 on horses that were as ﬂeet as the wind. He reached Hastinapura with great anxiety in
his mind. He went to Dhritarashtra’s place, where, the number of well-wishers had declined.13 He saw the king,
who was overcome by lassitude and was devoid of energy. Joining his hands in salutation, he bowed his head at the

king’s feet. He worshipped Dhritarashtra, lord of the earth, in accordance with the prescribed rites. He then spoke
these words. “Alas! I am Sanjaya. O lord of the earth! Are you happy? You have confronted this state because of
your own sins. I hope you are not confounded now. You did not follow the beneﬁcial advice of Vidura, Drona,
Gangeya14 and Keshava. Are you distressed when you remember that? In the assembly hall, Rama, Narada and
Kanva spoke beneﬁcial words to you, but you did not accept them.15 Are you distressed when you remember that?
Remembering that the well-wishers who were engaged in your welfare, with Bhishma and Drona as the foremost,
have been killed by the enemy in the battle, are you distressed?” Having been thus addressed, the king joined his
hands in salutation before the son of the suta.16 He sighed deeply. Oppressed by sorrow he spoke these words. “O
Sanjaya! The brave Gangeya, who was well versed in the use of divine weapons, has been brought down. So has
the great archer, Drona, and my mind is severely distressed. The energetic one17 was born from the Vasus. The armoured one slaughtered ten thousand rathas. He has been killed by Yajnasena’s son, Shikhandi, who was protected
by the Pandaveyas. My mind is severely distressed. Bhargava gave supreme weapons to the great-souled one and
when he was a child, Rama himself taught him Dhanurveda.18 It is through his favours that the immensely strong
Kounteya princes and many other lords of the earth became maharathas. Drona was a great archer and unwavering
in his aim. On hearing that he has been killed by Dhrishtadyumna in the battle, my mind is severely distressed. In
the three worlds, there was no man who was his equal in the sacred texts.19 On hearing that Drona had been killed,
what did those on my side do? Using his valour, the great-souled Pandava Dhananjaya dispatched the army of the
samshaptakas to Yama’s abode. The narayana weapon used by Drona’s intelligent son was repulsed.20 After this,
and when the remainder of the army was slain and driven away, what did those on my side do? I think that they
must have been immersed in an ocean of grief. When Drona was killed, they must have been like people on an
ocean whose boat had been shattered. O Sanjaya! What were the facial complexions of Duryodhana, Karna, Bhoja
Kritavarma, Shalya, the king of Madra, Drona’s son, Kripa, my remaining sons and the others when the soldiers
ﬂed? Tell me that. O son of Gavalgana! Tell me everything, exactly as it happened in the battle. Tell me everything
about the Pandaveyas and those on my side.” Sanjaya replied, “O venerable one! On hearing what transpired between the Pandaveyas and the Kouraveyas, you should not be distressed. This is destiny and your mind should not
be full of grief. Sometimes, what should not happen, happens to a man. And sometimes, what should happen, does
not. Therefore, learned ones do not grieve over that which has not been obtained, or what has been obtained.”
Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! On hearing this, my mind is not distressed. I think this is because of what destiny
has ordained earlier. Tell me what you wish to.” ’

Chapter 1152(2)
‘S anjaya said, “When Drona, the great archer, was killed, your maharatha sons became pale
in their faces. They grieved and were bereft of their senses. O lord of the earth! All of them
held weapons in their hands, but were silent. They were oppressed by grief and did not look
at each other, or speak to each other. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that
they were so distressed, your soldiers were also miserable and glanced upwards, extremely
terriﬁed. O Indra among kings! The weapons of those who remained were smeared in blood.
On seeing that Drona had been brought down, these dropped from their hands. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! O great king! But some21 still hung down from their hands and were
seen to be like stars in the ﬁrmament. O great king! They were stationed there, dispirited and
bereft of enterprise. On seeing his own army in that state, King Duryodhana spoke these
words. ‘I am ﬁghting on the basis of the valour in your arms. Depending on this, I have challenged the Pandaveyas to this battle. With Drona having been killed in the battle, I discern
that you are distressed. All the warriors who are ﬁghting in the battle are being killed. When
ﬁghting in a battle, there may be victory, or there may be death. What is strange about this?
Face all the directions and ﬁght. Behold the great-souled warrior Karna Vaikartana in the
battle. The immensely strong and great archer is roaming around, possessing divine
weapons. Dhananjaya, Kunti’s son, is frightened of ﬁghting with him. He always retreats before that wrathful one, like small animals before a lion. The immensely strong Bhimasena
possesses the strength of ten thousand elephants. But in a human battle, he was reduced to a
miserable state.22 The brave Ghatotkacha knew the use of maya. Using the divine weapon,
the invincible spear, in the battle, he killed him and roared loudly.23
The intelligent one’s valour is difﬁcult to cross. He is unwavering in his aim. You will witness the inexhaustible strength in his arms in the battle today. You will behold both the
great-souled Radheya and Drona’s son act against the Pandu and Panchala soldiers. All of
you are brave, wise and born in noble lineages. You will witness each other’s good conduct
and skill in the use of weapons today.’ O great king! When the king had spoken in this way,
the immensely strong Vaikartana Karna roared like a lion. As all of them looked on, he
fought with the Srinjayas, Panchalas, Kekayas and Videhas and caused great destruction, releasing hundreds of showers of arrows from his bow. They seemed to be linked head to tail,
like a ﬂock of bees. The spirited one afﬂicted the Panchalas and Pandavas. He killed thousands of warriors and was brought down by Arjuna.” ’

Chapter 1153(3)
said, ‘O great king! On hearing this, Dhritarashtra, Ambika’s son,
V aishampayana
was seen to be overcome by great grief. He thought that Suyodhana had already
been killed. He lost his senses and fell down on the ground, like an elephant that had
lost its consciousness. That supreme among kings was senseless and fell down on the
ground. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! A great lamentation arose among the
women. That sound ﬁlled the earth, everywhere. The Bharata women were immersed
in a great and terrible ocean of grief. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Gandhari approached the king. All those from the inner quarters24 lost their senses and fell down
on the ground. O king! At this, Sanjaya comforted those distressed ones. Miserable,
copious quantities of tears ﬂowed from their eyes. He repeatedly assured the trembling women. In every direction, they were like plantain trees that had been whirled
by a storm. Vidura sprinkled the Kourava king, the lord who had wisdom for his
sight,25 with water and comforted him. O king! He slowly regained his senses and
saw the ladies. O lord of the earth! The king seemed to be mad and stood there,
silently. He reﬂected for a long time and sighed repeatedly. He censured his sons in
many ways and applauded the Pandavas. He censured his own intelligence and that
of Shakuni Soubala. He thought for a long time and trembled repeatedly. The king
then used his mind to restrain himself. Resorting to patience, he asked Sanjaya, the
suta who was the son of Gavalgana. “O Sanjaya! I have heard the words that you
have spoken to me. O suta! Has my son, Duryodhana, already gone to Yama’s
abode? O Sanjaya! Tell me everything accurately, even if you have told it to me earlier.” O Janamejaya! Having been thus addressed by the king, the suta replied, “O
king! The great archer, Vaikartana, was killed, with his maharatha sons and brothers
and so were the sons of other sutas.26 In the battle, Duhshasana was killed by the illustrious and angry Pandava Bhimasena, who drank his blood.” ’

Chapter 1154(4)
said, ‘O great king! On hearing these words, Dhritarashtra, Ambika’s son, became anxious. His
V aishampayana
senses were overcome with grief. He spoke to the suta, Sanjaya. “O son!27 All this is the result of my evil policy. My mind and my soul are overcome. On hearing that Vaikartana has been killed, the sorrow is tearing out my
inner organs. He was skilled in the use of supreme weapons. This is like a stake and I wish to cross the ocean of
grief. Among the Kurus and the Srinjayas, who are the ones who remain alive and who are dead?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! Shantanu’s son28 was brought down. He was unassailable and powerful. He killed
ten thousand Pandava warriors for each of ten days. The great archer, Drona, was invincible. The one with the
golden chariot roamed around amidst the Panchala rathas and killed warriors. Thereafter, he was slain. Having
slain half the soldiers29 who remained after the slaughter by the great-souled Bhishma and Drona, Vaikartana Karna was killed. O great king! The immensely strong, Prince Vivimshati, killed hundreds of warriors from the Anarta
region. He was then killed in the battle. Remembering the duty of kshatriyas, your brave son, Vikarna, stood stationed, facing the enemy, though he was without mounts and without weapons. Bhimasena remembered the diverse and extremely terrible hardships caused by Duryodhana and his own pledge and brought him down.30 Having performed extremely difﬁcult deeds, the immensely strong princes from Avanti, Vinda and Anuvinda, went to
Vaivasvata’s abode.31 O king! The immensely valorous Jayadratha was the foremost among those from the Sindhu
kingdom. The brave one controlled ten kingdoms and he was always obedient to your instructions. Having vanquished eleven akshouhinis with his sharp arrows, Arjuna killed him.32 Duryodhana’s son was spirited and invincible in battle. He followed his father’s instructions and was brought down by Subhadra’s son.33 Duhshasana’s son
was brave and possessed strength of arms. He prided himself in battle and was dispatched to Yama’s abode by
Droupadi’s sons.34 Bhagadatta was the lord of the kiratas35 and those who dwelt along the shores of the ocean.
He had dharma in his soul and was the revered and beloved friend of the king of the gods. That lord of the earth
was always devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. Through Dhananjaya’s valour, he went to Yama’s abode.36 O
king! The immensely illustrious and brave Bhurishrava, son of the Kourava Somadatta, was killed by Satyaki in
the battle.37 Shrutayu from Ambashtha was a foremost archer among the kshatriyas. He fearlessly roamed around
in the battle and was killed by Savyasachi.38 O great king! Your son, Duhshasana, was skilled in the use of
weapons and was invincible in battle. He was brought down by Bhimasena.39 O king! Sudakshina possessed many
thousands of wonderful armies of elephants. Savyasachi slew him in the battle.40 The lord of Kosala killed many
hundreds of the enemy and through the valour of Subhadra’s son, was sent to Yama’s abode.41 Having fought with
many warriors and Bhimasena, Chitrasena, your maharatha son, was brought down by Bhimasena.42 The handsome and brave son of the king of Madra increased the terror of his enemies. He wielded a sword and a shield and
was brought down by Subhadra’s son.43 The immensely energetic Vrishasena was Karna’s equal in battle. He was
swift in the use of weapons and did not deviate from his aim. Dhananjaya remembered Abhimanyu’s death and the
pledge that he had made and while Karna looked on, used his valour to send him to Yama’s abode.44 Shrutayu,
lord of the earth, was ﬁrm in his enmity towards the Pandavas. Reminding him of that enmity, Partha brought him
down.45 O venerable one! O king! Rukmaratha, Shalya’s son, was brave. He was the son of Sahadeva’s maternal
uncle, but was nevertheless killed by his brother in the battle.46 The aged King Bhagiratha and Brihatkshatra of
Kekaya were brave and powerful, but despite their supreme valour, they were killed.47 O king! Bhagadatta’s son

was immensely strong and wise. He was brought down by Nakula, who roamed in the battle like a hawk. Your
grandfather Bahlika, with all the others from Bahlika, was sent to Yama’s abode through Bhimasena’s valour.48 O
king! Jayatsena was Jarasandha’s immensely strong son. That descendant of Magadha was slain by Subhadra’s
great-souled son in the battle.49 O king! Your sons, Durmukha and maharatha Duhsaha, prided themselves on their
valour. Bhimasena killed them with his club.50 Having performed excellent deeds, maharatha Durmarshana,
Durvishaha and Durjaya went to Yama’s eternal abode. The suta Vrishavarma was your adviser and was extremely
valorous. Because of Bhimasena’s valour, he went to Yama’s abode. The king possessed the strength of ten thousand elephants and had a large army of ten thousand elephants. With his followers, he was killed by Pandu’s son,
Savyasachi.51 O great king! There were two thousand Vasatis, skilled in striking and the brave Shurasenas. All
these warriors were killed. The Abhishahas were armoured. They could strike and were mad with insolence. They
were slain, together with the best of rathas from among the Shibis and the Kalingas. There were those who were
reared in Gokula. They were extremely well versed in ﬁghting. Many thousands of them arrayed themselves as
masses of samshaptakas. All of them approached Partha and went to Vaivasvata’s eternal abode.52 O great king!
The kings Vrishaka and Achala were your brothers-in-law and those brave ones fought in your cause. They were
killed by Savyasachi.53 O great king! King Shalva was famous because of his terrible deeds and his acts as a great
archer. He was brought down by Bhimasena.54 O great king! Together with Brihanta, Oghavan was valiant in the
battle, for the sake of their friends. They have gone to Vaivasvata’s eternal world.55 O lord of the earth! In that
fashion, Kshemadhurti was the best among rathas. O king! In the battle, he was killed through Bhimasena’s
club.56 King Jalasandha was immensely strong and a great archer. He performed extremely great deeds in the battle and was killed by Satyaki.57 Alayudha, Indra among the rakshasas, possessed charming asses as his mounts.
Through Ghatotkacha’s valour, he went to Yama’s abode.58 The ones descended from Radheya,59 the son of the
suta, and all his maharatha brothers and all the Kekayas were killed by Savyasachi. The Malavas, Madraka and
Dravidas were terrible in their valour. O venerable one! There were the Mavellakas, the Tundikeras, the Savitriputrakas, the Anchalas, those from the east, north, west and the south. Large numbers of infantry and tens of thousands of horses were slain. When the horses and best of elephants were killed, chariots wandered around. There
were those who were reared in noble lineages and made the best of efforts at the right time. They had standards,
weapons, every kind of garment and ornament and were brave. O king! Partha, never exhausted in his deeds, killed
them in the battle. There were others who were inﬁnitely strong, wishing to kill each other.60 In the battle, there
were many other kings, with their followers. O king! They were killed in thousands. I will now tell you what you
have asked me. Such was the carnage when Karna and Arjuna clashed against each other. It was like the great Indra against Vritra,61 or Rama against Ravana. It was like Mura being brought down and slain by Krishna in a battle, or the brave Kartavirya, indomitable in battle, being killed by Bhargava Rama in an encounter, together with
his kin and relatives, after an extremely great and terrible ﬁght that is famous in the three worlds.62 O king! In that
fashion, in a duel, Karna, supreme among strikers and indomitable in battle, was killed by Arjuna, together with
his advisers and relatives. He was the main cause behind the enmity and he was the one on whom the sons of Dhritarashtra depended for their victory. O king! The Pandavas have accomplished what they could not have contemplated earlier. O great king! However, your relatives who were your well-wishers had told you about this. That is
the reason this great catastrophe has arisen now. O king! Your sons desired the kingdom and you concurred with
their wishes. Ill action was practised and the fruits of that have arrived.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “O son!63 You have so far recounted the names of those on my side who have been killed
by the Pandavas.64 O Sanjaya! Tell me about the Pandaveyas who have been killed by those on my side.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “The sons of Kunti were valiant in the battle. They possessed great spirits and immense
strength. Bhishma brought down their warriors, with their relatives and their advisers. In a battle, Satyajit possessed valour and strength that was Kiriti’s equal. He was unwavering in his aim and he was killed by Drona in the
encounter.65 Virata and Drupada were aged and fought valiantly, for the sake of their friends. With their sons,

those kings were killed in the battle by Drona. Though a child, he was revered in battle and the lord was as unassailable as Savyasachi, Keshava or Baladeva. He was skilled in ﬁghting and performed great deeds. Though he
was alone, he was surrounded by six enemies who were rathas. They were incapable of withstanding Bibhatsu, but
brought down Abhimanyu.66 Though he was deprived of his chariot, the brave one remained established in the
dharma of kshatriyas. O great king! Subhadra’s son was killed by Duhshasana’s son in the battle. Brihanta, the
great archer, was skilled in the use of weapons and indomitable in battle. Through Duhshasana’s valour, he went to
Yama’s abode. The kings Maniman and Dandadhara were unassailable in battle and fought valiantly for the sake of
their friends. They were brought down by Drona. King Anshuman of Bhoja was a maharatha. Because of the valour of Bharadvaja’s son, with his soldiers, he went to Yama’s abode. Chitrayudha was wonderful in ﬁghting and
performed great deeds. He exhibited his valour in wonderful modes and was killed by Karna in the battle. The
Kekaya warriors were ﬁrm in ﬁghting and were Vrikodara’s equals. Brother brought down brother and they were
slain through the valour of the Kekayas.67 Janamejaya fought with a club. That powerful one hailed from the
mountainous regions. O great king! He was brought down by your son, Durmukha. The Rochamanas68 were tigers
among men and were like blazing planets. O king! Drona shot arrows into the sky and killed them simultaneously.
O lord of the earth! There were kings who fought back valiantly. They performed extremely great deeds and went
to Vaivasvata’s eternal abode. Purujit Kuntibhoja was Savyasachi’s maternal uncle.69 In the battle, he won many
worlds for himself and was killed by Drona’s arrows. Abhibhu, the king of Kashi, was surrounded by many from
Kashi. Vasudana’s son made him give up his body in the battle. The valiant Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja were inﬁnitely energetic. In the battle, those brave ones killed hundreds and were then themselves slain. O venerable one!
Kshatradharma and Kshatravarma from Panchala were supreme archers. Drona made them go to Yama’s abode. O
king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Kshatradeva, Shikhandi’s son, was chief among warriors and was
killed in the battle by your grandson, Lakshmana.70 Suchitra and Chitradharma were father and son and were maharathas. They roamed around with great valour and were killed by Drona in the battle. O great king! O great king!
Vardhakshemi performed great deeds in the battle. O great king! He was brought down by the Kourava Bahlika. O
great king! Dhrishtaketu was a foremost ratha among the Chedis. Having performed great deeds, he went to
Vaivasvata’s eternal abode. O father!71 In that fashion, Satyadhriti performed great deeds. He fought valiantly for
the sake of the Pandavas and went to Yama’s abode. Suketu, lord of the earth, was Shishupala’s son. The warrior
killed many enemies in the battle and was then slain by Drona. The brave Satyadhriti,72 the valiant Madirashva
and the valorous Suryadatta were killed by Drona’s arrows. O great king! Shrenimana fought valiantly and having
performed great deeds, went to Vaivasvata’s eternal abode. O king! Magadha,73 the destroyer of enemy heroes,
fought valiantly and powerfully and was killed in the battle by Bhishma. Vasudana performed extremely great
deeds in the battle. Because of the valour of Bharadvaja’s son, he went to Yama’s abode. There were many other
maharathas on the side of the Pandavas. They were slain through Drona’s valour. This is what you had asked me.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “O supreme among eloquent ones! The foremost of soldiers on my side have been killed. O
suta! I think the remnants will also be destroyed. What is the point of remaining alive? You have told me about the
names of the ones who have been killed. I think that the ones who are still alive will also ascend to heaven. That is
my view.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! Drona’s son is still alive. He is a brave maharatha who is skilled and swift in the use
of his arms. He is ﬁrm in wielding weapons and his ﬁsts are also ﬁrm. He is valiant and spirited. Drona, supreme
among brahmanas, gave him many valuable weapons that are wonderful, sparkling and of four different types.74
This includes divine weapons. He is still stationed, desiring to ﬁght for your sake. Bhoja Kritavarma is skilled in
the use of weapons. He resides in the Anarta region and is the son of Hridika.75 He is a maharatha and is foremost
among the Satvatas. He is still stationed, desiring to ﬁght for your sake. O king! Sharadvata Goutama76 is immensely strong and can ﬁght in many wonderful ways. He possesses a wonderful bow that is capable of withstanding a great burden. He has grasped it and is stationed, desiring to ﬁght. Artayani77 does not tremble in the battle
and is the ﬁrst among the soldiers who are on your side. He has abandoned the Pandaveyas, who are the sons of his
sister. The spirited one wishes to make his pledge come true, that he will sap the energy of the son of the suta in

the battle. This is the promise that he made to Ajatashatru earlier. Shalya is unassailable and is Shakra’s equal in
valour. He is stationed, desiring to ﬁght for your sake. The king of Gandhara78 is united with his own army, which
comes from Sindhu, Kamboja, Vanayu, Bahlika and other mountainous and unnamed regions. He is stationed, desiring to ﬁght for your sake. O Indra among kings! Your son Kurumitra is also stationed. He is foremost among the
Kurus and is on his chariot, with a blazing complexion that is like that of the sun or the ﬁre. He is as dazzling and
resplendent as the sun. Duryodhana is immensely valiant and is with the best of soldiers. He is in the midst of an
army of elephants. His chariot is decorated with gold and he is stationed in the battle, desiring to ﬁght. In the midst
of the kings, Chitravarma is blazing in gold.79 He is brave among men and is resplendent. His complexion is like
that of a lotus, or a ﬂame that is without smoke. He is shining, like the sun emerging from clouds. Your sons, the
brave Satyasena and Sushena, have swords and shields in their hands. They are cheerfully stationed in the battle,
together with Chitrasena, and wish to ﬁght. The princes of the Bharata lineage, Chitrayudha, Shrutakarma, Jaya,
Shala, Satyavrata and Duhshala are modest. However, they are powerful and are stationed, wishing to ﬁght. The
lord of Kaitavya is proud of his valour.80 From one battle to another, that prince kills his enemies. He is advancing
with infantry, horses, elephants and chariots. He is stationed in the battle, desiring to ﬁght for your sake. The brave
Shrutayu and Shrutayudha81 and the valiant Chitrangada and Chitravarma, foremost among men, are stationed.
They are proud strikers, who are unwavering in their aim. Karna’s son, the great-souled Satyasena, is stationed in
the battle, wishing to ﬁght. O Indra among kings! Karna has two other supreme sons who are dexterous in the use
of their hands. They are stationed. They desire to ﬁght for your sake and are at the heads of two large armies that
are impatient. O king! These and others are the foremost warriors. They are inﬁnite in their power. For the sake of
victory, the king of the Kurus is stationed in the midst of an army of elephants, like the great Indra.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “You have accurately described to me those who are still alive, on our side and that of the
enemy. From this, I can understand what is obvious, about which side will triumph.” ’
Vaishampayana said, ‘Dhritarashtra, Ambika’s son, realized that the foremost among the warriors on his side
had been killed and that only a little bit of his army remained. Having heard this and having spoken thus, he was
overcome by confusion and sorrow and his senses were benumbed. He became unconscious for a while and then
said, “O Sanjaya! Wait. O son! Having heard this extremely unpleasant news, my mind is anxious.” The lord of the
earth lost his senses and fell down.’

Chapter 1155(5)
asked, ‘O foremost among brahmanas! On hearing that Karna had been killed in that battle and that
J anamejaya
his sons had run away, how was that Indra among kings assured and what did he say? Because of the great disaster that confronted his sons, he suffered from supreme grief. What did he say at that time? I am asking you. Tell
me.’
Vaishampayana replied, ‘He heard of Karna’s death, which was unbelievable and extraordinary. It was so terrible that it paralysed all beings, as if Mount Meru had moved. It was as if the senses of the immensely wise Bhargava82 had got confused, or that Indra, the performer of terrible deeds, had been defeated and shattered by his enemies. It was as if the immensely radiant sun had fallen down from the sky onto the earth, or the unthinkable drying
up of the waters from the ocean. It was as extraordinary as the earth, the sky and all the directions being destroyed.
It was as if both good and evil deeds had become fruitless. Dhritarashtra, the lord of men, used his intelligence to
skilfully think about this. With Karna killed, he thought that his side had been destroyed and came around to the
view that all the other beings would similarly be destroyed. He was scorched by the ﬂames of sorrow and his heart
could ﬁnd no solace. His soul was shattered and he sighed in distress. He was extremely miserable and lamented.
O great king! Dhritarashtra, Ambika’s son, lamented in woe.
‘Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! Adhiratha’s son was brave. He was like a lion or an elephant in his valour. His
shoulders were like that of a bull. His eyes, gait and voice were like those of a bull. He was a bull and like a bull.
He was young and was capable of withstanding the vajra. He did not retreat from a battle, even if the adversary
were to be the great Indra. Because of his bowstring twanging against his palms and because of the shower of his
arrows, chariots, horses, men and elephants could not stand before him in a battle. He was mighty-armed and without decay. He was the slayer of large numbers of the enemy. Depending on him, Duryodhana ventured to provoke
an enmity with the immensely strong sons of Pandu. How could Karna, best of rathas, have been brought down by
Partha in the battle? He was capable of withstanding valour that is impossible to counter. How could that tiger
among men have been killed? Depending on the strength of his own arms, he never showed any reverence towards
Achyuta,83 Dhananjaya or the Vrishnis. ‘The wielders of the Sharnga and Gandiva bows84 are undefeated. When
they are together, on their divine chariot, I will alone bring them down in the battle.’ He always spoke these words
to the wicked and evil Duryodhana, who was afﬂicted by desire for the kingdom and was confused because of his
greed for what was undesirable. He is the one who defeated powerful enemies who were extremely difﬁcult to vanquish—the Gandharas, the Madrakas, the Matsyas, the Trigartas, the Tanganas, the Shakas, the Panchalas, the
Videhas, the Kunindas, the Kashis, the Kosalas, the Suhmas, the Angas, the Pundras, the Nishadas, the Vangas, the
Kichakas, the Vatsas, the Kalingas, the Taralas, the Ashmakas and the Rishikas. In earlier times, using his strength,
the brave one defeated all of these in battles. Just as Uchchaihshrava85 is supreme among horses, Vaishravana86 is
supreme among yakshas87 and the great Indra is supreme among gods, Karna was supreme among those who
could strike. Having obtained and paciﬁed him through riches and honours, the king of Magadha wished to ﬁght
with all the kshatriyas on earth, with the exception of the Kouravas and the Yadavas.88 On hearing of Karna’s
death in the duel with Savyasachi, I am immersed in an ocean of grief. It is as if I am on an ocean without a boat. I
think that my heart cannot be shattered and must be harder than the vajra. I have heard about the defeat of my kin,
matrimonial allies and friends. O suta! Other than an unfortunate one like me, which other man in the world would
not have given up his life? I wish for poison, or ﬁre. I desire to fall down from the summit of a mountain. O Sanjaya! I am incapable of bearing this misery and hardship.”

‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! In prosperity, lineage, fame, austerities and learning, the virtuous ones regard you to
be the equal of Yayati, Nahusha’s son. You are like a maharshi in your learning and are accomplished in your
deeds. Find solace inside your own self. Do not give way to this sorrow in your mind.”
‘Dhritarashtra said, “I think that destiny is supreme. Shame on manliness, it is futile. Karna was the equal of
Rama89 and has been killed in this battle. He killed Yudhishthira’s soldiers and the Panchalas who roamed around
in their chariots. With his showers of arrows, the maharatha scorched all the directions. In the battle, he confounded the Parthas, like the wielder of the vajra against the asuras. How can he have been killed? How can he lie down,
like a tree that has been shattered by the storm? I do not see an end to my sorrows and seem to be in an endless
ocean. My anxiety is increasing. It is terrible. The desire to die is increasing. I have heard about Karna’s death and
Phalguna’s90 victory. But I do not think that Karna’s death is believable. It is certain that my heart has the essence
of the vajra. It is extremely ﬁrm. On hearing about the death of Karna, tiger among men, it has not been shattered.
It is certain that, from earlier times, destiny has ordained an extremely long life for me. I am extremely miserable.
But despite hearing about Karna’s death, I am still alive. O Sanjaya! I am without well-wishers now and shame on
this life. O Sanjaya! I have been reduced to this reprehensible state today. I am wicked in my understanding.
Everyone will grieve over my miserable state. Earlier, I used to be honoured by the entire world. O suta! Having
been defeated, how can I bear to remain alive? O Sanjaya! I have faced hardships and have moved from pain to
greater pain. There was Bhishma’s death and then that of the great-souled Drona. With the son of the suta having
been killed in the battle, I do not see any remnants left. O Sanjaya! It was he who would have enabled my sons to
tide over this great enmity. The brave one released many arrows and has been slain in the battle. When that bull
among men has been killed, what is the point of my remaining alive? There is no doubt that the atiratha91 was afﬂicted by arrows and fell down from his chariot. It was like the summit of a mountain, shattered by the vajra.
There is no doubt that he is lying down, adorning the earth, blood ﬂowing from his wounds. He is like a crazy elephant, brought down by another elephant. He was the strength of the sons of Dhritarashtra and fear for the Pandavas. Karna was revered by all archers and has been slain by Arjuna. The brave and great archer granted my sons
freedom from fear. The brave one has been killed and is lying down, like Bala by Shakra.92 Duryodhana’s wishes
are now like a lame one desiring to walk, the wishes of a poor man being satisﬁed, or a thirsty man without drops
of water. We thought of one thing when performing our deeds, but it has turned out to be something else. Destiny
is powerful and time is extremely difﬁcult to transgress.
‘ “O suta! What about my son, Duhshasana? When he was killed, was he running away? Was he weak, distressed in his soul and devoid of manliness? O son! Did he display inferior conduct in the battle? Was the brave
one killed like other kshatriyas on our side have been slain? Yudhishthira’s words have always been against war.
They were like diet and medicine, but the foolish Duryodhana did not accept them. Bhishma was lying down on a
bed of arrows and desired a drink. The extremely great-souled Partha pierced the surface of the earth. O son! On
seeing the fountain of water that was created by the Pandava, the mighty-armed one spoke about peace with the
Pandavas. ‘Be paciﬁed. Let there be peace and let the hostilities of the war end. With fraternal feelings, enjoy the
earth with the sons of Pandu.’93 My son did not act in accordance with those words and is no doubt sorrowing
now. What the far-sighted one stated in his words has now transpired. O Sanjaya! My advisers have been killed
and my sons have been slain. I have been reduced to this state because of the gambling match, like a bird without
wings. O Sanjaya! Boys cheerfully grasp birds in sport and having severed their wings, let them go. But because
their wings have been severed, they cannot ﬂy away. I have been reduced to that state, like a bird without wings. I
am destitute and weak in every way. I am without relatives and kin. I am miserable and have come under the subjugation of my enemies. Which direction will I turn to? For the sake of Duryodhana’s prosperity, the lord94 conquered the earth. He was valorous, but has been vanquished by the capable and brave Pandavas. When the great
archer, Karna, was killed in the battle by Kiriti, which brave ones surrounded him? O Sanjaya! Tell me that. When
he was slain by Pandava in the battle, I hope he was not abandoned and alone. O brave one! Earlier, you have told
me how the valiant ones were brought down. Bhishma, supreme among wielders of all weapons, did not ﬁght back
and was brought down in the battle by Shikhandi’s supreme arrows. Similarly, Drona, the great archer, cast aside
his weapons in the battle and immersed himself in yoga. O Sanjaya! He was already pierced with many arrows and

Dhrishtadyumna, Drupada’s son, raised his sword and slew him. Both of them were killed through a weakness, especially through deceit. That is what I have heard about the way Bhishma and Drona were brought down. Even the
wielder of the vajra himself would not have been able to kill Bhishma and Drona in a battle, provided the ﬁght
took place through fair means. I tell you this truthfully.
‘ “Karna must have unleashed many divine weapons. The brave one was Indra’s equal. How could death have
touched him in the battle? He possessed a divine spear that was as radiant as lightning. It was decorated with gold
and was capable of killing the enemy. Purandara gave him that in exchange for the earrings.95 Among the arrows
in his quiver, there was a divine arrow, decorated with gold. It was lying there and was smeared with sandalwood
paste. It had a serpent in its mouth and the slayer of enemies did not use it.96 The brave one ignored maharathas
like Bhishma and Drona and learnt the extremely terrible brahmastra from Jamadagni’s son.97 When the mightyarmed one saw that Drona and the others were afﬂicted by the arrows released by Subhadra’s son, he used his arrows to sever his98 bow. Bhimasena possessed the strength of ten thousand elephants and the speed of the wind.
But the one without decay deprived him of his chariot and laughed at his brother.99 He conquered Sahadeva with
straight-tufted arrows. But having deprived him of his chariot, he took compassion on him and knowing about
dharma, did not kill him.100 Ghatotkacha, Indra among the rakshasas, used a thousand different kinds of maya and
was crazy in the battle. But he destroyed all those and killed him with the spear that he had obtained from Shakra.
For all these days, Dhananjaya has been frightened of ﬁghting a duel with him. The brave one was like an elephant. How could he have been killed in the battle? His chariot must have been shattered. His bow must have been
fragmented. His weapons must have been exhausted. Otherwise, how could he have been killed by the enemy?
When Karna brandished his gigantic bow, who was capable of standing against him in the battle? In the battle, he
released terrible arrows and divine weapons. Who could defeat that tiger among men? He was like a tiger in his
force. It is certain that his bow must have been shattered. His chariot must have got stuck in the ground. Else, his
weapons must have got exhausted, since you have told me that he has been killed. Without these being destroyed, I
can see no other reason for his death. ‘Until I have killed Arjuna, I will not wash my feet.’ This is the extremely
terrible vow that the great-souled one took. In the forest, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was always terriﬁed of him. The
bull among men could not sleep for thirteen years.101
‘ “When my son forcibly brought the wife of the Pandus to the assembly hall, he depended on the valour and
bravery of the great-souled one. While the Pandavas looked on, in the midst of that assembly hall, in the assembly
of the Kurus, he102 had spoken to Panchali. ‘You are the wife of slaves. You think that arrows released from Gandiva have the touch of the ﬁre. O Krishna! They are no longer your husbands.’ He said this while Partha looked on.
O Sanjaya! Depending on the strength of his own arms, not for a single moment was he frightened of the Parthas,
their sons, or of Janardana. O son! I do not think that he could have been killed even by the gods, with Vasava,103
even if they had angrily rushed against him, not to speak of the Pandavas. When he touched the bowstring with his
ﬁnger-guards, which man was capable of standing before Adhiratha’s son?104 It is possible for the earth to be deprived of the blazing rays of the sun or the moon. However, that Indra among men did not retreat from a battle and
his death is impossible. The wicked one, evil in his intelligence,105 obtained him as an aide and with his brother,
Duhshasana, rejected Vasudeva’s desirable proposal.106
‘ “On seeing that Karna, with the shoulders of a bull, has been brought down and on seeing that Duhshasana has
been killed, I think that my son must be grieving. On hearing that Vaikartana has been killed in a duel with
Savyasachi and on witnessing the victory of the Pandavas, what did Duryodhana say? He heard that Durmarshana
and Vrishasena107 had been killed in the battle. He saw the army was shattered and was being slaughtered by the
maharathas. The kings were unwilling to ﬁght and were running away. On seeing that the rathas were routed, I
think that my son must be grieving. He is extremely insolent and wrathful because of his childish intelligence. On
seeing that the army had lost its enterprise, what did Duryodhana say? On seeing that Bhimasena had killed his
brother in the battle and had drunk his blood, what did Duryodhana say? With the king of Gandhara,108 he had
proclaimed in the assembly hall, ‘Karna will kill Arjuna in the encounter.’ On seeing him slain, what did he say?

Earlier, having deceived the Pandavas in the gambling match, Shakuni Soubala had rejoiced. O son! On seeing
Karna killed, what did he say? On seeing that Karna had been slain, what did the great archer, Hardikya Kritavarma, the maharatha of the Satvata lineage, say? Drona’s son is intelligent. Brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaishyas worship him, for the sake of learning about dhanurveda. He is young, handsome, qualiﬁed, beautiful and immensely
illustrious. O Sanjaya! On learning that Karna had been killed, what did Ashvatthama say? O son! Sharadvata Kripa is the preceptor in dhanurveda and possesses supreme knowledge.109 When Karna was killed, what did he say?
Shalya, the great archer and the king of Madra, is the adornment of any assembly. It is destiny that he did everything so that Karna might be brought down. There were kings of the earth who had come to ﬁght. O Sanjaya! On
seeing that Vaikartana had been killed, what did they say? O Sanjaya! At the time when the brave Karna, tiger
among rathas and bull among men, was killed, who were the leaders of the main divisions of the army? O Sanjaya!
How did Shalya, supreme among rathas and king of Madra, come to be engaged as Vaikartana’s charioteer. Tell me
about that. In the battle, who protected the right wheel of the son of the suta? Who protected the left wheel? Who
protected the brave one from the rear? Which were the brave ones who did not abandon Karna and who were the
inferior ones who ran away? When all those on our side were united, how was maharatha Karna killed? How did
the brave ones among the Pandavas advance against the maharatha, creating a shower of arrows, like clouds showering down rain? There was a great and divine arrow, with a serpent at the mouth. O Sanjaya! How was it rendered
unsuccessful? Tell me that. O Sanjaya! When the best of soldiers on our side have been killed, I do not see any
refuge for the dispirited ones who are left. Those two brave and great archers were supreme among those on the
Kuru side. On hearing of the death of Bhishma and Drona, what is the point of my remaining alive? I cannot tolerate the thought of Radheya, the ornament of a battle, being slain. The strength of his arms was equal to that of ten
thousand elephants. O Sanjaya! When Drona was killed, tell me everything that took place between those brave
ones among men, between the Kouravas and the enemy and how the Kounteyas prepared themselves for ﬁghting
with Karna. In the battle, how was the one without decay killed by his foes and how did he ﬁnd peace?” ’

Chapter 1156(6)
‘S anjaya said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O great king! When Drona, the great archer was killed on
that day, and the resolution of Drona’s maharatha son countered,110 the Kourava forces were driven away there.
Together with his brothers, Partha111 arranged the soldiers on their side into a vyuha.112 O bull among the Bharata lineage! On discerning that he was stationed in that fashion and on seeing that his own forces were running
away, your son113 used his manliness to restrain them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having stationed his
own troops, he used the strength of his arms to ﬁght with the Pandaveyas for a long time. The enemy had attained
its objective and was cheerful, after having struggled for a very long time. However, since it was evening, the
armies withdrew. The soldiers were withdrawn and entered their own respective camps. Having done this, the Kurus consulted with each other. They were on expensive beds, with supreme cushions and supreme beds. They were
on supreme seats and comfortably lying down, were like the immortals. King Duryodhana spoke to them in conciliatory and supremely restrained tones. He addressed those great archers in words that were appropriate to the occasion. ‘O best among intelligent ones! All of you, quickly tell me what your counsel is. O kings! What should be
done now? What is the supreme task?’ Having been thus addressed by that Indra among men, those lions among
men, who were seated on their thrones, used different kinds of signs to indicate that they wished to ﬁght. They
were ready to offer their lives as oblations into the sacriﬁce of war. The king’s face was also as radiant as the rising
sun. On seeing this, the preceptor’s son, who was intelligent and eloquent in words, spoke these words. ‘Passion,
engagement, skill and policy—these are the means to accomplish objectives. That is what the learned ones have
said. However, everything depends on destiny. We had foremost among men, maharathas, on our side. They were
the equals of the gods. They had good policy and were devoted, skilled and faithful. But they have been killed.
However, despite this, we should not lose hope about our victory. If we use good policies, destiny will become
favourable in accomplishing all our objectives. Among all these foremost men, we should make Karna the overall
commander. He is endowed with all the qualities. We will then crush our enemy.’ On hearing these pleasant words,
Duryodhana was delighted. He thought that these auspicious and beneﬁcial words were full of affection towards
him.
‘ “O great king! Reassuring his mind because of the strength of his arms,114 King Duryodhana spoke these
words to Radheya. ‘O Karna! I know your valour and that you are my supreme well-wisher. O mighty-armed one!
But nevertheless, I will address some beneﬁcial words towards you. O brave one! Having heard them, do what
pleases you. You have always been the wisest. You are my supreme refuge. Bhishma and Drona, both atirathas,
were my commanders and they have been killed. You are superior to them. Become my commander. Those great
archers were aged and were partial towards Dhananjaya. O Radheya! I revered those brave ones because of your
words. O son!115 In the great battle, for ten days, you saw that Bhishma, the grandfather, protected the sons of
Pandu. Having laid his weapons aside in the great battle, Bhishma, the grandfather, was killed by Phalguna, who
placed Shikhandi at the forefront. That immensely fortunate one was brought down and is lying down on a bed of
arrows. O tiger among men! It was because of your words that Drona was placed in our forefront.116 But because
they were his students, he also protected the Parthas in the battle. Then, the aged one was swiftly killed by Dhrishtadyumna. Thinking about it, I do not see any other warrior who is your equal, because of your inﬁnite valour,
even if I include those two foremost ones who have been killed. There is no doubt that you will be able to ensure
victory. You know everything about what has happened, earlier, in the middle, and later. You should be our leader
in this battle. You should be the leader in this enterprise. Consecrate your own self in all these soldiers, like Skanda, the undecaying lord, is the general of the gods. Like that, become the protector of the soldiers of the sons of

Dhritarashtra. Slay all the large numbers of the enemy, like the great Indra against the danavas. Knowing that you
are stationed in the battle, the maharatha Pandavas, together with the Panchalas, will run away, like the danavas on
seeing Vishnu. O tiger among men! Therefore, become the leader of this large army. When you station yourself
and make endeavours, the Pandavas, with their advisers, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas, will be bereft of their
senses. You will be like a rising sun that scorches with its energy and dispels the terrible darkness. Like that, you
will drive away our enemy.’ Karna replied, ‘O son of Gandhari! In your presence, I have spoken these words before. O king! I will defeat the Pandavas, with their sons and with Janardana. There is no doubt that I will be your
commander. O great king! Be assured. Know that I will defeat the Pandavas.’ Having been thus addressed, the immensely energetic King Duryodhana arose, together with the kings, like the gods with Shatakratu.117
‘ “He instated Karna as the commander, like the immortals did to Skanda. Desirous of victory, King Duryodhana
and the other kings swiftly sprinkled water, according to the prescribed rites.118 Golden and earthen pots were
ﬁlled and mantras pronounced over them. The tusks of elephants and the horns of large bulls were ﬁlled with water. There were others119 that were decorated with gems and jewels and with fragrant perfumes and herbs. He
seated himself on a seat made out of the ﬁg tree,120 covered with a piece of silk. He was consecrated, in accordance with the rites in the sacred texts. ‘In the great battle, may you defeat Partha and Govinda, together with their
followers.’ O bull among the Bharata lineage! These were the benedictions pronounced by bards and brahmanas.
‘Be like the rising sun, the destroyer of darkness through its ﬁerce rays. May they, together with Keshava, not be
able to look at your arrows. May those ungrateful ones look on them as the blazing rays of the sun. May the
Parthas and the Panchalas not be able to stand before you. In a battle, you possess the knowledge of weapons and
will be like the great Indra against the danavas.’ Thus was the inﬁnitely radiant Radheya consecrated. In his resplendent form, he looked like another sun. Radheya was instated as the commander by your son and goaded by
destiny, he thought that his task had been accomplished. O king! Having become the commander, Karna, the destroyer of enemies, instructed that the soldiers should be yoked and should wait for the sun to rise. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Surrounded by your sons, Karna looked dazzling there. He was like Skanda surrounded by the
gods, in the tarakamaya battle.” ’121

Chapter 1157(7)
‘D hritarashtra asked, “O Sanjaya! Vaikartana Karna obtained the generalship and was addressed by the king himself,122 in those gentle and fraternal words. He instructed the soldiers to be yoked and for the sun to rise. O immensely wise one! What did he do next? Tell me that.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having ascertained Karna’s views, your son instructed that
the soldiers should be yoked and that musical instruments should be sounded. O venerable one! When that long
night was over, a great sound of ‘Array, yoke,’ suddenly arose. In the army, elephants and chariots were prepared.
O lord of the earth! Infantry and cavalry were readied. The spirited warriors shouted at each other. There was a
large and tumultuous noise that seemed to touch heaven. Karna, the great archer and supreme among rathas, was
seen stationed on his chariot. His ﬂags were white and his steeds possessed the complexion of the rising sun. His
bow had a golden back and his standard bore the mark of an elephant’s housing. The army had quivers full of arrows and armlets. They wielded shataghnis,123 bells, lances, spears, clubs and bows. In his chariot and ﬂags, the
son of the suta was seen, sparkling like a clear sun. O father!124 He blew on his conch shell, which was decorated
in nets of gold. He stretched his giant bow, which was embellished with gold. O venerable one! On seeing Karna,
the great archer and supreme among rathas, stationed on his chariot, like a rising sun that drives away thousands of
clumps of darkness, the Kouravas, tigers among men, no longer thought about Bhishma and Drona’s death. O venerable one! Urging the warriors with sounds from his conch shell, Karna made the Kourava army march out. Wishing to defeat the Pandava, Karna, the great archer and scorcher of enemies, arranged a vyuha in the form of a
makara.125 O king! Karna stationed himself at the makara’s mouth. The brave Shakuni and maharatha Uluka were
at the eyes. Drona’s son was at the head. In the midst of his brothers and surrounded by a large army, King Duryodhana was at the neck. O Indra among kings! Kritavarma stationed himself along the left leg, with the narayana
and gopala forces who were indomitable in battle.126 O king! Goutama, for whom truth was valour, was at the
right leg, surrounded by great archers from the Trigarta and southern regions. Shalya was stationed at the rear left
leg, with a large army that had been raised from the Madra region. O great king! Sushena, unwavering in his resolution, was on the right, surrounded by a thousand chariots and a hundred tuskers.127 The brave brothers and
kings, Chitrasena and Chitra, were at the tail, surrounded by a large army. O Indra among kings! Thus did the
supreme among the best of men emerge.
‘ “On seeing this, Dharmaraja glanced towards Dhananjaya and said, ‘O Partha! In the battle, behold the large
army of the sons of Dhritarashtra. They have been arrayed by Karna and are protected by brave maharathas. The
remnants of the large army of the sons of Dhritarashtra are bereft of brave ones. O mighty-armed one! It is my
view that the remnants are feeble and like grass. There is only one great archer who is stationed there and that is
the son of the suta. That supreme among rathas cannot be vanquished by the gods, the asuras, the gandharvas, the
kinnaras, the giant serpents and all the mobile and immobile creatures in the three worlds. O mighty-armed one! O
Phalguna! If you kill him today, you will be victorious. The stake that has been in my heart for twelve years will be
uprooted. O mighty-armed one! Knowing this, construct the vyuha that you desire.’ On hearing his brother’s
words, the Pandava with the white horses arranged the soldiers in a counter-vyuha that was in the shape of a halfmoon. O king! Bhimasena stationed himself on the left ﬂank and the immensely strong and great archer, Dhrishtadyumna, was on the right. Pandava himself was at the centre of the vyuha, with Krishna as his charioteer. With
Dharmaraja, Nakula and Sahadeva were at the rear. Protected by Kiriti, Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja from Panchala protected Arjuna’s wheels and did not desert him in the battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The remain-

ing brave kings armoured and stationed themselves in the vyuha, according to each one’s position, enterprise and
spirit. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus did the Pandavas arrange themselves into a great vyuha.
‘ “The great archers on your side made up their minds to ﬁght. On seeing the army in the battle, arranged into a
vyuha by the son of the suta, your son and all the others on our side thought that the Pandavas had already been
killed. O lord of men! In similar fashion, on seeing the Pandava soldiers arranged into a vyuha, Yudhishthira
thought that the sons of Dhritarashtra and Karna had already been killed. Conch shells, kettledrums, drums, cymbals and other musical instruments were loudly sounded and the noise spread in every direction. O king! There was
a loud noise in both the armies. Desiring victory, the brave ones roared like lions. There were sounds of the neighing of horses and the trumpeting of elephants. O lord of men! There were ﬁerce sounds from the wheels of chariots. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On seeing the great archer, Karna, stationed at the front of the vyuha, no
one128 thought of Drona’s loss. On both sides, the soldiers were full of great spirits and the men and elephants
were cheerful. O king! Wishing to kill each other quickly, they remained stationed in the battle. O Indra among
kings! Karna and Pandava were resplendent in the midst of their soldiers and were extremely angry on seeing each
other stationed thus. As they advanced towards each other, the two armies seemed to be dancing around. Wishing
to ﬁght, they emerged from the ﬂanks and smaller segments. O great king! A battle commenced between men, elephants, horses and chariots and they ﬁrmly wished to kill each other.” ’

Chapter 1158(8)
‘S anjaya said, “Those two armies clashed against each other, with cheerful horses, men and elephants. That great
encounter was like that between the armies of gods and asuras. In that great battle, elephants, chariots, horses and
infantry struck at each other, mangling bodies and destroying lives. The heads of men who were like lions were
strewn around on the ground and the faces of those lions among men who were killed were like full moon, the sun,
or lotuses in splendour. The heads of the warriors were severed with broad-headed and razor-sharp arrows in the
shape of the half-moon, swords, lances and battleaxes. They possessed thick and long arms and these were severed
by others with thick and long arms. Those thick arms were severed and fell down, with weapons and armlets still
on the hands. With those red ﬁngers and palms, the earth looked resplendent. It was as if ﬁve-headed serpents had
been ﬁercely killed by Garuda. Horses, chariots, elephants and brave warriors were destroyed by the enemy and
fell down. It was as if residents of heaven had been dislodged from their celestial vehicles,129 after their sacred
merits had been exhausted. In that battle, hundreds of brave and braver ones were uprooted through thick and
heavy clubs, maces and bludgeons. Rathas were killed by rathas and mad elephants by other mad elephants. As
they clashed in that supreme encounter, horses were brought down by horses. Rathas were destroyed by supreme
rathas, elephants by horse riders and foot soldiers. Horse riders and foot soldiers were killed and lay down on that
ﬁeld of battle. Chariots, horses, foot soldiers and elephants were destroyed by chariots, elephants, horses and foot
soldiers. Chariots, foot soldiers, elephants and horses were destroyed by men, horses, chariots and elephants. Chariots, horses and men fought against men, horses and chariots and caused a great carnage, ﬁghting with hands, feet,
weapons and chariots.
‘ “While those brave soldiers were being slaughtered and killed, the Parthas, with Vrikodara at the forefront, advanced against us. They were with Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Droupadi’s sons, the Prabhadrakas, Satyaki, Chekitana and the Dravida soldiers. They were surrounded by a large army from the Pandyas, the Cholas and the Keralas. They were broad in the chest and long in the arms. They were tall and handsome. They were ornamented and
possessed red teeth. They were like crazy elephants in their valour. They were adorned in garments of many
colours and were smeared with fragrant scents. They had girded swords and nooses in their hands. They were capable of countering elephants. O king! Prepared to die, they were stationed against each other in that army. There
were quivers and bows in their hands and their hair was long. They were pleasant in speech. The foot soldiers from
Andhra were terrible in form and valiant and were led by Satyaki. There were other brave ones from Chedi, Panchala, Kekaya, Karusha, Kosala, Kashi and Magadha and they dashed forward. There were many kinds of chariots,
elephants, supreme horses and infantry amidst them and they could be seen to be dancing and laughing. Surrounded by supreme ones from the enemy, Vrikodara was in the midst of that large army. He was seated astride an elephant. That supreme among elephants was ﬁerce and having been properly prepared, looked dazzling. It was like a
palace atop Mount Udaya, illuminated at the peak by the rising sun.130 His131 supreme armour was made out of
iron and he was adorned with the best of gems. He sparkled like the autumn sky, studded with stars. There was a
ﬁerce spear in his hand and it was beautifully adorned at the tip. Like the midday sun in autumn, he began to burn
up the enemy.
‘ “Seeing that elephant from a distance, Kshemadhurti arrived, seated on another elephant.132 He was cheerful
and attacked and challenged someone who was more cheerful than he was. There was a clash between those two
elephants, both of which were ﬁerce in form. They clashed as they wished, like two mountains with trees at the
top. Astride the clashing elephants, those two brave ones struck each other with their spears. The powerful ones
were as dazzling as the rays of the sun and striking each other, roared. They then retreated and circled on their ele-

phants. Both of them picked up bows and struck each other. They slapped their arms and in every direction, there
was the sound of arrows. As they roared like lions, they delighted all the men. Those immensely strong lords were
on elephants that raised up their trunks. As they fought, the ﬂags whirled around in the wind. Having severed each
other’s bows, they roared. They showered down lances and spears, like clouds pouring down rain during the monsoon. Kshemadhurti used great force to strike Bhima between the breasts with a spear and striking him again with
another six, roared. Because of those spears, Bhimasena was resplendent in the ﬁeld of battle. In that encounter, his
body blazed with anger, like seven suns seven times.133 Bhima carefully hurled a spear towards his enemy. It was
made out of iron and possessed the complexion of the sun. It ﬂew straight. The lord of Kuluta afﬁxed ten arrows to
his bow and shattered the spear. He then pierced Pandava with sixty more. Pandava picked up a bow that roared
like a giant cloud and afﬂicting his enemy’s elephants with his arrows, roared. Having been afﬂicted by the arrows
of Bhimasena in the battle, the elephant did not remain there any longer, though one tried to restrain it. It was like
a cloud dispelled by the wind. Bhimasena’s elephant, the king of elephants, pursued it, like a cloud driven by a
strong wind follows a cloud blown away by the wind. Having endeavoured to restrain his elephant, Kshemadhurti
attacked Bhimasena and his elephant and pierced them with arrows. The bull among men used a razor-sharp arrow
that was released well to sever his enemy’s bow and oppressed his enemy’s elephant. As if striking Bhima with a
rod, Kshemadhurti used iron arrows to pierce the elephant everywhere in its inner organs. Before the elephant
could fall down, Bhimasena descended and stationed himself on the ground. He struck down the enemy’s elephant
with a club. When that elephant was brought down, Kshemadhurti advanced with an upraised weapon. But Vrikodara killed him with his club. He was killed, with the sword in his hand, and having been brought down, lay down
next to the elephant. He was like a lion killed by the vajra, alongside a mountain shattered by the vajra. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the illustrious king of Kuluta had been killed, your soldiers were distressed and ﬂed.” ’

Chapter 1159(9)
‘S anjaya said, “In the battle, the great archer, Karna, killed the Pandava soldiers with his straight-tufted arrows. O
king! In that fashion, in Karna’s presence, the maharatha Pandavas angrily killed your son’s soldiers. O king! The
mighty-armed Karna killed the Pandava soldiers with iron arrows that had been polished by artisans and were like
the rays of the sun. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The elephants were afﬂicted by Karna’s iron arrows.
They roared loudly and were weakened. They lost their senses and ﬂed in the ten directions. O venerable one!
While the army was thus being slaughtered by the son of the suta, Nakula swiftly attacked the son of the suta in
that great battle. Bhimasena advanced against Drona’s son, who was performing extremely difﬁcult deeds. Satyaki
countered Vinda and Anuvinda from Kekaya.134 Chitrasena, lord of the earth, advanced against Shrutakarma.135
With a colourful standard and a colourful bow, Chitra advanced against Prativindhya. Duryodhana attacked King
Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son. Dhananjaya angrily attacked the large numbers of samshaptakas. When the brave
ones were being killed, Dhrishtadyumna rushed against Kripa. Shikhandi attacked the undecaying Kritavarma.
Shrutakirti 136 attacked Shalya. O great king! Madri’s son, the powerful Sahadeva, attacked your son,
Duhshasana.
‘ “In the encounter with Satyaki, the Kekayas showered down radiant arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Satyaki also enveloped the two from Kekaya. In the great battle, those two brothers severely struck the brave
one in the chest and it was like two elephants striking another elephant with their tusks. With their armour pierced
by arrows, the brothers were resplendent in the battle. O king! But they pierced Satyaki, who was truthful in his
deeds, with arrows. O great king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! However, Satyaki countered them and
laughed. He shrouded them in every direction with a shower of arrows. Having been repulsed by the shower of
arrows released by Shini’s descendant, they quickly enveloped the chariot of Shini’s descendant with arrows. In
that great battle, Shouri severed their colourful bows.137 In that encounter, he repulsed them with sharp arrows
that were difﬁcult to withstand. They then grasped other bows and giant arrows in their ﬁsts and roaming around
with skill and dexterity, covered Satyaki. They shot giant arrows that were tufted with the feathers of herons and
peacocks and were decorated. They were embellished with gold and illuminated all the directions. O king! Because of the arrows released, there was darkness in the great battle there. Those maharathas severed each other’s
bows. O great king! Satvata, indomitable in battle, became enraged. In that encounter, he picked up and strung another bow. With an extremely sharp kshurapra arrow, he severed Anuvinda’s head. O king! That large head, with
earrings, fell down on the ground, like Shambara’s head when he was killed in the great battle.138 On seeing that
he swiftly fell down on the ground, all the Kekayas grieved. On seeing that his brave brother had been killed, the
maharatha139 strung another bow and countered Shini’s descendant. He pierced Satyaki with gold-tufted spears
that had been sharpened on stone.140 The maharatha from Kekaya roared loudly and powerfully and asking Satyaki to wait, struck him in the arms and in the chest with arrows that were like the ﬂames of ﬁres. The wise and spirited Satvata was wounded in all his limbs by these arrows. O king! He was resplendent in that battle, like a kimshuka141 with leaves. Having been pierced by the great-souled Kekaya in the battle, Satyaki laughed and pierced
Kekaya with twenty-ﬁve arrows. In their excellent arms, they grasped shields that were marked with the signs of
one hundred moons. Wielding the best of swords, they roamed around in that great arena. It was like the immensely strong Jambha and Shakra in the battle between the gods and the asuras.142 In the great battle, they roamed
around in circles and swiftly attacked each other, wishing to kill each other in the encounter. Satvata severed
Kekaya’s shield into two fragments and in that way, the king also shattered Satyaki’s shield. Having severed the

shield that was marked with the signs of hundreds of stars, Kekaya whirled around in circles, advancing and retreating. Wielding the best of swords, Shini’s descendant also roamed around in that great arena and striking sideways, severed Kekaya’s head. O king! Still wearing his armour, in that great battle, the great archer from Kekaya
was severed into two parts and fell down, like a mountain shattered by thunder. Having killed him in the battle,
Shini’s brave descendant, supreme among rathas and scorcher of enemies, quickly climbed onto Yudhamanyu’s
chariot. He then again ascended a different chariot that had been prepared properly. Using his arrows, Satyaki began to slaughter the large army of the Kekayas. The large army of the Kekayas was slaughtered in that battle. It
abandoned the enemy in the encounter and ﬂed in the ten directions.” ’

Chapter 1160(10)
‘S anjaya said, “O great king! In the encounter, Shrutakarma angrily struck Chitrasena, lord of the earth, with ﬁfty
arrows that had been sharpened on stone. The king of Abhisara143 struck Shrutakarma with nine straight-tufted
arrows and pierced his charioteer with ﬁve. In the forefront of the army, Shrutakarma became enraged. He struck
Chitrasena in his inner organs with extremely sharp iron arrows. Using the opportunity,144 the immensely illustrious Shrutakirti shrouded the lord of the earth with ninety arrows. Having recovered his senses, maharatha Chitrasena severed his145 bow with a broad-headed arrow and pierced him with seven arrows. He grasped another
bow that was decorated with gold and could strike hard. Piercing Chitrasena with arrows, he made him look
colourful. The youthful king was adorned with colourful garlands and was made colorful by the arrows. He looked
like an ornamented youth in an assembly. In that encounter, angrily asking Shrutakarma to wait, he pierced him between the breasts with iron arrows. In the battle, Shrutakarma was pierced by those iron arrows and began to shed
copious quantities of blood, like a mountain exuding red minerals. His limbs were covered in blood and he was
like a picture drawn in blood. O king! In that battle, he was as resplendent as a blossoming kimshuka. O king!
Having been thus struck by the enemy, Shrutakarma angrily countered the foe and severed his bow into two. O
best of the Bharata lineage! Having severed his bow, the immensely illustrious Shrutakarma pierced him with three
hundred iron arrows. Swiftly, he severely struck him with another sharp and broad-headed arrow and severed the
great-souled one’s helmeted head. Chitravarma’s146 extremely large head fell down on the ground, as if the moon
was wilfully dislodged from heaven and fell down on the surface of the ground. O venerable one! On seeing that
the king of Abhisara had been killed, Chitrasena’s soldiers attacked with force. However, Shrutakarma, the great
archer, angrily used his arrows to drive away those soldiers, like the wrathful lord of the dead147 at the time of the
destruction of all beings. Having driven them away, he roamed around there.
‘ “Prativindhya pierced Chitra with ﬁve swift arrows and having pierced his charioteer with three, brought down
his standard with a single arrow. Chitra struck him in the chest and the arms with nine broad-headed arrows that
were gold-tufted, sharpened on stone and shafted with the feathers of herons and peacocks. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Prativindhya used his arrows to sever his bow and then struck that ratha with ﬁve sharp arrows. O
great king! He hurled a spear towards your son.148 It possessed a golden handle and was difﬁcult to resist. It was
terrible and was like the ﬂame of a ﬁre. As it descended, Prativindhya severed it with his sharp arrows. It was like
the vajra frightening all beings at the end of a yuga and on seeing that this spear had been destroyed, Chitra
grasped a large club. It was decorated with nets of gold and he hurled it towards Prativindhya. In that great battle,
it slew his horses and his charioteer. It struck his chariot with great force and crushed it down on the ground. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At this time, he ascended another chariot and hurled a spear that was decorated
with golden bells towards Chitra. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As it descended, the great-souled
Chitra seized it and ﬂung it back towards Prativindhya. In the battle, the immensely radiant spear struck the brave
Prativindhya. It pierced his right arm and fell down on the surface of the earth. Having fallen down, because of its
radiance, like lightning, it lit up the spot where it had fallen down. O king! Prativindhya grasped a javelin that was
decorated with gold. Wishing to kill Chitra, he angrily hurled it towards him. It pierced the armour on his body and
his heart. It then swiftly penetrated the ground, like a snake entering its hole. The king was struck by that javelin
and was brought down, extending his large and thick arms that were like clubs. On seeing that Chitra, the ornament of a battle, was killed, all those on your side powerfully attacked Prativindhya from all directions. They released many kinds of arrows and shataghnis with bells. They quickly enveloped him, like the sun by a mass of
clouds. But in that encounter, the mighty-armed one struck them with a net of arrows and drove away those sol-

diers, like the wielder of the vajra against the asuras. O king! In the battle, those on your side were slaughtered by
the Pandavas. They were violently dispersed, like the clouds by the wind. The army was slaughtered and scattered
in all the directions. Drona’s son alone quickly attacked the immensely strong Bhimasena. A terrible and violent
clash ensued between them. It was like that between Vritra and Vasava in the battle between the gods and the asuras.” ’

Chapter 1161(11)
‘S anjaya said, “O king! Drona’s son possessed supreme speed. He displayed his dexterity with weapons and struck
Bhimasena with an arrow. He then again struck him with another ninety sharp arrows in his inner organs. He was
light in the use of his hands and had seen and was knowledgeable about where the weak spots were. O king! Having been struck by the sharp arrows shot by Drona’s son, Bhimasena was resplendent in that battle, like the sun
with its rays. Pandava shot one thousand well-aimed arrows and enveloping Drona’s son, emitted a roar like a lion.
O king! In the encounter, Drona’s son countered Pandava with one hundred arrows and smiling, struck him in the
forehead with an iron arrow. O king! Bearing that arrow on his forehead, Pandava looked like a proud and horned
rhinoceros in the forest. While Drona’s son was making his efforts in the battle, the valiant Bhima also seemed to
smile and struck him in the forehead with three iron arrows. With those arrows stuck to his forehead, the brahmana
was resplendent. He looked like a supreme mountain with three peaks, drenched during the rains. Drona’s son
struck Pandava with one hundred arrows, but could not make him tremble, like the wind against a mountain.
Drona’s son used hundreds of other sharp arrows in the battle. However, he could not make the cheerful Pandava
tremble, like the wind against a mountain. The maharathas shrouded each other with many other showers of arrows. They were proud in the battle and roaming around on their chariots, the brave ones were resplendent. They
blazed like a couple of suns that had arisen for destroying beings. Their supreme arrows were like rays and they
scorched each other with these. In that great battle, they acted and counteracted each other. Without any fear, they
made efforts to act and counteract. The maharathas roamed around in that battle, like tigers. The invincible arrows
were like the teeth and the terrible bows were like the mouths. With nets of arrows on all sides, they became invisible. It was as if the sun or the moon in the sky was enveloped by a net of clouds. But in a short instant, those two
scorchers of enemies became visible again, like the moon and the sun in the sky, freed from the net of clouds.
‘ “Drona’s son placed Vrikodara on his right and showered down hundreds of sharp arrows, like rain pouring
down on a mountain. However, Bhima was not ready to tolerate signs of his enemy being victorious. O king! Remaining on the right, Pandava began to execute circular motions, advancing and retreating. In that great battle,
there was a tumultuous encounter between them. In that spot, they traversed along various circular paths. They
drew their bows back to the full extent and struck each other with arrows. The maharathas made the best efforts to
kill each other. In that battle, they used their arrows to try and deprive each other of their chariots. Drona’s maharatha son released many great weapons and in that encounter, Pandava destroyed them with his own weapons. O
great king! There was an extremely ﬁerce battle with those weapons. It was as if there was a tremendous clash between the planets, for the sake of destroying beings. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those arrows were
swiftly released and clashed against each other. They illuminated all the directions and the soldiers on every side.
Because of the large numbers of arrows, the sky looked terrible. O king! It was as if meteors were descending to
destroy beings. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As the torrents of arrows clashed against each other, sparks of
ﬁre were generated and those blazing ﬂames consumed both the armies. O great king! The siddhas149 descended
there and said, ‘This encounter is superior to all other encounters. All other battles do not amount to one-sixteenth
of this.150 Such an encounter has not happened earlier, nor will it happen again. These two lords are knowledgeable and terrible in their valour. Bhima is terrible in his valour and the other one is skilled in the use of weapons.
They represent the essence of valour and great is their skill. They are stationed in the battle like two Destroyers.
They are like two Rudras or like two suns. In this battle, those two tigers among men have terrible forms, like two
Yamas.’ At that time, we repeatedly heard these words spoken by the siddhas. Among the assembled denizens of
heaven, there were roars like lions, on witnessing the extraordinary and unthinkable deeds performed by them in
that battle. O king! Having injured each other in that encounter, those two brave ones glanced towards each other,

their eyes dilated with rage. Their eyes were red with anger. Their lips trembled in rage. They gnashed their teeth
in wrath. They bit their lips in ire. The maharathas enveloped each other with showers of arrows. In that encounter,
the arrows were like rain pouring from clouds. The weapons were like lightning. The maharathas pierced each other’s standards and charioteers. They pierced each other’s horses and struck each other. O great king! In that great
encounter, they picked up two arrows and swiftly released them towards each other, wishing to kill each other. O
great king! At the heads of the two armies, those two arrows blazed and struck each other, with an irresistible force
that was like that of the vajra. They severely wounded each other through the force of those arrows. Those two,
who were extremely valiant, sank down on the ﬂoors of their chariots. O king! While all the kshatriyas looked on,
knowing that Drona’s son had become unconscious, his charioteer bore him away from the ﬁeld of battle. O king!
In similar fashion, Pandava, the scorcher of enemies, repeatedly lost his senses and his charioteer bore him away
on the chariot.” ’

Chapter 1162(12)
‘D hritarashtra said, “Describe the battle between Arjuna and the samshaptakas and also tell me about the one between the others on my side and the Pandavas.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! Listen. I will describe the battle exactly as it happened. The brave ones fought with
the enemy and this destroyed bodies and lives. Partha penetrated the mass of samshaptakas, which was like an
ocean.151 The destroyer of enemies was like a giant storm that agitated the ocean. Dhananjaya used his sharp and
broad-headed arrows to slice off the heads of the brave ones. The faces were like full moons, with excellent eyes,
eyebrows and teeth. He152 quickly scattered these around on the ground, like lotuses devoid of their stalks. The
faces were well formed and large and were smeared with sandalwood paste and perfumes. With weapons and armour on their bodies, they looked like ﬁve-headed serpents. In that encounter, Arjuna severed the arms of his enemies with razor-sharp arrows. With his broad-headed arrows, Pandava severed the best of charioteers, standards,
bows and hands decorated with gems. O king! Arjuna shot thousands of arrows in that battle and dispatched elephants, horses and chariots, with their riders, to Yama’s eternal abode. The foremost of brave ones roared like angry bulls that desired intercourse. They roared and attacked. As they were being killed, they struck him with their
arrows, like bulls goring with their horns. The battle between them and him was wonderful and it made the body
hair stand up. It was like one between the wielder of the vajra and the daityas, for the conquest of the three worlds.
With his weapons, Arjuna countered all the weapons of his enemies on every side. He swiftly pierced them with
many arrows and robbed them of their lives. He shattered the poles,153 wheels and axles and killed warriors, horses and charioteers. He shattered the weapons and quivers and brought down the standards. The yokes, harnesses,
poles and bumpers of chariots were fragmented. The place became impassable because of the shattered yokes and
the heaps of weapons. The chariots were scattered, like giant clouds by the wind. Everyone was astounded on seeing this and this, increased the terror of the enemy. Arjuna rivalled the deeds of one thousand maharathas acting
together. Masses of siddhas, devarshis154 and charanas155 were satisﬁed. The drums of the gods were sounded
and ﬂowers were showered down on Keshava and Arjuna’s heads. An invisible voice was heard. ‘Keshava and Arjuna possess the beauty of the moon, the sun, the wind and the ﬁre. They blaze in strength and are resplendent.
Those two brave lords always dazzle. When those two brave ones are stationed on the same chariot, they are as invincible as Brahma and Ishana.156 Those two brave lords are foremost among all beings and are Nara and
Narayana.’157 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On witnessing this great wonder and on hearing these words,
Ashvatthama controlled himself and rushed against the two Krishnas in the battle.158
‘ “He advanced against Pandava and attacked him with arrows that were like the destroyer Yama. Drona’s son
laughed on his chariot. In his hand, he held up an arrow and said, ‘O brave one! A guest has arrived before you. If
you think me to be deserving, with all your heart, grant the guest the opportunity of ﬁghting with you.’ Having
been thus challenged by the preceptor’s son, who wished to ﬁght, Arjuna thought that he had been greatly honoured and spoke to Janardana. ‘The samshaptakas should be killed by me, but Drona’s son is challenging me. O
great-armed one! Instruct me about which one I should do ﬁrst.’ Having been thus addressed, Krishna drove
Partha, like Vayu taking Indra to a sacriﬁce, towards Drona’s son, who had issued a challenge in the appropriate
manner. Drona’s son was single-minded in his intentions and Keshava spoke to him. ‘O Ashvatthama! Be patient.
Strike and bear the counter-strike. The time has come for those who live off others to repay the food they have received from their masters.159 Brahmanas are subtle in settling disputes. Kshatriyas are coarser, resulting in victory
or defeat. Because of your folly, you have asked for excellent and divine hospitality from Partha. Now be patient

and receive what you have asked for from Pandava.’ When Vasudeva had spoken thus, the supreme among brahmanas agreed. He pierced Keshava with sixty iron arrows and Arjuna with three. Arjuna became extremely angry
at this and used three broad-headed arrows to slice down his bow. Drona’s son then picked up a bow that was more
terrible. He strung it in an instant and pierced Arjuna and Keshava, with three arrows for Vasudeva and one thousand for Pandava. Carefully, Drona’s son shot a thousand arrows, then another one million and then ten million. He
confounded Arjuna in the battle. O venerable one! He was knowledgeable about the brahman and arrows issued
from his quiver, his bow, his bowstring, his ﬁngers, his arms, his hands, his chest, his face, his nose, his eyes, his
ears, his head, his limbs, his pores, his chariot and his standard. He pierced Keshava and Pandava with a great net
of arrows. Drona’s son roared in joy, like the rumbling of a large cloud. On hearing the roar, Pandava spoke to
Achyuta.160 ‘O Madhava! Behold Drona’s son’s wickedness towards me. He thinks that since we have entered
this chamber of arrows, we are about to be slain. But with my training and my strength, I will destroy his resolution.’ The foremost among the Bharata lineage shattered each of Ashvatthama’s arrows into three fragments. It was
like the wind dispelling a mist.
‘ “Then Pandava used his ﬁerce arrows to pierce the samshaptakas and their horses, charioteers, chariots, elephants, standards and large numbers of infantry. Everyone who was a spectator there, in whatever form, thought
himself to have been covered by those arrows. Arrrows of many different types were shot from Gandiva. In that
battle, they killed elephants, horses and men who were within a distance of a krosha.161 Broad-headed arrows severed and brought down the trunks of elephants that were mad with musth. They were sliced down, like trees in the
autumn by an axe. After this, the elephants themselves, like mountains, were brought down, with their riders. It
was as if the mountains were being shattered by the wielder of the vajra with his vajra. There were chariots that
had been properly prepared and were like the cities of gandharvas. Well-trained and swift horses, indomitable in
battle, were yoked to them. Dhananjaya showered down arrows on these enemies, ornamented horse riders, foot
soldiers and horses. In that great ocean of the samshaptakas, Dhananjaya was like the sun that arises at the end of a
yuga. They were difﬁcult to dry up.162 But with his ﬁerce arrows that were like rays, he dried them up.
‘ “Drona’s son was like a gigantic mountain and swiftly, he again pierced him with extremely forceful iron arrows that were as energetic as the sun, like the wielder of the vajra against a mountain. At this, the preceptor’s son
became wrathful and wished to ﬁght. He advanced towards Partha, wishing to strike his horses and his charioteer
with his swift arrows. But these were struck down. He163 next released a multitude of arrows towards Ashvatthama, who was like a guest whohad arrived in a house. Abandoning the samshaptakas, Pandava attacked
Drona’s son, like a giver abandons the undesirable in favour of the desirable.164 There was a clash like that between Shukra and the radiant Angirasa.165 It was as if Shukra and Angirasa were clashing in the sky to enter the
same nakshatra.166 Their ﬂaming arrows traversed the sky and scorched each other. They terriﬁed the worlds with
those rays, like planets that had been dislodged from their positions. With an iron arrow, Arjuna severely struck
Drona’s son in the midst of his eyebrows and he looked as resplendent as the sun, with its rays extending upwards.
The two Krishnas were also severely wounded by the hundreds of arrows shot by Ashvatthama. They looked like
two suns that dazzled with their rays at the end of a yuga. Protected by Vasudeva, Arjuna released a weapon that
was sharp on every side. He struck Drona’s son with arrows that were like the vajra, the ﬁre, or Vaivasvata’s167
staff. The performer of terrible deeds pierced the extremely energetic Keshava and Arjuna in the inner organs.
These were arrows that were released well and were extremely ﬁerce and forceful. Struck by these, even Death
would have been pained. But Arjuna countered the arrows of Drona’s son and covered him with twice that number
of well-tufted arrows.
‘ “Having enveloped that solitary and brave one and his horses, charioteer and standard, he struck the samshaptakas again. Partha shot arrows and severed the bows, arrows, quivers, bowstrings, hands, arms, weapons held in
the hands, umbrellas, standards, horses, garments, garlands, ornaments, shields, armour, wishes and all the beautiful heads of his enemies, as they were stationed there and did not retreat.168 Those brave ones made every endeavour, stationed on well-prepared chariots, horses and elephants. But they were restrained by the large numbers of
Partha’s arrows and the foremost among men fell down. The heads of men were like lotuses, the sun and the full

moon. They were adorned with diadems, garlands and crowns. They were severed by broad-headed and razorsharp arrows and arrows that were in the shape of a half-moon. They incessantly fell down on the ground. Brave
ones from Kalinga, Vanga, Anga and Nishada wished to kill Pandava and rushed against him. They were astride
elephants that looked like the elephant of the king of the gods. They were angry and insolent, as insolent as the enemies of the gods. Partha sliced down those elephants, their trunks and their armour and mangled their inner organs. He brought down the standards and ﬂags, as if the one with the vajra in his hand was bringing down the
peaks of mountains.
‘ “When they were routed, Kiriti enveloped his preceptor’s son with arrows that possessed the complexion of
the rising sun. It was as if a rising sun was dispelling a large net of clouds created by the wind. Countering Arjuna’s arrows with his own arrows, Drona’s son covered Arjuna and Vasudeva with his arrows, as if the moon and
the sun were being covered in the sky by a thundering cloud at the end of the summer. Afﬂicted by these arrows,
Arjuna directed his weapons towards those on your side and suddenly made everything dark with his arrows. He
pierced all of them with his well-tufted arrows. In that encounter, no one could discern when Savyasachi picked up
an arrow, afﬁxed it and released it. One could only see that horses, elephants, foot soldiers and rathas were slain
and their bodies fell down. Swiftly, Drona’s son afﬁxed ten iron arrows. He released them so quickly that they
seemed to be a single arrow. They were released well and Arjuna was pierced by ﬁve and Achyuta by another ﬁve.
Having been thus wounded, those two foremost of men, who were like the lord of riches169 and Indra, began to
exude blood. They were afﬂicted by the one who had completed his learning.170 Some thought that they had been
killed. The lord of Dasharha spoke to Arjuna. ‘Why are you hesitating? Kill this warrior. If you commit the error of
ignoring him, he will cause great hardship, like a disease that spreads.’ Having been thus addressed by Achyuta, he
was no longer distracted and sought to wound Drona’s son with his arrows. He severed the harnesses of the horses
and pierced the steeds, which then bore him171 a long distance away. The intelligent one did not return again to
ﬁght with Partha. The one with self-control knew that the victory of the brave one from the Vrishni lineage and
Dhananjaya, the best of the Angirasa lineage,172 was certain. Reversing, Ashvatthama withdrew his horses from
the ﬁeld of battle, like a disease is treated through mantras, herbs and remedies and withdraws from the body. Keshava and Arjuna headed in the direction of the samshaptakas. Flags were stirred by the wind and ﬂuttered atop
their chariot, which rumbled like the clouds.” ’

Chapter 1163(13)
‘S anjaya said, “At this time, a loud uproar arose towards the northern side of the Pandu soldiers. The rathas, elephants, horses and foot soldiers were being slaughtered by Dandadhara. Keshava reversed the direction of the
chariot, but did not stop the swift horses, which were as fast as Garuda or the wind. He told Arjuna, ‘Magadha is
extremely powerful and is on an elephant that can crush. He is like Bhagadatta in training and strength. Having
killed him, you will then slay the samshaptakas again.’ Having completed these words, he bore Partha towards
Dandadhara.173 The foremost among Magadhas was foremost in wielding the goad, just as the brilliant planet is
foremost among planets.174 He was ﬁercely destroying the enemy soldiers, like a brilliant planet destroying the
earth.175 His elephant was the crusher of enemy soldiers and was like an elephant of the danavas. It had been prepared well and it roared like a giant cloud. He killed thousands of rathas, horses and large numbers of elephants
with his arrows. The elephant also stood on chariots and quickly crushed horses, charioteers, rathas and foot soldiers. With its front legs and its trunk, it killed elephants, like a wheel of death. Men with armour made out of
steel176 and adorned in ornaments were brought down, with their horses and foot soldiers. As those supreme ones
were crushed and killed, a sound arose, like that of reeds being crushed by the wind. There were the sounds of
drums, kettledrums and many conch shells at the spot, mixed with the noise of bowstrings slapping against palms.
There were the roars of thousands of men, horses and elephants.
‘ “On his supreme chariot, Arjuna advanced against that supreme of elephants. Dandadhara struck Arjuna with
twelve supreme arrows, Janardana with sixteen and each of the horses with three. He then roared and laughed. At
this, Partha used broad-headed arrows to slice off his bow, with the bowstring and arrows attached, and brought
down his ornamented standard. He next struck those who were protecting his feet and this enraged the lord of
Girivraja.177 His tusker’s temples were shattered and it was as dark as a mass of clouds. But it was also as swift as
the wind and he wished to crush Arjuna with this. He shot arrows and hurled spears at Janardana and Dhananjaya.
Pandava simultaneously shot three razor-sharp arrows and severed his two arms, which were like the trunks of elephants, and his head, which had the complexion of the full moon. He then struck the elephant with one hundred
arrows. Partha’s arrows were decorated with gold. They struck the elephant, which was clad in golden armour. It
looked like a mountain in the night, when herbs and trees burn because of a ﬁre. Afﬂicted with pain, it roared like a
cloud. It roamed aimlessly and then, with trembling steps, it tottered as it tried to run away. It was weakened and
fell down, together with the driver. It was as if a mountain had been shattered by thunder and had fallen down.
‘ “When his brother was killed in the battle, Danda advanced, wishing to kill Indra’s younger brother178 and
Dhananjaya. He was astride a tusker that possessed the complexion of snow and was garlanded in gold. It looked
like a summit of the Himalayas.179 He hurled three lances that were as bright as the rays of the sun towards Janardana and ﬁve towards Arjuna. Having struck them, he roared. Pandava severed his arms with extremely ﬁerce
kshurapra arrows, while they still held lances, were adorned with armlets and were smeared with sandalwood
paste. They simultaneously fell down from the elephant’s back and looked as beautiful as two serpents that had
fallen off a mountain’s peak. With an arrow that was in the shape of a half-moon, Kiriti severed Danda’s head and
it fell down from the elephant onto the ground. It was covered with blood and looked beautiful as it fell down, like
the sun setting in the western direction. The supreme elephant possessed a white complexion and Partha pierced it
with supreme arrows that blazed like the rays of the sun. It shrieked as it fell down, as if the summit of a mountain
had been struck down by thunder. There were other supreme elephants that were their equals180 and wished to obtain victory. Like those two elephants, Savyasachi carefully brought them down and that extremely large army of

elephants was routed. Elephants, chariots, horses and large numbers of men dashed against each other and fell
down in that battle. They were wounded and struck each other. They anxiously lamented and were killed. Arjuna
was then surrounded by his own soldiers, like Purandara by the masses of gods. They said, ‘O brave one! We were
frightened of the enemy, who seemed to us to be like Death before beings. It is good fortune that you have killed
him. We were immersed in terror and had you not rescued us, we would have been afﬂicted by the forces of the enemy. The enemy would have rejoiced. You have killed the enemy and we are now rejoicing.’ Hearing these and
many other conciliatory words spoken by his well-wishers, Arjuna was delighted in his mind. He then honoured
the men, in accordance with what they deserved, and again headed towards the mass of samshaptakas.” ’

Chapter 1164(14)
‘S anjaya said, “Jishnu again returned, like the planet Angaraka181 in its forward and retrograde motions, to kill
large numbers of samshaptakas. O king! O venerable one! Men, horses, rathas and elephants were killed by
Partha’s arrows. They wavered, wandered around, shrieked, fell down and died. Large numbers of charioteers and
chariots were ﬂung away. There were hands, with weapons still in the hands, and arms and heads. Pandava severed
them with broad-headed and razor-sharp arrows, arrows that were in the shape of a half-moon and arrows that had
heads like a calf’s tooth, as those enemy heroes fought against him in that battle. They fought, like a bull that desires intercourse ﬁghting against another bull. Hundreds and thousands of brave ones descended on Arjuna. The
encounter between them and him was extraordinary and it made the body hair stand up. It was as if the daityas
were ﬁghting with the wielder of the vajra for the conquest of the three worlds. Ugrayudha pierced him with three
arrows that were like malignant snakes,182 but he severed his183 head from his body. All of them184 became extremely angry and showered down many weapons on Arjuna, like clouds urged by the Maruts surrounding the Himalayas at the end of summer. With his own weapons, Arjuna countered all the weapons of his enemies. He used
many well-directed arrows to kill all those who meant to injure him. The trivenus were shattered around their
thighs. The parshni185 charioteers were killed. The harnesses were torn and the poles, axles, joints and yokes of
chariots were shattered. Using his arrows, Arjuna swiftly destroyed all their equipment. There were large numbers
of chariots there, fragmented into pieces. They looked like the palaces of the rich, destroyed by the ﬁre, the wind
and the rain. Arrows that were like the vajra mangled the inner organs of the elephants and they fell down, resembling mansions on mountains destroyed by thunder, storm and ﬁre. Persecuted by Arjuna, large numbers of horses
and riders fell down on the ground. Their tongues lolled out. Their entrails were plucked out. They were weak.
They were covered in blood. They looked terrible. Savyasachi’s iron arrows struck men, horses and elephants. O
venerable one! They tottered, shrieked, fell down and died. Like the great Indra against the danavas, Partha killed
the inferior ones with arrows that were sharpened on stone and were like the vajra or like virulent poison. There
were brave ones, with extremely expensive armour and ornaments. They possessed diverse kinds of garments and
weapons. With their chariots and their standards, they were slain by Partha and forced to lie down. They were the
performers of pious deeds. They were distinguished and famous. Nevertheless, they were vanquished and died.
They conquered heaven because of their deeds, but their bodies lay down on the ground. The brave ones on your
side attacked Arjuna’s chariot. They were the leaders of many different countries and they, and their followers,
were full of rage. They were on chariots and horses and the foot soldiers also desired to kill him. They quickly
rushed against him, with many different kinds of weapons. Those warriors angrily showered down a large number
of weapons, as if from a giant cloud. However, like the wind, Arjuna swiftly dispelled them with his sharp arrows.
Using his own weapons as a bridge, Partha violently crossed that large and boatless ocean of weapons, horses, infantry, elephants and chariots.
‘ “Vasudeva spoke to him. ‘O Partha! O unblemished one! Why are you toying with them? Crush the samshaptakas and make haste towards Karna’s death.’ Having been thus addressed, Arjuna swiftly struck the remaining
samshaptakas. He powerfully unleashed his weapons and killed them, like Indra against the daityas. In that battle,
no one could distinguish when Arjuna took out an arrow, afﬁxed it and released it. He was that swift. As he goaded
his horses, Govinda himself said that it was extraordinary. As they penetrated the soldiers, his arrows were like
white and swift swans diving into a lake. The ﬁeld of battle was full of the destruction of men. On seeing this,
Govinda spoke to Savyasachi. ‘O Partha! A great and extremely terrible destruction of the Bharatas, the earth and
the kings is going on. This is because of Duryodhana’s extremely evil deeds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!

Behold the bows, with golden backs, of the archers. The large armour and quivers have been dislodged. The arrows have drooping tufts and the tufts are made out of gold. The iron arrows have been washed in oil and are like
snakes that have cast off their skins. The place is strewn with colourful lances and bows that are decorated in gold.
The swords have handles of ivory and are embellished in gold. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The armour
and sheaths for the bows possess golden backs. The lances and spears are embellished with gold and are also decorated in gold. The giant clubs are tied in garments that are decorated with gold. The handles of the swords are
made out of gold and the battleaxes are also embellished in gold. The handles of the scattered battleaxes are ornamented in gold. Lances made of iron and heavy bludgeons have fallen down. Behold the colourful shataghnis and
the large maces. There are many chakras186 and clubs that have been scattered around in this battle. There are
many kinds of weapons that were grasped by the ones who desired victory. Their bodies have been crushed by
clubs and bludgeons and their heads have been smashed. Behold the thousands of elephants, horses, chariots and
warriors who have been destroyed. Men, elephants and horses have been struck with arrows, lances, swords,
spears, scimitars, javelins, spikes, nails and bludgeons. Their bodies have been mangled in many ways and they are
covered in blood. O destroyer of enemies! They have lost their lives and are strewn around in this ﬁeld of battle.
Their arms are smeared with sandalwood paste and adorned with armlets and sparkling ornaments. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! The earth is resplendent with arm-guards and bracelets. The ornamented tips of the hands,
with ﬁnger-guards, are scattered around.187 The supreme heads sport gems on the headdresses and wear earrings.
Those with eyes like bulls have been brought down and the earth looks dazzling. There are headless torsos covered
in blood, since the heads have been severed from the bodies. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! They are
scattered on the ground and it is as if the ﬁery ﬂames of the ﬁre have been paciﬁed. Many kinds of chariots, with
sparkling golden bells, have been shattered. Behold the many horses, covered in blood. The place is strewn with
the white and giant conch shells of the warriors. As they lie down like mountains, the tongues of the elephants are
lolling out. Sporting colourful ﬂags of victory, warriors who fought on horses and elephants have been slain. There
are excellent cushions, covers and blankets from the elephants. They are diverse and have been uprooted. So have
the colourful and varied housings. Many bells have been broken, crushed by the feet of the elephants. Staffs and
goads decorated with lapis lazuli have fallen down on the ground. Harnesses were decorated with gold and so were
the tips of the standards that the riders possessed. They were colourful with many kinds of gems and were polished
in gold. From the horses, cushions and covers made out of the skin of ranku deer have fallen down on the ground.
The lords among men had gems on their headdresses and golden garlands. Umbrellas are scattered around and so
are fans and whisks. The faces of the kshatriyas have beautiful earrings and are as beautiful as the moon or nakshatras. The brave ones are ornamented and their beards have been clipped. Behold. Their heads are scattered around
on the ground, in the mire created by blood. Behold. The men who are still alive are lamenting in every direction.
O lord of the earth! There are many who are honouring you and others have been killed by your weapons. With
their relatives, they are repeatedly lamenting there. Though they have been routed, there are some spirited warriors
with angry faces. Driven by anger and desiring victory, they wish to advance and ﬁght again. However, there are
other proud ones who are ﬂeeing from the spot. Their relatives have fallen down and desire water from those brave
ones. O Arjuna! Some have gone in search of water and there are many who have lost their lives. It can be seen
that those brave ones have lost their senses and are retreating. Having seen water, they are rushing to the spot,
shouting at each other. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Behold the ones who have expired after drinking water and the others who are drinking. Others have abandoned their beloved ones, their beloved relatives, kith and
kin. In the great battle, they can be seen to be running around, here and there. O foremost among men! Behold the
others. They are repeatedly gnashing their teeth and biting their lips. O Arjuna! In the great battle today, these are
the deeds that you have performed. The deeds performed by you in the battle are like those of the king of the gods,
or those who live in heaven.’ In this way, Krishna showed Kiriti the ﬁeld of battle.
‘ “As they were returning, they heard a loud noise from Duryodhana’s army. It was mixed with the blaring of
conch shells and the beating of drums and kettledrums and mingled with the ﬁerce sound of weapons and roars of
chariots, horses and elephants. Borne by horses that were as fast as the wind, Krishna penetrated that army and was
surprised to see that your army was being crushed by Pandya. That foremost among warriors was using many different kinds of arrows. He was slaying the enemy, like Yama among those whose life has run out. The foremost

among strikers was mangling the bodies of elephants, horses and men with his sharp arrows and was robbing them
of their bodies. With many weapons and arrows, he was piercing heroes among the enemy. Pandya was killing the
enemy, like Shakra against the asuras.” ’

Chapter 1165(15)
‘D hritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! You have earlier spoken about that great hero, famous in the worlds. But you have
not recounted his deeds in the battle. Now, in detail, recount to me that hero’s valour, learning, power, bravery, expanse and pride.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “Drona, Bhishma, Kripa, Drona’s son, Karna, Arjuna and Janardana completed their learning
of archery and you think that they are the foremost among warriors. But he thinks himself to be an equal of Karna
and Bhishma and does not wish to be regarded as inferior to Vasudeva and Arjuna. Such was Pandya, foremost
among kings and supreme among all wielders of weapons. He was like Yama and overcame and killed Karna’s soldiers. Stationed in the midst of that army of chariots, horses, foot soldiers and elephants, Pandya crushed them. He
whirled them around like a potter’s wheel. Pandya’s arrows dispelled them, like the wind amidst a mass of clouds.
The horses, charioteers, standards, rathas and warriors of the enemy were struck. Elephants were killed. Flags,
standards and weapons were uprooted. The destroyer of enemies killed the elephants, together with those who
guarded their feet. He killed horse riders, armed with spears, javelins and quivers. The Pulindas, Khashas,
Bahlikas, Nishadas, Andhrakas, Tanganas, those from the south and the Bhojas were ﬁerce and did not retreat from
a battle. However, Pandya used his arrows to deprive them of their weapons and armour and robbed them of their
lives. In that battle, Pandya used his arrows to slaughter the four divisions of the army.188 He showed no fear. On
seeing this, Drona’s son fearlessly advanced towards him.
‘ “As he seemed to be dancing around, he,189 best among strikers, fearlessly challenged him and spoke to him
in sweet words. ‘O king! O one with eyes like the petals of a lotus! You are foremost among those who are borne
into a battle. You are known as someone who can withstand the vajra and you are foremost in strength and manliness. You have weapons in your hands and you are using your arms to stretch your giant bow. As you extend it
with your arms, you seem to be like a large cloud. With great force, you are showering down torrents of arrows on
the enemy. In this battle, with my exception, I do not see anyone who is your match in bravery. You have singlehandedly crushed many chariots, elephants, foot soldiers and horses, like an extremely ﬁerce and powerful lion
kills large numbers of deer. The sky and the earth resound with the great noise of your chariot. O king! At the end
of the monsoon, you are ﬁlling the earth and its crops.190 You are taking out sharp arrows from your quiver and
they are like venomous serpents. You should ﬁght with me alone, like Andhaka ﬁghting with Tryambaka.’191
Having been thus addressed, he192 agreed.
‘ “Asking him to strike, Drona’s son struck him and Malayadhvaja struck him back with a barbed arrow.
Drona’s son, supreme among preceptors, smiled and struck Pandya with ﬁerce arrows that were like the ﬂames of
ﬁre and could penetrate the inner organs. Ashvatthama then released nine other sharp and iron arrows that were
tufted with the feathers of herons and covered the ten directions. Pandya severed ﬁve of these with ﬁve sharp arrows. However, four swiftly struck his horses and robbed them of their lives.193 Pandya, who was as radiant as the
sun, severed the bowstring of Drona’s son with sharp arrows. However, Drona’s son, the destroyer of enemies,
ﬁxed another string to his bow and shot thousands of arrows at Pandya. He enveloped the sky and all the directions
with his torrents of arrows. Pandya, the great-souled bull among men, knew that the arrows shot by Drona’s son
were inexhaustible. However, he made efforts to cut down the arrows of Drona’s son and then used sharp arrows to
rob the ones who were protecting his chariot wheels of their lives. On seeing his dexterity, Drona’s son stretched
his bow into a circle and showered down arrows, like rain pouring from a cloud. O venerable one! That encounter
lasted for an eighth part of a day.194 Nevertheless, Drona’s son shot as many weapons as could be carried on eight
carts, drawn by eight bullocks. He was like an angry Destroyer, or like the Destroyer of the Destroyer. Almost

every one who saw him there lost his senses. The preceptor’s son showered down arrows like rain on the soldiers,
like rain pouring on the earth, with its mountains and trees, at the end of summer. That shower of arrows released
by Drona’s son, who was like a cloud, was extremely difﬁcult to withstand. Pandya swiftly countered it with a
vayavya weapon195 and roared like a gale. His standard was smeared with sandalwood paste and aloe and he
looked like Mount Malaya. As he was roaring, Drona’s son severed his standard and killed his four horses. He then
killed his charioteer with another arrow. With an arrow that was in the shape of a half-moon, he severed the bow
that thundered like a giant cloud and shattered the chariot into small fragments. Having countered his weapons
with his own weapons and having cut down all his weapons, Drona’s son found the opportunity to kill him in the
battle. There was a supreme tusker that had been prepared well and its rider had been killed. As it was swiftly advancing towards him, as if against a rival, the powerful one196 climbed onto it, roaring like a lion. Stationed on it,
the lord of Malaya looked like a mountain with two peaks.197 He swiftly urged the elephant forward. He picked
up a spear that was as radiant as the rays of the sun and hurled that weapon with supreme force, care and anger.
The lord of the mountains hurled this towards the preceptor’s son and roared. The head of Drona’s son was decorated with a diadem. It was decorated with supreme gems, jewels and diamonds and adorned with excellent cloth,
garlands and pearls. It was as dazzling as the sun, the moon, the planets and the ﬁre. Being severely struck,198 it
was shattered into fragments and fell down, like a large forest when it is struck by the great Indra’s vajra, or when
the summit of a mountain falls down on the ground. At this, he199 blazed with great rage, like a king of the serpents that has been struck by the foot. He picked up fourteen arrows that were capable of killing the enemy and
each of these was like Yama’s staff. With ﬁve, he served the feet and trunk of the elephant and with three, the
king’s arms and head. With six, he killed the six splendid maharathas who were following the king of Pandya. The
king’s arms were long and smeared with the best of sandalwood paste. They were adorned with gold, pearls, gems
and diamonds. Those arms of the king fell down on the ground and writhed around like serpents that had been
killed by Tarkshya.200 His head possessed a face with the complexion of the full moon. His eyes were coppery red
with rage and his nose was excellent. With its earrings, the head fell down on the ground and was as resplendent as
the moon between two Vishakhas.201 The preceptor’s son was accomplished in learning and when he completed
this task, your son, the king, was delighted and surrounded by his well-wishers, honoured him, like the lord of the
immortals honouring Vishnu after he had vanquished Bali.” ’202

Chapter 1166(16)
‘D hritarashtra asked, “O Sanjaya! When Pandya was killed, what did Arjuna do in the battle, especially when the
brave Karna was single-handedly driving away the enemy? Pandava is brave and accomplished in learning. He is
powerful. The great-souled Shankara made all beings subservient to him.203 That is the reason my greatest fear is
from Dhananjaya, the slayer of enemies. O Sanjaya! Tell me everything that Partha did there.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “When Pandya was killed, Krishna quickly spoke these beneﬁcial words to him. ‘Without
looking towards the king,204 the Pandavas are retreating. To accomplish Ashvatthama’s resolution, Karna is
killing the Srinjayas. He is creating a great carnage there, amidst the horses, men and elephants.’ The extremely
unassailable Vasudeva spoke these words to Kiriti. On hearing this and on seeing that his brother was facing a
great and terrible calamity, Pandava asked Hrishikesha to quickly urge the horses. Hrishikesha advanced on that
chariot against those warriors.
‘ “O supreme among kings! Yet again, there was a terrible encounter and clash between Karna and the Pandavas
and it extended Yama’s kingdom. Wishing to kill each other, they swiftly grasped bows, arrows, clubs, swords,
lances, spikes, maces, catapults, spears, scimitars, battleaxes, bludgeons, javelins, cutlasses, darts, slings and large
hooks and descended. The whizzing of arrows and the sound of palms against bowstrings extended into the sky,
the directions and the sub-directions. As they attacked, they roared and the earth resounded with the thunder of
chariot wheels. Those great sounds of battle cheered them. Brave ones fought extremely terrible battles with brave
ones, wishing to bring an end to the hostility. There were sounds from bowstrings, palm-guards and bows and the
trumpeting of elephants. They were attacked and as they fell down, roared loudly. There were many sounds generated by the arrows and by the roars of brave ones. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing this terrible
sound, some were frightened, turned pale and fell down. There were many among them who roared and showered
down arrows. In the battle, Atiratha Karna crushed many of them with his arrows. With his arrows, Karna conveyed ﬁve heroes from Panchala, ten rathas and ﬁve others, with their horses, charioteers and standards, to Yama’s
eternal abode. Many foremost and immensely valorous warriors from the Pandus swiftly attacked Karna in that
battle and surrounding him from all sides, covered the sky with their weapons. Karna agitated the enemy soldiers
with his shower of arrows. He was like the leader of a herd205 plunging into a lake full of birds and lotuses. Radheya penetrated into the midst of the enemy. He brandished his supreme bow and using his sharp arrows, began to
bring down their heads. The shields and armour were shattered and the bodies were deprived of life. There was no
one among them who needed the touch of a second arrow.206 The arrows that were released from the bow crushed
armour and bodies. The bowstrings and palm-guards were shattered, like horses lashed with a whip. Whenever
Pandus, Srinjayas and Panchalas came within the reach of his arrows, Karna quickly struck them in the inner organs, like a lion among large numbers of deer.
‘ “O venerable one! The son of Panchala,207 Droupadi’s sons, the twins and Yuyudhana united and advanced
against Karna. When the Kurus were severly engaged with the Pandavas and the Srinjayas, warriors advanced
against each other, prepared to give up their lives in the battle. They were armoured well, with coats of mail, helmets and ornaments. The maharathas used clubs, maces and other kinds of bludgeons. They advanced ﬁercely, like
the god wielding his staff.208 O venerable one! They roared loudly and challenged each other. They struck each
other. Struck by the others, they fell down. They vomited blood and lost their limbs, heads and eyes in the battle.
Complete with teeth, but laced with blood, the faces looked like pomegranates. Though they had been brought
down by weapons, they seemed to be alive. They struck each other with spears, swords, lances, catapults, nails,
javelins and spikes. They were crushed and cut down by others. They also crushed and cut others down. They an-

grily killed and struck each other. They were brought down and killed by others. Losing their lives, they were covered with blood. They seemed to exude their own natural red juice, like sandalwood trees. Rathas were killed by
rathas, elephants by elephants, men by the best of men and thousands of horses were brought down by horses.
Standards, heads, umbrellas, the trunks of elephants and the arms of men were severed by razor-sharp and broadheaded arrows, arrows in the shape of a half-moon and other weapons. In that battle, men, elephants, chariots and
horses were brought down. Horse riders slew brave warriors. The trunks of tuskers were severed. Flags and standards were shattered and brought down, strewn around like mountains. Foot soldiers destroyed elephants and chariots. Struck and killed, they fell down in every direction. Horse riders clashed against foot soldiers and were swiftly killed by them. In the battle, large numbers of foot soldiers were killed by horse riders and lay down. O greatly
intelligent one! The faces and limbs of those who were killed looked like crushed lotuses and faded garlands. O
king! The beautiful forms of elephants, horses and men looked like garments that had been sullied and therefore,
became supremely hideous to see.” ’

Chapter 1167(17)
‘S anjaya said, “There were many excellent elephants that were urged on by your son. Wishing to kill Dhrishtadyumna, they angrily advanced against Parshata. These were among the best who fought on elephants, from the
east, the south, Anga, Vanga, Pundra, Magadha, Tamraliptaka, Mekala, Kosala, Madra, Dasharna and Nishadha. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were skilled in ﬁghing with elephants and united with those from Kalinga.
Arrows, spears and iron arrows showered down like rain from clouds and in that battle, all of them sprinkled Panchala, who was like a mountain. Those elephants were violently urged on against the enemy with goads and with
toes prodding the ﬂanks. As they advanced towards Parshata, he showered down iron arrows on them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Each of those angry elephants was like a mountain and he pierced each with ten, six or
eight arrows. He was enveloped by those elephants, like clouds covering the sun. On seeing this, the Pandus and
Panchalas roared. They raised sharp weapons and attacked those elephants, the arrows making music on the bowstrings. Nakula, Sahadeva, Droupadi’s sons, the Prabhadrakas, Satyaki, Shikhandi and the valiant Chekitana advanced. The elephants were driven by mlecchas209 and used their trunks to pick up men, horses and chariots and
crush them with their feet. They pierced others with the tips of their tusks, picked them up and ﬂung them down.
Others were stuck to the tips of the tusks and looked terrible. Vanga’s210 elephant was stationed in front of him.
Satyaki powerfully struck it with a ﬁerce iron arrow. Pierced in its inner organs, it fell down. Abandoning that elephant, he211 was about to descend from the elephant. However, Satyaki struck him on the breast with an iron arrow and made him fall down on the ground. Pundra’s elephant was descending like a mobile mountain. Sahadeva
carefully killed it with three iron arrows. It was deprived of its ﬂag, its rider, its armour, its standard and its life.
Having brought that elephant down, Sahadeva advanced against Anga.212 However, Nakula asked Sahadeva to
desist and himself attacked Anga. He struck him with three iron arrows that were like Yama’s staff and struck the
elephant with one hundred. Anga hurled eight hundred spears that were as bright as the rays of the sun. However,
Nakula sliced each of these down into three fragments. Pandava then severed his head with an arrow that was in
the shape of a half-moon. Having been killed, the mleccha fell down, together with the tusker. The son of their preceptor was skilled in the technique of managing elephants.213 When he was killed, the excellent ones from Anga
attacked Nakula on elephants. The best of ﬂags ﬂuttered and the sides214 were decorated in gold. They looked like
mountains on ﬁre and wished to swiftly destroy the enemy. There were those from Mekala, Utkala, Kalinga,
Nishadha and Tamraliptaka. Wishing to kill him, they showered down arrows and spears. They enveloped Nakula,
like the sun shrouded by clouds. At this, the Pandus, the Panchalas and the Somakas were enraged. A battle commenced between those rathas and the elephants. Showers of arrows and thousands of spears were released. These
shattered the temples of the elephants and penetrated their inner organs in many ways. The tusks were pierced by
iron arrows and seemed to be ornamented. Sahadeva quickly killed eight giant elephants with sixty-four extremely
energetic arrows and brought them down, together with their riders. Nakula, the descendant of the Kuru lineage,
carefully drew his supreme bow and used many straight-ﬂying iron arrows to kill many elephants. Shini’s descendant, Panchala, Droupadi’s sons, the Prabhadrakas and Shikhandi brought down many showers of arrows on the
mighty elephants. The warriors on the Pandu side were like clouds full of rain and the elephants of the enemy were
like mountains. Slain by those showers of arrows, they fell down, like mountains shattered by a storm of thunder.
Your elephants were thus killed by the Pandus, who were like elephants among men. The soldiers215 were soon
seen like a river with shattered banks. Having thus agitated the soldiers,216 the soldiers of the sons of Pandu
glanced towards them and again advanced towards Karna.

‘ “O great king! While Sahadeva was angrily scorching your army, Duhshasana advanced against him and it was
brother against brother. The kings who were there, witnessed a great battle between them and roaring like lions,
waved their garments around. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Your archer son was angry and pierced Pandu’s powerful son in the chest with three arrows. O king! Sahadeva pierced your son with an iron arrow and again
pierced him with seventy, striking his charioteer with three. O king! In that great battle, Duhshasana severed his
bow and struck Sahadeva in the arms and the chest with seventy-three arrows. Sahadeva became wrathful and in
that great encounter, grasped a sword. The foremost among warriors whirled and hurled it towards your handsome
son. That great sword severed his bow, with an arrow still afﬁxed to it. It then fell down on the ground, like a serpent that has been dislodged from the sky. The powerful Sahadeva picked up another bow and shot an arrow that
was like death towards Duhshasana. That arrow was as bright as Yama’s staff and descended. However, Kourava
severed it into two parts with a sword that was sharp at the edges. As that sword suddenly descended in the battle,
Sahadeva cut it down with sharp arrows and seemed to be laughing.217 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In
that great battle, your son swiftly shot sixty-four arrows towards Sahadeva’s chariot. O king! In that encounter,
many arrows descended with force. However, Sahadeva sliced down these with ﬁve arrows each. Having countered the great arrows that were shot by your son, Madri’s son released a large number of arrows. O great king!
The powerful Sahadeva became angry and afﬁxed an extremely ﬁerce arrow that was like the Destroyer and like
Death. He drew his bow back with force and shot it towards your son. O king! It penetrated his armour and his
body with great force and penetrated the earth, like a snake entering a termite hill. O king! Your maharatha son lost
his senses. On seeing that he had lost his consciousness, his charioteer, who was frightened and himself severely
wounded with sharp arrows, quickly bore him away on the chariot. O Pandu’s elder brother! O king! Having defeated him in the battle, Pandava cheerfully began to crush Duryodhana’s army in every direction, like an extremely angry man crushing a large number of ants. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus did he wrathfully crush
the Kourava soldiers.
‘ “O king! While Nakula was violently destroying the soldiers in the battle, Vaikartana Karna repulsed him.
Nakula laughed and spoke to Karna. ‘After a long time, because of the kindness of destiny, you have seen me. O
wicked one! And in this battle, you have surfaced before my sight. You are the root cause of the evil, the enmity
and the quarrel. It is because of your sins that those of the Kuru lineage are clashing against each other and are being destroyed. I will kill you in the battle today and become successful, devoid of fever.’218 Having been thus addressed, the son of the suta, who was himself like a prince and also an archer, replied to Nakula. ‘O child! Strike
me in this battle. Let me see your manliness. O brave one! One should boast only after having performed deeds in
a battle. O son!219 Those who do not speak in an encounter, but ﬁght to the best of their strength, are known as
brave. Fight with me, to the utmost of your strength and I will destroy your pride today.’ Having spoken thus, the
son of the suta swiftly struck Pandu’s son. In that battle, he pierced him with seventy-three arrows that had been
sharpened on stone. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having been thus pierced by the son of the suta, Nakula
pierced the son of the suta back with eighty arrows that were like venomous serpents. Karna severed his bow with
gold-tufted arrows that had been sharpened on stone. The supreme archer then struck Pandava with thirty arrows.
Those pierced his armour and drank his blood in the battle. They were like venomous serpents that drink water after entering the earth. O great king! Nakula, the destroyer of enemy heroes, became angry at this. He picked up another bow with a back that was embellished with gold. It was extremely difﬁcult to resist. He pierced Karna with
twenty arrows and his charioteer with three. With an extremely sharp arrow that was like a razor at the tip, he severed Karna’s bow. Having severed the bow, the brave one, who was regarded as a maharatha by the entire world,
laughed and struck him with three hundred arrows. O venerable one! On seeing that Karna was thus afﬂicted by
Pandu’s son, all the rathas and all the gods were struck by supreme wonder. Vaikartana Karna picked up another
bow and struck Nakula between the shoulder joints with ﬁve arrows. With those arrows sticking to his chest,
Madri’s son looked resplendent on the chariot, as if the sun was using its rays to shower radiance on the earth. O
venerable one! Nakula pierced Karna with seven iron arrows and again severed the ends of his bow. In that encounter, he220 picked up another bow that was even more powerful and enveloped Nakula and all the directions
with his arrows. When the maharatha was suddenly covered with arrows released from Karna’s bow, he swiftly

used his own arrows to slice down those arrows. The sky was seen to be shrouded with a net of arrows and it was
as if the ﬁrmament was covered with a large number of ﬁreﬂies that were ﬂitting around. Hundreds of arrows were
released and covered the sky and it was as if it was full of a swarm of locusts that had been stirred up by the wind.
Arrows decorated in gold descended repeatedly in an array and were as beautiful as an array of swans. When the
sky was covered by the arrows, the sun was shrouded. O lord of the earth! No beings could descend and nothing
could be seen.221 In every direction, those large numbers of arrows obstructed their paths. Those two immensely
fortunate ones were as resplendent as two young suns that had just arisen. The arrows released from Karna’s bow
slaughtered the Somakas. O Indra among kings! They were severely afﬂicted and pained by the arrows and lost
their lives. In a similar way, Nakula’s arrows killed your soldiers. O king! They were driven away in all the directions, like clouds dispelled by the wind. Those two sets of soldiers were slaughtered by their large and divine arrows and withdrew from that rain of arrows, remaining only as spectators. When the men there were driven away
by Karna and Pandava’s arrows, those two great-souled ones started to pierce each other with their showers of arrows. In that ﬁeld of battle, they displayed their divine weapons. Wishing to kill each other, they violently enveloped each other. The arrows released by Nakula were tufted with the feathers of herons and peacocks. They
seemed to remain stationed there, after having enveloped Karna. O king! Both of them seemed to be in a chamber
created by arrows and could not be seen. They were like the moon and the sun, enveloped during the monsoon.
‘ “Karna became wrathful in that battle and assumed a ﬁercer form. In every direction, he shrouded Pandava
with showers of arrows. O king! In that encounter, Pandava was enveloped by the son of the suta. However, like
the sun covered by clouds, he felt no pain. O venerable one! At this, Adhiratha’s son laughed in the battle and shot
hundreds and thousands of nets of arrows. The arrows of the great-souled one seemed to cover everything in a
canopy of shade. Those supreme arrows were like clouds that were descending. O great king! The great-souled
Karna severed his bow. He laughingly brought his charioteer down from the seat on the chariot. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! With four sharp arrows, he killed his four horses and quickly dispatched them to Yama’s
abode. O venerable one! Using his arrows, he swiftly shattered his chariot into tiny fragments and also destroyed
his ﬂags, the ones who protected his wheels, his standard, his sword, his shield that was decorated with the signs of
one hundred moons and all his implements. O lord of the earth! His horses were slain. He was without a chariot.
He was devoid of his armour. He quickly descended from his chariot and stood there, with a club. O king! That extremely terrible club was raised. However, using hundreds and thousands of arrows, the son of the suta shattered it
into fragments. On seeing that he was without any weapons, Karna struck with many arrows with drooping tufts,
but made sure that he did not hurt him grievously. O king! Nakula was defeated in that battle by someone who was
powerful and was skilled in the use of weapons. With his senses afﬂicted, he suddenly ﬂed. Radheya followed him,
laughing repeatedly. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! He placed the string of his bow around the neck
of the one who was running away.222 Pulled by the string of the great bow around his neck, he was as resplendent
as the moon in the sky, surrounded by white clouds and decorated with Shakra’s bow.223 Karna spoke these words
to him. ‘The words that were spoken by you have been rendered futile. You have been repeatedly struck by me.
Can you cheerfully utter them again? O Pandava! Do not ﬁght again with those who are your superior in strength.
O son! O Pandava! Fight with those who are your equals. Do not be ashamed at this. O son of Madri! Go home, or
go where Krishna and Phalguna are.’ O great king! Having spoken these words, he released him. O king! Though
he could have been killed, the son of the suta did not kill him. O king! He remembered Kunti’s words and abandoned him. O king! Having been released by the archer son of the suta, Pandava was ashamed and went towards
Yudhishthira’s chariot. Having been tormented by the son of the suta, he ascended that chariot and sighed,
scorched by grief, like angry snakes inside a pot.
‘ “Having abandoned him in the battle, Karna swiftly advanced against the Panchalas. He was on a chariot with
dazzling ﬂags and drawn by horses with the complexion of the moon. O lord of the earth! When they saw the commander224 advancing against the Panchalas on his chariot, a great uproar arose among the Pandavas. O great king!
The son of the suta caused carnage there. As the sun reached its midday spot, the lord roamed and wheeled around.
The wheels of chariots were shattered. The standards and ﬂags of others were torn. O venerable one! The son of
the suta killed charioteers and shattered the wheels. We saw the dispirited Panchalas ﬂeeing on their chariots.

Crazy elephants were terriﬁed and roamed here and there, as if their limbs had been burnt by a conﬂagration in a
great forest. The temples of elephants were shattered and they exuded blood. Their trunks were severed. O venerable one! Their bodies and armour were mangled, their tails were sliced down. They were like dispelled clouds, destroyed by that great-souled one. There were other elephants that were frightened because of the iron arrows and
hundreds of spears. They advanced towards him, like insects towards a ﬁre. We saw other giant elephants destroying each other. Blood ﬂowed from their bodies, like water from the slopes of mountains. Horses lost their breastplates, the dressings on their tails and their silver, bronze and golden ornaments. Their coverings were destroyed
and they lost their bridles. Whisks, spreads and quivers fell down. Brave riders, the ornaments of a battle, were
killed. In that battle there, we saw supreme horses wandering around. O lord of men! We saw the best of warriors
who fought on horses, with lances, swords and scimitars. They wore armour and headdresses. They were destroyed. There were chariots embellished with gold, yoked to swift horses. With the rathas swiftly slain, we saw
them roaming around.225 O venerable one! Wheels and poles were destroyed for some, wheels were shattered for
others. There were others without ﬂags and standards, or with their yokes destroyed. O lord of the earth! Deprived
of everything, we saw rathas wandering around in every direction, scorched by the arrows and weapons of Surya’s
son.226 There were those without weapons. And there were many with weapons, but they had been killed. We saw
many foot soldiers from their side running around in every direction. They were adorned with colourful ﬂags of
many different hues, decorated with bells. There were other warriors with severed head, arms and thighs. We saw
the arrows released from Karna’s bow sever them. We beheld those warriors confront a terrible and great calamity.
They were killed by Karna’s sharp arrows. In that battle, the Srinjayas were slaughtered by the son of the suta, as
they advanced towards him, like insects towards a ﬂame. In every spot there, he consumed those arrays of maharathas and the kshatriyas avoided him, taking him to be the ﬁre that comes at the time of the destruction of a
yuga. The remnants of the brave Panchala maharathas were routed and retreated. Karna pursued them from the
rear, showering arrows. They were devoid of armour and standards, but the spirited one pursued them. The maharatha son of the suta tormented them with his arrows. It was like the destroyer of darkness227 scorching beings
when it has attained midday.” ’

Chapter 1168(18)
‘S anjaya said, “Your son, Yuyutsu, was driving away that large army.228 Uluka asked him to wait and quickly attacked him. O king! At this, Yuyutsu used an arrow that was extremely sharp at the edges to strike Uluka, like Indra striking a mountain with his vajra. In that encounter, Uluka became angry with your son and slicing his bow
down with a kshurapra arrow,229 struck him with a barbed arrow. When his bow was severed, Yuyutsu picked up
another large bow that was more forceful. O bull among the Bharata lineage! His eyes red with rage, he pierced
Shakuni’s son with sixty arrows. Striking his charioteer with three arrows, he pierced him230 again. Uluka now
became wrathful in the battle and piercing him with twenty arrows that were adorned with gold, severed his golden
standard. With the pole shattered, that extremely large and lofty standard fell down. O king! Blazing in gold, it fell
down in front of Yuyutsu. On seeing that his standard had been uprooted, Yuyutsu became senseless with rage. He
struck Uluka between the breasts with ﬁve arrows. O venerable one! O supreme among the Bharata lineage! With
a broad-headed arrow that had been washed in oil, Uluka violently severed his charioteer’s head. He then killed his
four horses and pierced him with ﬁve arrows. Having been severely struck by that powerful one, he231 departed
on his chariot. O king! Having defeated him, Uluka swiftly advanced towards the Panchalas and the Srinjayas and
began to slay them with sharp arrows.
‘ “O great king! Fearlessly, and in the twinkling of an eye, your son, Shrutakarma, advanced against Shatanika
and deprived him of his horses, his charioteer and his chariot.232 O venerable one! Though his horses were slain,
the immensely powerful Shatanika remained stationed on his chariot and extremely angry, ﬂung a club towards
your son. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having reduced the chariot, together with its horses and charioteer,
to ashes, it fell down with great force and shattered the earth. Those two brave ones, the extenders of the fame of
the Kuru lineage, were both without chariots. They glared angrily at each other and withdrew from the battle.
Frightened, your son ascended Vivitsu’s chariot.233 Shatanika quickly advanced towards Prativindhya’s
chariot.234
‘ “Angrily, Sutasoma235 pierced Shakuni with sharp arrows, but could not make him tremble, like a wind
against a mountain. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing his father’s supreme enemy, Sutasoma enveloped him with thousands of arrows. However, Shakuni was dexterous and colourful in ﬁghting and wished to
be victorious in that encounter. He severed those arrows with other arrows. In that battle, having countered those
arrows with his sharp arrows, he angrily struck Sutasoma with three arrows. Your immensely valorous brother-inlaw used his arrows to bring down his horses and his charioteer and shattered his standard into fragments. At this,
all the people roared in applause. O venerable one! His horses were slain. He was without a chariot. His bow was
severed. However, the archer236 descended from the chariot, stood on the ground and picked up a supreme bow.
He released gold-tufted arrows that had been sharpened on stone and enveloped your brother-in-law’s chariot. The
shower of arrows released by the maharatha was like a torrent of insects. But on seeing this, Soubala was not distressed and remained stationed on his chariot. The immensely illustrious one countered those arrows with a storm
of his arrows. On witnessing Sutasoma’s extraordinary deed of ﬁghting on foot, while the king was on his chariot,
all the warriors, and all the siddhas who were assembled in the ﬁrmament, were satisﬁed and honoured him. The
king237 then used sharp and extremely forceful broad-headed arrows that possessed drooping tufts to sever his
bow and all his quivers. When his bow was severed in the encounter, he picked up a sword and roared. It possessed
the complexion of lapis lazuli or a lotus and had an ivory handle. It was as radiant as the clear sky, and the intelligent Sutasoma whirled it around. It seemed as if he was Death himself. O great king! He had the strength and

learning of fourteen techniques238 and roamed around, violently whirling his sword in thousands of circular motions. The valiant Soubala shot arrows at him. But as they descended, he quickly severed them with his supreme
sword. O great king! Soubala, the destroyer of enemy heroes, became enraged at this and shot arrows that were
like venomous serpents towards Sutasoma. However, displaying his learning, strength and dexterity, the immensely radiant one, with valour like that of Tarkshya,239 used his sword to slice them down in that battle. O king! As
he was roaming around and executing circular motions, he240 used an extremely sharp kshurapra arrow to sever
that resplendent sword. Thus sliced down, the large sword fell down violently on the ground. When the sword was
severed, maharatha Sutasoma retreated six steps and hurled that part of the sword that was still in his ﬁst. That
fragment was decorated with gold and diamonds. In that encounter, it quickly severed the great-souled one’s241
bow and bowstring and fell down on the ground. After this, Sutasoma went to Shrutakirti’s giant chariot. Soubala
picked up another terrible bow that was extremely difﬁcult to withstand. Using this, he attacked the Pandava soldiers and killed large numbers of the enemy. O lord of the earth! On seeing Soubala fearlessly striding around in
the battle, a loud uproar arose amongst the Pandavas, when they saw that large, proud and armed soldiers were driven away by the great-minded Soubala. O king! It was like the army of the daityas being crushed by the king of the
gods. In that fashion, the Pandava soldiers were destroyed by Soubala.
‘ “O king! Kripa countered Dhrishtadyumna in the battle, like a sharabha242 in a forest, advancing and ﬁghting
against a proud elephant. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Parshata was checked by the powerful Goutama
and could not advance a single step. On witnessing Goutama’s form advancing towards Dhrishtadyumna’s chariot,
all the beings were terriﬁed and thought that he243 was confronting destruction. The rathas and riders were distressed in their minds and said, ‘The immensely energetic Sharadvata, supreme among men, is certainly extremely
enraged at Drona’s killing. He is intelligent and skilled in the use of divine weapons. Will Dhrishtadyumna be safe
today from Goutama? Will this entire army be freed from this great danger? The brahmana will kill all of us together. His severe form is seen to be like that of the Destroyer. In this encounter, he will follow the footsteps of
Bharadvaja’s son. The preceptor244 is light in the use of his hands and is always victorious in battle. He possesses
the valour of weapons and is angry as well. It can be seen that Parshata is now extremely reluctant to ﬁght.’ These
and other words were spoken by those on your side and on the side of the enemy. O king! Kripa Sharadvata
breathed angrily and enveloped Parshata, who was immobile, in all his inner organs. In that encounter, he was
struck by the great-souled Goutama. He was supremely confounded in that battle and did not know what he should
do. His charioteer said, ‘O Parshata! Are you ﬁne? I have never seen you face such a difﬁculty in a battle. These
arrows shot by that foremost among brahmanas are capable of penetrating the inner organs and are directed at your
inner organs. It is sheer fortune that you have escaped. I will withdraw the chariot from the spot, like the force of a
river driven back by the ocean. Your valour has been destroyed by this brahmana and I think that he cannot be
killed.’ O king! At this, Dhrishtadyumna gently spoke these words. ‘O son!245 My mind has gone numb and there
is sweat on my body. Behold! My body is overcome by lassitude and my body hair is standing up. O charioteer!
Abandon the brahmana in the battle and slowly go to the spot where Achyuta, Arjuna and Bhimasena are, so that I
may obtain safety in the battle. In my view, that is what we should do.’ O great king! At this, the charioteer urged
the horses towards the spot where the great archer, Bhima, was ﬁghting with your soldiers. O venerable one! On
seeing that Dhrishtadyumna’s chariot was going away, Goutama followed it and showered hundreds of arrows. The
scorcher of enemies repeatedly blew on his conch shell. He drove away Parshata, like the great Indra against
Shambara.
‘ “The invincible Shikhandi was responsible for Bhishma’s death. In the battle, Hardikya246 smiled repeatedly
and repulsed him. Shikhandi advanced against the maharatha from the Hridika lineage and struck him between the
shoulder joints with ﬁve sharp and iron arrows. Kritavarma became angry and struck him with sixty swift arrows.
O king! The maharatha smiled and severed his247 bow with a single arrow. Drupada’s powerful son then grasped
another bow and enraged, asked Hardikya to wait. O Indra among kings! He shot ninety arrows that were goldtufted and extremely forceful. But they were repulsed by his248 armour. On seeing that they were repulsed and fell
down on the ground, the powerful one used an extremely sharp kshurapra arrow to sever his bow. When the bow

had been severed, he249 was like a bull with shattered horns and he250 angrily struck him in the arms and the
chest with eighty arrows. Though he was angry, Kritavarma was mangled by these arrows. The lord picked up another stringed bow and afﬁxing arrows, struck Shikhandi in the shoulder with those supreme arrows. With those
arrows sticking to his shoulders, Shikhandi looked beautiful. He was like a giant tree, with sparkling branches and
sub-branches. Having severely pierced each other, they were both covered with blood. They were as resplendent as
bulls that had wounded each other with their horns. Those two maharathas made supreme efforts to kill each other.
They roamed around on their chariots, executing a thousand circular motions. O great king! In that battle, Kritavarma pierced Parshata with seventy arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone. In that encounter,
Bhoja, supreme among strikers, quickly released a terrible arrow that was capable of robbing life. O king! Severely
struck by this, he251 quickly lost his consciousness. He suddenly lost his senses and grasped the pole of his standard. His charioteer took the supreme of rathas away from the battle. Tormented by Hardikya’s arrows, he sighed
repeatedly. O lord! Drupada’s brave son was defeated. At this, the Pandava soldiers were slaughtered and ﬂed in all
directions.” ’

Chapter 1169(19)
‘S anjaya said, “O great king! The one on the white horses252 killed your soldiers, like the wind scattering a mass
of cotton in every direction. The Trigartas, Shibis, Kouravas, Shalvas, samshaptakas and the army of narayanas
combined and attacked him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were Satyasena, Satyakirti, Mitradeva,
Shrutanjaya, Soushruti, Chitrasena and Mitravarma. In that battle, the king of Trigarta was surrounded by his
brothers and sons. They were great archers and wielded many kinds of weapons while ﬁghting. In that battle
against Arjuna, they released a storm of arrows. They attacked in that encounter, like waves agitated by the wind in
the ocean. Hundreds and thousands of warriors attacked Arjuna, but all of them encountered their destruction, like
serpents at the sight of Tarkshya.253 O king! But though they were killed in that battle, they did not abandon Pandava. They were scorched, like insects in a ﬁre.
‘ “In that battle, Satyasena pierced Pandava with three arrows, Mitradeva with sixty-three, Chandradeva with
seven, Mitravarma with seventy-three, Soushruti with ﬁve, Shatrunjaya with twenty and Susharma with nine arrows. He254 killed King Shatrunjaya with arrows sharpened on stone. He severed Soushruti’s helmeted head from
his body. He swiftly used arrows to convey Chandradeva to Yama’s eternal abode. O great king! When the other
maharathas endeavoured against him, he struck them with ﬁve arrows each. Satyasena became angry in that battle.
He roared like a lion and hurled a giant spear towards Krishna. It was extremely terrible and was made completely
out of iron. It pierced the great-souled Madhava’s left arm and penetrated the ground. O lord of the earth! Madhava
was thus pierced by the spear in that great battle, and the whip and the reins fell down from his hand. However, the
immensely illustrious one picked up the whip and the reins again and drove the horses towards Satyasena’s chariot.
On seeing that Vishvaksena255 had been pierced, the immensely strong Partha Dhananjaya struck Satyasena with
sharp arrows. In the forefront of that army, with extremely sharp arrows, he severed the king’s large head, adorned
with earrings, from his body. O venerable one! He then struck and killed Chitravarma with sharp arrows and used a
sharp vatsadanta arrow to kill his charioteer. He angrily brought down hundreds and thousands from that mass of
samshaptakas with hundreds of arrows. With a kshurapra arrow that was silver-tufted, the great-souled and immensely illustrious one severed King Mitradeva’s head. In wrath, he struck Susharma between his shoulder joints.
At this, all the samshaptakas surrounded Dhananjaya. They angrily showered him with weapons and roared in the
ten directions. Jishnu, who was like Shakra in his valour, was oppressed by them. The maharatha, whose soul was
immeasurable, released the aindra256 weapon. O lord of the earth! Thousands of arrows were released from this.
In that encounter, standards, bows, chariots and their ﬂags, quivers with their arrows, axles, yokes, wheels, harnesses, seatings, bumpers and whips were shattered. In that battle, rocks rained down, with a shower of lances.
There were clubs, maces, lances and spears. O venerable one! Shataghnis with wheels and arms and thighs fell
down, with necklaces, armlets and bracelets. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were golden necklaces
and body armour, with umbrellas, whisks and heads adorned with crowns. O lord of the earth! A great sound could
be heard there. There were heads ornamented with earrings, with faces like the full moon. They could be seen lying there, like stars in the ﬁrmament. The slain bodies could be seen on the ground. They had excellent garlands
and excellent garments and were smeared with sandalwood paste. At that time, the ﬁerce ﬁeld of battle looked like
a city of the gandharvas. Immensely strong princes and kshatriyas were killed. Elephants and swift horses were
brought down on the ground. In that battle, they were heaped around like mountains and it became difﬁcult to pass.
As the great-souled Pandava slew a large number of the enemy and elephants with his broad-headed arrows, there
was no path for him. As he roamed around in that battle, in that red-coloured mud, it was as if the wheels of his
own chariot were sinking in distress. But though the wheels seemed to sink, his horses possessed great energy and

had the speed of the mind and the wind. They exerted a great effort and dragged along Pandu’s archer son, as he
killed those soldiers. None of them could remain stationed in the battle and most of them retreated. In that battle,
Jishnu defeated large numbers of samshaptakas. O great king! He was resplendent, like a blazing ﬁre without any
smoke.
‘ “O great king! Yudhishthira shot a large number of arrows and King Duryodhana fearlessly received him himself. On seeing that your immensely strong son was violently descending, Dharmaraja asked him to wait and
pierced him. He257 pierced him back with nine sharp arrows and, extremely angry, struck his charioteer with a
broad-headed arrow. At this, King Yudhishthira shot thirteen arrows at Duryodhana. They were gold-tufted and
sharpened on stone and possessed stone heads. The maharatha258 killed his four horses with four arrows and with
a ﬁfth, severed his charioteer’s head from his body. With a sixth, he brought down the king’s standard; with a seventh, his bow; and with an eighth, his sword, on the ground. With ﬁve more arrows, Dharmaraja severely struck
the king. With the horses slain, your son descended from his chariot. He was stationed on the ground and was in
supreme danger. On seeing that he was overcome by this calamity, Karna, Drona’s son, Kripa and the others collectively rushed there, wishing to save the king. O king! At this, all the sons of Pandu surrounded Yudhishthira in
the battle and an encounter commenced.
‘ “In that great battle, thousands of trumpets were sounded. O lord of the earth! As the Panchalas clashed against
the Kouravas, a tumultuous sound arose. Men clashed against men and elephants against supreme elephants.
Rathas clashed against rathas and horses against horse riders. O great king! Duels could be witnessed in that encounter. As supreme weapons were used, the sight was wonderful and unthinkable. They wished to kill each other
and fought with great force, killing each other in that battle and following the vow of warriors. In that encounter,
for a short while, no one attacked from the rear and it was beautiful to see. O king! But it soon became crazy and
no one followed codes of honour. As they roamed around in the ﬁeld of battle, rathas attacked elephants and dispatched them to Yama, using straight-tufted arrows. Elephants attacked horses and brought down large numbers of
them there, ﬁercely driving them away. O king! Having driven away large numbers of horses, the elephants were
intoxicated with their strength and gored them with their tusks or severely crushed them. In that battle, they
pierced horse riders and horses with their tusks. Others picked them up powerfully and ﬂung them down with great
force. In every direction, there were elephants that were struck by foot soldiers in their weak spots. They uttered
ﬁerce woes of lamentation and ﬂed in the ten directions. In that great battle, foot soldiers were violently driven
away. In the ﬁeld of battle, there were many who quickly discarded their ornaments. Having determined that this
was a sign, the giant elephants picked up those expensive ornaments and pierced them.259 Other elephants were
severely wounded in their temples and the bases of their tusks by lances and spears. Others were sorely and ﬁercely struck along their sides with clubs hurled by rathas and horse riders. They were shattered and fell down on the
ground. There were other giant elephants that powerfully brought charioteers and horse riders down on the ground,
with their armour and their ﬂags. O venerable one! In that great battle, some elephants assumed terrible forms.
They approached rathas and picking them up, hurled them down violently. Giant elephants were killed by iron arrows and brought down. They lay down on the ground, like mountain peaks shattered by thunder. In the battle,
warriors encountered warriors and struck each other with their ﬁsts. They dragged and seized each other by the
hair. Others sought to use their arms and ﬂung the foe down on the ground. They placed their feet on their chests
and cheerfully severed their heads. O great king! With their feet, some kicked those that were already dead. Others
used weapons to sever the bodies of those who were alive but dying. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that
spot, warriors fought great ﬁghts with their ﬁsts. They ﬁercely seized each other by the hair and there were others
who only wrestled. In that battle, there were many who were killed with weapons while they were ﬁghting with
another and were therefore ignorant.260 The warriors were thus engaged in that frightful encounter. Hundreds and
thousands of headless torsos stood there. The weapons and armour were red. And in that great arena, so were the
garments. Thus did that great and ﬁerce battle rage on and ﬁlled the universe with a sound like that of violent
waves. O king! Oppressed by arrows, they could not distinguish those on one’s own side from that of the enemy. O
great king! Desiring victory, the kings fought as they should and killed those who advanced against them, whether
they were from their own side or from the side of the enemy. As they advanced, the warriors on both sides were

anxious. O great king! The chariots were shattered and the elephants were brought down. The horses were brought
down and the men fell. The earth was covered with ﬂesh, blood and mud and became impassable. O great king! In
a short instant, there were currents of blood. Karna killed the Panchalas and Dhananjaya killed the Trigartas. O
king! Bhimasena killed the Kurus and their entire army of elephants. O great king! In this way, there was carnage
among the soldiers of the Kurus and the Pandavas, as they clashed in the afternoon, desiring a great victory.” ’

Chapter 1170(20)
‘D hritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! I have heard from you about many ﬁerce and terrible sorrows that are difﬁcult to
tolerate and about the destruction of my sons. O suta! From what you have told me and from the way the war is
going on, it is my ﬁrm view that the Kouravas don’t exist any more. In that great battle, Duryodhana was deprived
of his chariot. What did Dharma’s son do then and what did the king261 do in return? How did the battle that
makes the body hair stand up rage in the afternoon? O Sanjaya! You are skilled. Tell me all this in detail.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “The soldiers fought in accordance with their different divisions. O lord of the earth! Your son
resorted to another chariot. He was overcome by great rage, like a venomous snake. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! On seeing Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, Duryodhana quickly told his charioteer, ‘O charioteer! Drive and
swiftly take me to the spot where Pandava is. The king is resplendent in his armour there and an umbrella is held
aloft his head.’ Having been thus instructed by the king, in that encounter, the charioteer drove that supreme chariot towards King Yudhishthira. Yudhisthira was also angry and maddened, like an excellent bull. He instructed his
charioteer to go to the spot where Suyodhana was. The best of rathas, those two brave brothers who were immensely valorous, clashed against each other, armoured and invincible in battle. In the battle, those two great
archers mangled each other with their arrows. O venerable one! In that encounter, with a broad-headed arrow that
was sharpened on stone, King Duryodhana severed the bow of the one who observed dharma in his conduct. Yudhishthira could not tolerate this conduct and became enraged. In front of the army, Dharma’s son cast aside that
severed bow and, his eyes red with rage, picked up another bow and severed Duryodhana’s standard and bow.
He262 picked up another bow and pierced Pandava back. Extremely angry, they showered down arrows on each
other. They wished to defeat each other and were as enraged as lions. They struck each other and roared like bulls.
The maharathas roamed around, glancing at each other. O great king! They drew their bows back to the complete
extent and wounded each other. They were as resplendent as ﬂowering kimshukas. O king! They roared repeatedly
at each other, like lions. In that great battle, they made sounds with the slapping of their palms and the twangs of
their bows. O great king! Those best of rathas blew on their conch shells and severely wounded each other. King
Yudhishthira angrily struck your son in the chest with three arrows that were irresistible and had the force of the
vajra. Your son quickly pierced the king back, using ﬁve sharp arrows that were gold-tufted and sharpened on
stone. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! King Duryodhana hurled a lance. It was sharp, made completely out of
iron and like a giant meteor. On seeing it descend violently, Dharmaraja used sharp arrows to powerfully shatter it
into three fragments and then pierced him with seven arrows. That extremely expensive lance fell down, with its
golden handle, blazing like a giant meteor with trails of ﬁre. O lord of the earth! On seeing that the lance had been
destroyed, your son struck Yudhishthira with nine sharp and broad-headed arrows. The foremost among scorcher
of enemies263 was powerfully and severely struck and quickly afﬁxed an arrow in Duryodhana’s direction. The
immensely strong and valiant king afﬁxed the arrow on his ﬁerce bow and angrily released it at the king.264 That
arrow struck your maharatha son. Having robbed the king of his senses, it penetrated the ground. Duryodhana became angry at this and forcefully raised a club. He advanced against Pandava, wishing to bring an end to the
feud.265 With that upraised club, he was like Yama with a staff in his hand. On seeing this, Dharmaraja hurled a
giant spear towards your son. It blazed and was immensely powerful, ﬂaming like a giant meteor. As he266 was
stationed on his chariot, it pierced his armour in the great battle. Severely wounded and struck in the chest, he lost
his senses and fell down.
‘ “Kritavarma swiftly approached your son, as the king was immersed in an ocean of hardship. Bhima also
grasped a giant club that was decorated with gold and in that battle, powerfully advanced against Kritavarma. Thus

the battle raged between those on your side and the enemy.” ’

Chapter 1171(21)
‘S anjaya said, “Those on your side placed Karna at the forefront. They were invincible in battle and the encounter
commenced again, like that between the gods and the asuras. There was the sound of elephants, chariots, men,
horses and conch shells and that of many weapons descending. Elephants, rathas and foot soldiers, with their leaders, were cheered by this and descended and struck each other. The riders used arrows, battleaxes, supreme swords,
spikes and many different kinds of arrows. In that great battle, there were elephants, chariots, horses, the best of
men and the vehicles of the men. The ground was beautiful, strewn with the heads of men. The faces possessed the
complexion of the lotus, the sun or the moon. The teeth were white. The mouths, eyes and noses were excellent.
They were adorned with beautiful crowns and earrings. Thousands of elephants, men and horses were killed with
hundreds of clubs, maces, spears, javelins, nails, catapults and bludgeons. A river of blood began to ﬂow. The slain
and wounded men, rathas, horses and elephants were terrible to look at. Because that large army was destroyed in
the cause, it was like the kingdom of the lord of the ancestors267 when there is a destruction of beings.
‘ “O god among men! Your soldiers and your sons looked like the sons of the gods, when, in the forefront of the
battle, those bulls among the Kurus advanced against Shini’s descendant.268 That army was extremely beautiful
and was ﬁerce in its sentiments. It was full of the best of men, horses, chariots and elephants. It was like the soldiers of the immortals or the asuras and made a sound like the salty ocean. The son of the sun269 was like the lord
of the gods in his valour. As a warrior, he was equal to the best among the thirty gods. He attacked the foremost
among the Shini lineage with arrows that blazed like the rays of the sun. In that encounter, the bull among the Shini lineage quickly used many kinds of arrows, which were as resplendent as venomous snakes, and enveloped the
supreme among men,270 with his chariot, his horses and his charioteer. Vasusena271 was oppressed because of the
arrows of the bull among the Shinis, and the atirathas and well-wishers on your side quickly advanced towards that
bull among rathas,272 together with their elephants, chariots, horses and foot soldiers. That force was as large as
the ocean. But it was quickly driven away by the enemy, the friends of Drupada’s son,273 and there was a great
destruction of men, rathas, horses and elephants.
‘ “The best of men, Arjuna and Keshava, performed their religious ceremonies and worshipped Lord Bhava274
in accordance with the proper rites. They set their minds on killing the enemy and swiftly rushed against your
army. The chariot roared like a cloud and the ﬂags and standard ﬂuttered in the wind. It was drawn by white horses. On seeing it advance towards them, like Death, they275 were distressed in their minds. Arjuna stretched Gandiva and seemed to dance around in the battle. He showered arrows and covered the sky, the directions and the subdirections. There were chariots that were like celestial vehicles, equipped with machines, weapons and standards.
Using his arrows, he destroyed these, together with their charioteers, like a wind driving away clouds. There were
elephants with triumphant standards and weapons and those who controlled these elephants. There were horse riders, horses and foot soldiers. Using his arrows, he conveyed them to Yama’s eternal abode. The maharatha was angry and unassailable, like Yama. Duryodhana advanced against him alone and struck him with his arrows. However, Arjuna used seven arrows to strike his bow, his charioteer, his standard and his horses.276 With another arrow,
he then brought down his umbrella. He then afﬁxed a ninth arrow, with the desire of killing Duryodhana. However,
Drona’s son shattered that supreme arrow into seven fragments. Pandava then used supreme arrows to destroy the
bow of Drona’s son and also killed his horses. He then severed Kripa’s ﬁerce bow. Having severed Hardikya’s bow
and standard and killed his horses, he cut down Duhshasana’s supreme bow and attacked Radheya. At this, Karna
abandoned Satyaki and struck Arjuna with three arrows. He then pierced Krishna with twenty arrows and struck

Partha with three more. However, Satyaki advanced against Karna and pierced him with sharp arrows, ﬁrst with
ninety-nine ﬁerce arrows and yet again with one hundred. All the foremost among the Pandus oppressed Karna—
Yudhamanyu, Shikhandi, Droupadi’s sons, the Prabhadrakas, Uttamouja, Yuyutsu, the twins and Parshata.277 The
Chedis, Karushas, Matsyas, Kekayas and their armies, the powerful Chekitana and Dharmaraja, excellent in his
vows—these rathas, horses, elephants and foot soldiers who were ﬁerce in their valour—surrounded Karna in that
battle and released many kinds of weapons. All of them devoted themselves to killing Karna and addressed him in
ﬁerce and eloquent words. Karna used his sharp arrows to cut down those numerous showers of weapons. He destroyed all of them, like a wind breaks down trees. One saw Karna angrily use his storm of arrows to destroy
rathas, elephants and their riders, horses and their riders. The Pandu forces were slaughtered by Karna’s energy.
Most of them lost their weapons and their bodies were wounded. They retreated. Then, Arjuna himself countered
Karna’s weapons with his own weapons. He enveloped the directions, the sky and the earth with his showers of arrows. Those arrows descended like clubs and bludgeons. Some were like shataghnis and others were as ﬁerce as
the vajra. The soldiers, the foot soldiers, horses, rathas and elephants, were destroyed. They closed their eyes, uttered woes of lamentation and ﬂed distractedly in different directions. In that battle, horses, men and elephants
were destroyed. The soldiers were killed by the arrows and terriﬁed, ﬂed.
‘ “Thus did they engage in battle, desiring victory. The sun approached Mount Asta.278 O great king! In particular, there was darkness and dust. We could not see anything, favourable or unfavourable. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The great archers were frightened of ﬁghting in the night. With all their horses, they therefore
withdrew.279 O king! When the Kouravas departed at the end of the day, the Parthas were delighted in their minds
at having obtained victory and also left for their own camps. They showed contempt for the enemy by sounding
many kinds of musical instruments, roaring like lions, dancing and praising Achyuta and Arjuna. When the brave
ones and all the soldiers retreated, all the lords of men pronounced benedictions on the Pandaveyas. Having retreated, the Kurus and the Pandavas were cheerful. The lords of men went to their camps in the night and rested.
Large numbers of yakshas, rakshas, pishachas and carnivorous beasts went to that terrible ﬁeld of battle, which
was like Rudra’s dancing arena.” ’

Chapter 1172(22)
‘D hritarashtra said, “Arjuna killed all of us easily, as he wished. I don’t think Yama would have escaped, had he
attacked him in a battle. O fortunate one! Partha robbed single-handed. Single-handed, he satisﬁed Agni.280 He
vanquished the earth single-handed and made all the powerful kings offer tribute.281 Single-handedly, using his
divine bow, he killed the nivatakavachas.282 He fought single-handedly with Sharva, who was in the form of a
hunter.283 He protected the Bharatas single-handed and satisﬁed Bhava.284 Fierce in his energy, he single-handedly defeated all those on my side. They285 should not be censured. Tell me what they did next.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “They were killed, wounded and shattered. They were deprived of their armour and the vehicles that bore them in war. Their voices were distressed. Those insolent ones grieved and were defeated by the enemy. The Kouravas went to their camps and sought counsel and advice from each other. They were like serpents
that had been defanged and had lost their poison, having then been trod on by the foot. Karna angrily spoke to
them, sighing like a snake. He rubbed one hand against another hand and glanced towards your son.286 ‘Arjuna is
always ﬁrm, skilled and persevering. He understands and when the time is right, Adhokshaja287 instructs him. We
were deceived by him today, because of that sudden shower of weapons. O lord of the earth! But tomorrow, I will
destroy all his intentions.’288 Thus addressed by him, the supreme among kings gave his assent. Having cheerfully
spent the night, they emerged to do battle. They saw that Dharmaraja had constructed an invincible vyuha, which
the foremost among the Kurus had constructed according to the injunctions of Brihaspati and Ushanas.289 At this,
Duryodhana remembered Karna, whose shoulders were like that of a bull. He was in control of his soul and could
counteract the deeds of others. He was Purandara’s equal in a battle and as strong as the masses of Maruts. Karna
was like Kartyavirya290 in his valour and the king’s mind turned towards him. The son of a suta was a great
archer, and in a hardship, one turns towards a relative.
‘Dhritarashtra said, “In that miserable situation, your minds turned towards Vaikartana Karna. Did you look towards him, like those afﬂicted with cold glance towards the sun? After the retreat was over, the battle commenced
again. O Sanjaya! How did Vaikartana Karna ﬁght then? How did all the Pandavas ﬁght there, with the son of a
suta? The mighty-armed Karna could single-handedly kill the Parthas and the Somakas. It is my view that the valour of Karna’s arms is equal to that of Shakra and Vishnu. The great-souled one’s weapons and valour are extremely terrible. He saw that Duryodhana was severely afﬂicted by the Pandavas and he also saw that the sons of Pandu
were extremely powerful in that great battle. Yet again, in the battle, the proud Duryodhana had relied on Karna to
defeat the Parthas, their sons and Keshava. It is a great sorrow that the powerful Karna could not overcome the
sons of Pandu in the encounter. There is no doubt that destiny is supreme. The consequences of that terrible gambling match have arrived now. Alas! These terrible miseries are the result of what Duryodhana did. O Sanjaya! I
am bearing all these extremely ﬁerce stakes. O son!291 Soubala292 was revered as one who knew about policy. O
Sanjaya! Though this is named a battle, it is a gambling match that is going on. I am always hearing about my sons
being killed and defeated. There is no one who is capable of countering the Pandavas in battle and they are immersing themselves, as if in the midst of a crowd of women. Destiny is certainly most powerful.”
‘Sanjaya said, “Those deeds have been done and you are thinking about them now. Those deeds should not have
been done. But thinking about them brings destruction. The deeds that you did are long distant from memory. You
did what should not have been done, and you did not think then about what would be obtained, and what would not
be obtained, from those deeds. O king! You have been told several times not to ﬁght with the Pandavas. O lord of
the earth! But because of your delusion, you did not accept that advice about the Pandavas. You performed many

terrible deeds against the sons of Pandu. It is because of what you did that this terrible destruction of kings is taking place. O bull among the Bharata lineage! But all that has transpired. Do not sorrow about it. O one without decay! Listen to a detailed account of the terrible destruction that happened.
‘ “When night was over and it was morning, Karna went to the king. Meeting Duryodhana, the mighty-armed
one said, ‘O king! I will clash against Pandu’s illustrious son today. Either I will kill that brave one, or he will kill
me. O lord of the earth! O king! Because of the many things that Partha and I have done, this clash between me
and Arjuna has not taken place earlier. O lord of the earth! I am speaking these words in accordance with my wisdom. Listen to them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will not return without having killed Partha in battle.
The foremost of our soldiers have been killed and I am the one who will be stationed in battle. Partha will attack
me, now that I am without Shakra’s spear.293 O lord of men! Therefore, listen to what is beneﬁcial. The valour of
my weapons is equal to the energy of Arjuna’s. Savyasachi is not my equal in ﬁghting against great warriors, dexterity, shooting from a distance, skill and the use of weapons. My bow, Vijaya, is supreme among all weapons.
Vishvakarma294 constructed it for Indra’s sake. It was with this that Shatakratu vanquished large numbers of
daityas. In the ten directions, the daityas were confounded because of its roar. Shakra gave that revered weapon to
Bhargava and Bhargava gave that divine and supreme bow to me.295 With this, I will ﬁght against the mightyarmed Arjuna, foremost among victorious ones, like Indra ﬁghting in a battle against all the assembled daityas.
Rama296 gave me this terrible bow and it is superior to Gandiva. It was with this bow that he297 conquered the
earth twenty-one times. Bhargava told me about this bow’s divine deeds and Rama gave it to me. I will use it to
ﬁght against Pandava. O Duryodhana! I will delight you and your relatives today. I will kill the brave Arjuna, foremost among victorious ones, in the battle. O king! The entire earth, with its mountains, forests, islands and oceans,
will be yours, for your sons and your grandsons to be established in, without any opposition. There is nothing that I
cannot accomplish today, especially if it is something that brings you pleasure, just as one who has controlled his
soul and follows dharma is certain to obtain success. Like a tree against ﬁre, he will not be able to stand against me
in the battle. But I must certainly tell you how I am inferior to Phalguna. His bowstring is divine and his large
quivers are inexhaustible. He possesses a celestial and supreme bow and Gandiva is invincible in battle. I also possess a supreme, great and divine bow known as Vijaya. O king! Therefore, in the matter of bows, I am superior to
Partha. Listen to how that brave Pandava is superior to me. His reins are held by Dasharha, who is revered by all
the worlds. His divine chariot is decorated with gold and was given to him by Agni. O brave one! It is impenetrable in every way and his horses are as swift as thought. His standard is divine and, with the resplendent ape atop it,
causes wonder. Krishna, the creator of the universe, protects that chariot. Though I am inferior to him in these respects, I still wish to ﬁght with Pandava. But this brave Shalya, the ornament of assemblies, is his298 equal. If he
acts as my charioteer, there will certainly be victory. Shalya is incapable of being resisted by the enemy. Therefore,
let him be my charioteer. Let a large number of carts bear iron arrows that are shafted with the feathers of vultures.
O Indra among kings! Let supreme horses be yoked to the best of chariots. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Let
these always follow me from the rear. Through these, my qualities will be superior to those of Partha. Shalya
knows more about horses than Krishna, and I am superior to Arjuna. Just as Dasharha, the destroyer of enemy heroes, knows about the minds of horses, maharatha Shalya also knows about horses. There is no one who is equal to
the king of Madra in the strength of his arms. Just as there is no archer who is equal to me in weapons, there is no
one who is equal to Shalya in knowledge of horses. In this fashion, my chariot will become superior to that of
Partha’s. O great king! O scorcher of enemies! I have told you what I desire. Please do this. Let all these wishes of
mine be satisﬁed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You will then see what I accomplish in this battle. In every
way, I will vanquish all the Pandavas, when they advance against me.’ Duryodhana replied, ‘O Karna! I will do
everything that you have thought of. O son of a suta! Chariots, with implements and horses, will follow you. There
will be many carts, bearing iron arrows tufted with the feathers of vultures. O Karna! We, and all these kings, will
follow you.’ O great king! Having spoken thus, your powerful son went to the king of Madra and spoke these
words to him.” ’

Chapter 1173(23)
‘S anjaya said, “O great king! Your son spoke these words to the king of Madra. He went humbly to him and spoke
these affectionate words to him. ‘O one who observes truthful vows! O immensely fortunate one! O one who increases the hardship of enemies! O lord of Madra! O one who is brave in battle! O one who is terrible to enemy
soldiers! O supreme among eloquent ones! You have heard Karna’s words. I am seeking you out among all these
lions among kings. This is for Partha’s destruction and for my welfare. O best of rathas! O one with an excellent
mind! You should accept the task of being a charioteer. There is no one in the worlds who is your equal in holding
the reins. Protect Karna in every way, like Brahma protects Shankara. Krishna is Partha’s adviser and he is
supreme in holding the reins. In that fashion, always protect Radheya. Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna, you, the
valiant Bhoja, Shakuni Soubala, Drona’s son and I are our strength. O leader of an army! In that fashion, we were
divided into nine divisions. The divisions of the great-souled Bhishma and Drona no longer exist. They slew my
enemy, more than the two parts that were allotted to them.299 But those two tigers among men were old and were
killed through deceit. O unblemished one! Having performed extremely difﬁcult deeds for us, they have gone to
heaven. In that way, in this battle, many other tigers among men have been slain by the enemy. In that way, in this
encounter, there are many on our side who have ascended to heaven, giving up their lives, striving to the best of
their capacity and performing good rites. The mighty-armed Karna alone remains, engaged in our welfare. O tiger
among men! And you are there, a maharatha in all the worlds. O lord of Madra! That is the reason my hopes of
victory are still great. Krishna is foremost among those who hold Partha’s reins in battle. O king! In the battle, he
is engaged in protecting Partha. You have witnessed the deeds that he has performed. Earlier, in an encounter, Arjuna has never killed enemies in this fashion.300 O lord of Madra! But you have seen how he has killed and driven
away in this battle. O immensely radiant one! Yours and Karna’s divisions are left. In the battle, unite with Karna
and bear that share. O venerable one! Surya and Aruna are seen to destroy the darkness.301 In that way, destroy
the Kounteyas, with the Panchalas and the Srinjayas. Karna is foremost among rathas. You are foremost among
men. When there is a clash, there is no one in the worlds who is your equal. Varshneya protects the Pandavas in
every situation. In that way, in this battle, protect Vaikartana Karna. O lord of the earth! If you are the charioteer of
the horses, he will be unassailable in a battle by Shakra and all the gods, not to speak of the Pandaveyas. Do not
doubt these words of mine.’
‘ “Hearing these words of Duryodhana, Shalya was ﬁlled with anger. His brows furrowed into three lines. He
repeatedly whirled his hands around. His large eyes were red with rage. The mighty-armed Shalya was proud of
his lineage, prosperity, knowledge and strength. He spoke these words. ‘O son of Gandhari! You are insulting me
and it is certain that you suspect me. Without any hesitation, you have asked me to act as a charioteer. You regard
Karna to be superior to us and have honoured and praised him. But I have never regarded Radheya as my equal in
battle. O lord of the earth! Instruct me to assume a burden that is greater than my share. Having defeated them in
battle, I will return to the place I have come from. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! I will ﬁght single-handedly
with them. As I consume the enemies in the battle, behold my valour today. O Kouravya! It is not proper for a man
to advance with an injury in his heart. Do not doubt me and do not enjoin me in this way. You should not act so as
to insult me in the battle. Behold my thick arms. They are capable of withstanding the vajra. Behold my colourful
bow and these arrows, which are like venomous serpents. Behold my chariot. Well-trained horses that are as swift
as the wind have been yoked to it. O son of Gandhari! Behold my club. It has been decorated with strips of golden
garments. If I am angry, I can split the earth and shatter the mountains. O lord of the earth! I can dry up the oceans
with my energy. O king! Knowing that I am capable of oppressing the enemy in this way, why are you instructing

me to be the charioteer of Adhiratha’s inferior son in the battle? O Indra among kings! You should not employ me
on such a lowly task. Since I am superior, I have no interest in following the commands of that wicked person. A
superior person has arrived with affection and obedience. If one makes such a person subject to the commands of
an inferior one, one commits the crime of confusing the inferior with the superior. Brahma created brahmanas from
his mouth and kshatriyas from his chest. He created vaishyas from his thighs and shudras from his feet. That is
what has been heard. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Because of mixture among the varnas, those who are
other than the four varnas, pratiloma and anuloma, have been generated.302 It has been said in the sacred texts
that kshatriyas are protectors. They accumulate wealth and distribute it. Pure brahmanas act as ofﬁciating priests,
study and receive.303 Brahmanas have been established on earth for the sake of gratifying people. Agriculture, animal husbandry and donations are always the tasks of vaishyas. It has been decreed that shudras are the servants of
brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaishyas. It has been decreed that sutas are the servants of brahmanas and kshatriyas.
They are not the servants of shudras.304 O unblemished one! Therefore, listen to my words. I am one whose head
has been consecrated.305 I have been born in a lineage of rajarshis. I am famous as a maharatha and should be
served by bards and minstrels. O destroyer of enemy forces! Since I am such a person, I have no interest in being
the charioteer of the son of the suta in battle. Having been thus humiliated, I will never ﬁght. O son of Gandhari! I
am seeking your permission now, because I wish to return to the place that I have come from.’ Having spoken
these words, Shalya, tiger among men and the ornament of an assembly, was angry and quickly stood up in the
midst of those kings.
‘ “However, your son restrained him, with affection and great respect. He spoke sweet and conciliatory words
that were capable of achieving every object. ‘O Shalya! There is no doubt that it is exactly as you have said. O lord
of men! But I have an objective. Please listen to it. O king! Karna is not superior to you and I have never doubted
you. The king who is the lord of Madra will never do something that is false. Your ancestors, the best of men, always spoke the truth. It is my view that this is the reason you are known as Artayani.306 O one who deserves honours. That is the reason, on this earth, you are like a stake to enemies.307 O lord of the earth! That is the reason
you are known by the name of Shalya. You have given away a large quantity of donations earlier. O one who
knows about dharma! Therefore, for my sake, do what you have promised to do earlier. Radheya and I are not
more valiant than you, that I am asking you to be the charioteer of those foremost of horses in the battle. Just as the
world thinks that Karna is superior to Dhananjaya in qualities, the world thinks that Shalya is superior to Vasudeva. O bull among men! Karna is superior to Partha in weapons. And you are superior to Krishna in the knowledge
of horses and in strength. The great-minded Vasudeva knows about the heart of horses. O king of Madra! But there
is no doubt that you are twice as knowledgeable as him.” Shalya replied, “O son of Gandhari! O Kourava! Since,
in the midst of the soldiers, you have said that I am superior to Devaki’s son, I am pleased with you. Therefore, I
will be the charioteer of the illustrious Radheya, while he ﬁghts with the foremost of the Pandavas. O brave one! It
shall be as you wish. O brave one! But let this be clear to Vaikartana, what when the time is right, I will be free to
speak disrespectful words to him.” O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O supreme among the Bharata
lineage! Together with Karna, your son told the king of Madra that it would be this way.’

Chapter 1174(24)
‘ “D uryodhana said, ‘O lord of Madra! Listen once more to what I am about to tell you. O lord! This is an account
of the ancient battle that took place between the gods and the asuras. The great rishi, Markandeya, told my father
about this. O supreme among rajarshis! I will recount it, without leaving anything out. You should listen to it, without doubting its veracity.
‘ “‘The gods and the asuras engaged with each other in a mighty battle. O king! At ﬁrst, there was the encounter
known as Tarakamaya.308 It has been heard by us that the daityas were then defeated by the gods. O king! When
the daityas were defeated, Taraka’s three sons, Taraksha,309 Kamalaksha and Vidyunmali, resorted to ﬁerce austerities and established themselves in supreme control. O scorcher of enemies! They oppressed their bodies with
austerities. O king! Because of their control, austerities and rules, the grandfather310 was pleased with them and
offered them supreme boons. O king! They were united in asking for the boon that all beings would always be unable to kill them. They wanted this from the grandfather of all the worlds. The god who is the lord and master of
all the worlds told them, “O asuras! There is nothing like immortality and not being killed by anyone. Ask for any
other boon that pleases you.” At this, they consulted among themselves for a long time and then, bowing down before the lord who is the master of the worlds, spoke these words, “O god! O grandfather! Please grant us this boon.
With your favours, we will dwell in three cities above the earth and roam around in this world. O unblemished
one! Once, every one thousand years, those cities will merge with one another and become one. O illustrious one!
When they have merged, if a supreme among gods slays us with a single arrow, let that be the means of our death.”
Having agreed to this, the god311 left for heaven.
‘ “‘Having obtained the boon, they were pleased and consulted each other about constructing the three cities.
They asked the great asura Maya, who was accomplished in everything. He was without decay and was worshipped by the daityas and the danavas.312 Using his own austerities, the intelligent Maya created those three
cities, one of gold, another of silver and another of black iron. O lord of the earth! The one that was of gold was
resplendent in heaven, the one of silver in the ﬁrmament and the one of iron on earth. They were such that they circled. Each was a hundred yojanas in length and breadth and possessed houses, mansions and many walls and
gates.313 The roads had many qualities and they were also spacious. There were many kinds of palaces, adorned
with gates. O king! Each of those cities had a different king. The great-souled Tarakaksha possessed the expensive
city of gold, Kamalaksha the silver one and Vidyunmali the iron one. Those three daitya kings swiftly attacked the
three worlds with their energy. They spoke these words. “Who is the one who is known as Prajapati?”314 There
were no heroes to rival them and the foremost among danavas went and united with them, in tens of millions. They
sought refuge in those three inaccessible cities, desiring great wealth. When they were thus united, Maya gave
them everything they wanted. Resorting to him, all of them lived there, without any fear. If any resident of the
three cities desired anything in his mind, using his powers of illusion, Maya immediately satisﬁed that wish.
Tarakaksha had an immensely strong son named Hari. He went through supreme austerities and satisﬁed the grandfather. Having satisﬁed the god, he asked for a boon. “Let there be a lake in our city. When those killed with
weapons are ﬂung into it, let them emerge with life and greater strength.” Having obtained the boon, Tarakaksha’s
brave son, Hari, constructed a lake there. O lord! It was capable of reviving the dead. In whatever form and in
whatever attire a daitya was slain, once he was thrown there, he became alive in that form. Having obtained them
back, those in Tripura315 began to oppress all the worlds. They obtained success through their great austerities and
extended the fear of the gods. O king! They never suffered from destruction in a battle. At this, they were over-

come by avarice and delusion and were bereft of their senses. They shamelessly uprooted everything that had been
established. Everywhere, they drove away the gods and their companions. They roamed around at will, insolent
because of the boon they had obtained, through all the celestial forests and other regions loved by the residents of
heaven and the sacred and revered hermitages of rishis. The evil-acting danavas did not show respect towards
anyone.
‘ “‘O scorcher of enemies! All the gods united and went to the grandfather, to tell him about the depredations
caused by those who were not suras.316 They bowed their heads in obeisance before him and told him everything.
They asked the illustrious grandfather about a means for their destruction.317 On hearing this, the illustrious god
told the gods, “The asuras are evil-souled and hate the gods. Those who commit crimes against you, also oppress
me. There is no doubt that I am neutral among beings. But those who are against dharma must be killed. I am ﬁrmly telling you this. You elect Sthanu Ishana Jishnu, the performer of undecaying deeds.318 O Adityas! He will save
you and kill the ones who are not suras.” Having heard his words, with Shakra at the forefront, the gods placed
Brahma ahead of them and sought refuge with the one who bears the mark of a bull. They performed supreme austerities and praised the eternal brahman. With the rishis, the ones who knew about dharma gave up all their souls
to Bhava.319 With eloquent words, they praised the one who grants freedom from fear in all situations that cause
fear. He is the great-souled one who is the soul of everything. He pervades everything with his soul. They320
knew special austerities and many kinds of yoga to control the soul. They knew about the techniques of sankhya,
so that the soul could always be controlled.321 They then beheld Ishana, the consort of Uma, in his mass of energy. He has no equal in the worlds. He is devoted to vows and is without blemish. He is the single illustrious one,
though they had thought of him in many different forms. On seeing the form of the great-souled one, whom they
had thought of in many different forms in their own souls, all of them were astounded and glanced at each other in
great wonder. He is the lord who is in all beings. He is the one without origin and is the lord of the universe. On
seeing him, all the gods and brahmarshis bowed their heads down on the ground. Shankara welcomed them with
words of benediction over them and asked them to arise. The illustrious one smiled and said, “Tell me why you
have come.” Having obtained permission from Tryambaka,322 their hearts were assured. They told Bhava, “O
lord! We bow down. We bow down before you. We bow down before the one who is the god of all the gods. You
are the archer. You are the one who is supremely angry. You are the one who destroyed the sacriﬁce of
Prajapati.323 You are the one who is worshipped by all Prajapatis. We bow down before you. We praise you. We
praise the one who is praised by those who are about to die. You are the one who is red. You are Rudra. You are the
one with the blue throat. You are the one with the trident. You are the one who cannot be repulsed. You are the one
with the eyes of a deer. You are the one who ﬁghts with the best of weapons. You are unassailable. You are the
seed. You are the brahman. You are a brahmachari. You are Ishana. You are the one who cannot be measured. You
are the one who controls. You are dressed in skin. You are always engaged in austerities. You are tawny. You are
the one who observes vows. You are the one who is attired in skin. You are the father of Kumara. You are threeeyed. You wield the best of weapons. You destroy the afﬂictions of those who seek refuge. You destroy masses of
those who hate brahmanas. You are the lord of trees. You are the lord of men. We bow down before you. You are
the lord of cattle. You are always the lord of sacriﬁces. We bow down before you. We bow down before you. O
Tryambaka! Fierce in your energy, you are in front of all the soldiers. O god! We worship you, in our thoughts and
our deeds. Be paciﬁed.” At this, the illustrious one was gratiﬁed and welcomed and honoured them. He asked, “Let
the reason for your fright be dispelled. Tell me what I should do for you.” The great-souled one granted a boon to
the masses of ancestors, gods and rishis. Brahma honoured Shankara and spoke these words for the welfare of the
worlds. “O lord of the gods! Through your favours, I have obtained the status of Prajapati. Having been thus established, I have granted a great boon to the danavas. Because of that, they are transgressing all norms of respect. You
are the lord of the past, the present and the future. Other than you, there is no one who can destroy those wicked
ones. Show your favours to the gods and grant this to the residents of heaven. O lord of the gods! O wielder of the
trident! Show your favours and kill the danavas.”
‘ “‘The illustrious one replied, “All your enemies should be killed. That is my view. But I cannot kill them
alone. Those who hate the gods are capable. Therefore, all of you should unite. Use the energy of my weapons to

ﬁght against the enemy in battle. Unity offers great strength.”
‘ “‘The gods said, “We think that their energy and strength is double that of ours. We think that we have already
witnessed their energy and their strength.”
‘ “‘The illustrious one replied, “Those who have committed crimes against you and are wicked must always be
killed. Accept half of my energy and strength and kill all those enemies.”
‘ “‘The gods said, “O Maheshvara! We will not be able to bear half of your energy. But with half of our united
strength, you can kill the enemies.” ’
‘ “Duryodhana said, ‘O supreme among kings! The gods accepted what the lord of the gods had said.324 All of
them gave him half of their energy and he became superior. The god became the strongest among all the strong
ones. From that time, Shankara came to be known as Mahadeva.325 Mahadeva said, “Armed with the bow and the
arrow, I will station myself on my chariot and kill the enemies of the residents of heaven. Therefore, all of you attend to my chariot and my bow and arrows. Behold, as I bring them down on the surface of the earth.”
‘ “‘The gods said, “Let all forms be gathered from everywhere in the three worlds. O lord of the gods! Using
that, we will construct an immensely energetic and resplendent chariot for you, which will be fashioned by Vishvakarma with his intelligence.”
‘ “‘The tigers among the gods then constructed the chariot.326 The goddess earth, garlanded with large cities
and with mountains, forests, islands and all the beings, became the seat for the charioteer. Mandara327 was the
axle and Mahanadi328 became the ﬂank. The directions and the sub-directions became the entourage around the
chariot. The ﬂaming planets were the anukarsha329 and the stars were the bumpers. Dharma, artha and kama united to become the trivenu.330 Many kinds of herbs and many trees, with ﬂowers and fruit, became the seat for the
charioteer. The sun and the moon became wheels of that supreme chariot. Day and night were the auspicious
ﬂanks, ahead and to the rear. The ten lords of the nagas, with Dhritarashtra331 as the foremost, constituted the
shaft. The sky was the yoke and Samvartaka and Balahaka were the leather coverings for the yoke.332 Fortitude,
understanding, permanence and humility were the staffs. The planets, nakshatras, stars and the colourful ﬁrmament
were the leather coverings. The guardians of the world, the lords of the gods, the water, the dead and wealth,333
were made the horses. Sinivali, Anumati, Kuhu and Raka, all excellent in their vows, were made the yokes and
harnesses around the necks of the mounts, for use by the rider.334 Action, truth, austerities and prosperity were
made the reins. The mind became the base and Sarasvati335 the track for the chariot. Many beautiful and colourful
ﬂags were whirled around by the wind. With lightning and Indra’s bow fastened to the chariot, it blazed in radiance. O great king! Thus was the supreme of chariots prepared there. O tiger among men! The gods prepared it, for
crushing those who hated them. Shankara placed the best of his weapons on the chariot. Having made the ﬁrmament the ﬂagstaff for his chariot, he placed the mark of the bull there. Brahma’s staff, Yama’s staff, Rudra’s staff
and Fever became the protectors of the chariot and faced all the directions. The great-souled Atharvan and Angirasa became the protectors of the chariot wheels.336 Rig Veda, Sama Veda and the Puranas were in the front. Itihasa337 and the Yajur Veda protected the rear. Divine words and learning surrounded it from all sides. O Indra
among kings! Vashatkara338 was the goad there. O king! The syllable Om was at the forefront and made it look
radiant. He339 made the year, with its six seasons, his bow. He made the night that destroys men the undecaying
bowstring. Vishnu, Agni and Soma were the arrows. Agni and Soma constitute the entire universe and it is said
that Vishnu is the universe. Vishnu is the illustrious one’s soul and Bhava’s inﬁnite energy. That is the reason
they340 could not bear the touch of Hara’s bowstring. On that arrow, the lord released his ﬁerce and virulent ﬁre of
anger, generated from the intolerable wrath of Bhrigu and Angirasa. Nilalohita, Dhumra and Krittivasa looked terrible.341 He blazed like ten thousand suns, amidst a mass of ﬂaming energy. Hara is the vanquisher of those who
can be defeated with difﬁculty. He is the slayer of those who hate Brahma. He is always the protector and the destroyer. He is the refuge of dharma and adharma. He was surrounded by large numbers of terrible and ﬁerce beings
who were horrible in form. Surrounded by large numbers of these, the illustrious Sthanu was resplendent. O king!

The entire world and universe is established in his limbs and all mobile and immobile objects were beautiful. It
was a wonderful sight. On seeing that the chariot was ready, he donned divine armour and picked up his bow and
arrow. He grasped the celestial arrows that were generated through Soma, Vishnu and Agni. O king! O supreme
among kings! The gods instructed the lord of the wind to blow sacred fragrances. Mahadeva ascended the chariot
and terriﬁed the gods. When he ascended, the earth and heaven trembled. The granter of boons was beautiful, with
his sword, arrows and bow.
‘ “‘He smiled and asked the masses of gods, “Who will be my charioteer?” The gods replied, “O lord of the
gods! There is no doubt that whoever you employ, will be your charioteer.” He told the gods again, “You decide
who is superior to me. Decide this yourselves and make him the charioteer.” Having heard the words of the greatsouled one, the gods went to the grandfather and having obtained his reassurance, spoke these words. “O god! We
have done everything that you asked us to, for destroying the enemies of the thirty gods. The one with the bull on
his banner is completely pleased with us. We have constructed a chariot and equipped it with many wonderful
weapons. But we do not know who should be the charioteer of that supreme chariot. Therefore, let the best of the
gods be appointed as the charioteer. O god! O lord! You should ensure that the words that you spoke become successful. O illustrious one! You told us earlier that you would do that which would be beneﬁcial for us. You should
act in accordance with that. The supreme of chariots has parts from all the gods. It is irresistible and will drive
away the enemy. The one with the Pinaka in his hand is the warrior. He is ready and will strike terror among the
danavas. The four Vedas have become the best of steeds. With all the mountains, the earth is the great-souled one’s
chariot. The nakshatras have obediently become the ornaments. But we do not see a charioteer for that warrior. O
god! O grandfather! When such are the chariot, the horses and the warrior, the charioteer must be someone who is
special in every way, just as the armour, the weapons and the bow are. But except you, we do not see someone who
can be a charioteer. O lord! You are the one who is superior to the gods in all the qualities. Ascend swiftly as a
charioteer and control those supreme horses.” It has been heard, that in this fashion, the gods bowed down their
heads before the grandfather who is the lord of the three worlds and sought his favours, so that he might become
the charioteer. Brahma said, “O residents of heaven! There is nothing false in everything that you have said. I will
control the horses when Kapardin342 ﬁghts.” The illustrious god, the grandfather who was the creator of the
worlds, was appointed by the gods as the charioteer of the great-souled Ishana. When he swiftly ascended the chariot, worshipped by the worlds, the horses, which possessed the speed of the wind, quickly lowered their heads and
sank down on their knees on the ground. Maheshvara also ascended. The great grandfather of the three worlds successfully grasped the reins and urged those horses, which possessed the speed of thought and the wind. When the
granter of boons343 ascended and left in the direction of the asuras, the lord of the universe344 smiled and said,
“Excellent! Wonderful! O god! Go to the spot of the daityas. Urge the horses diligently. Behold the strength of my
my arms today. I will slay the enemies in the battle.” At this, he345 urged the horses, which were as ﬂeet as the
wind. O king! He went towards the city that was protected by the daityas and the danavas.
‘ “‘Sharva346 strung the bow and afﬁxed the arrow. He afﬁxed the pashupata weapon and thought of Tripura. O
king! Having stationed himself there, he angrily stretched his bow. At that point, the cities united and became one.
The three cities united and became one and a tumultuous sound of delight arose among the great-souled gods. All
the masses of gods, siddhas and supreme rishis became full of joy and uttered words of praise, signifying victory.
Tripura manifested itself before the one who wanted to slay the asuras, the god whose form was indescribable and
ﬁerce and whose energy was intolerable. The illustrious one, the lord of the worlds, drew his celestial bow. The
one who is the essence of the three worlds released the arrow towards Tripura. He consumed the large numbers of
asuras and ﬂung them into the western ocean. Thus, Tripura was burnt and the remaining danavas scorched by the
angry Maheshvara for the welfare of the three worlds. The one with three eyes then paciﬁed the ﬂames that resulted from his wrath and said, “Do not reduce the world to ashes.” At this, nature, the gods, the worlds and the rishis
returned to their natural states and satisﬁed the inﬁnitely energetic Sthanu with eloquent words of grave import. On
receiving the permission of the illustrious one, all of them returned to where they had come from. Having accomplished their objective, the gods, with Prajapati at the forefront, were satisﬁed. Thus did the illustrious Brahma, the
grandfather who is the controller of the worlds, control the horses, and you should do the same for the great-souled

Radheya. O tiger among kings! There is no need to debate whether you are especially superior to Krishna, Karna
and Phalguna. O unblemished one! He347 is like Rudra in a battle and you are like Brahma. Like the asuras, if the
two of you are united, you can vanquish my enemies. O Shalya! Act so that Karna can swiftly oppress and slay
Kounteya, the one with the white horses, with Krishna as his charioteer. Karna, the kingdom and our foundation is
based on you.
‘ “‘There is another account I will tell you about. Listen to it. A brahmana who knew about dharma recounted it
in my father’s presence. Hear these wonderful words, full of reasons, deeds and objectives. O Shalya! Do what
must be done and do not reﬂect. The immensely energetic Jamadagni was born in the lineage of the Bhargavas. He
had a famous son named Rama,348 with energy and all the qualities. So that he might be able to please Bhava and
obtain weapons, he performed terrible austerities. He was cheerful in his soul, controlled and restrained his senses.
At this, Mahadeva was satisﬁed and pleased by his devotion. Shankara knew what was in his mind and showed
himself. The god said, “O Rama! I am satisﬁed with you. O fortunate one! I know what you wish for. If you purify
your soul, you will get everything that you want. When you become pure, I will give you all the weapons. O Bhargava! Those weapons burn down a person who is incapable and undeserving.” Having been thus addressed by the
god of the gods who wields a trident, Jamadagni’s great-souled son bowed his head in obeisance and told the lord,
“O lord of the gods! If you think that I am a person who is capable of bearing those weapons, you should give me
those weapons, since I have always served you.” He performed austerities and resorted to control and discipline.
He worshipped, offered gifts and sacriﬁces and honoured him with oblations and mantras. He worshipped Sharva
for a large number of years. Mahadeva was satisﬁed with the great-souled Bhargava. In the presence of the gods,
he spoke about his349 many qualities. “Rama is ﬁrm in his vows and is always devoted to me.” The lord, the destroyer of enemies, was pleased and spoke about his qualities in many different ways, in the presence of the gods
and the ancestors. At this time, the daityas became extremely powerful. Because of their insolence and delusion,
they afﬂicted the residents of heaven. At this, all the gods united and made up their minds to kill them. They made
every effort to kill the enemy, but were incapable of vanquishing them. The gods then went and spoke to Maheshvara. They pleased him with their devotion and asked him to kill the large numbers of the enemy. Having obtained
a promise from the god that the enemies would be destroyed, the gods summoned Bhargava Rama. Shankara told
him, “O Bhargava! For the sake of the welfare of the worlds and to please me, kill the enemies of the assembled
gods.” Rama replied, “O lord of the gods! O Maheshvara! Without the weapons, what strength do I possess, that I
should kill the danavas? All of them are accomplished in the use of weapons and are indomitable in battle.” The
god said, “On my instructions, go. You will kill the danavas. Having vanquished the enemy, you will obtain many
qualities.” Having heard these words, he agreed wholeheartedly. Rama offered benedictions and left in the direction of the danavas. He killed the enemies of the gods, who were proud, insolent and powerful. Bhargava struck
them with the touch of the vajra. The danavas inﬂicted wounds on the body of Jamadagni’s son, supreme among
the brahmanas. However, at Sthanu’s touch, all those wounds disappeared. The illustrious god was pleased at his
deed and granted boons to the great-souled Bhargava, who was knowledgable about the brahman. The god of the
gods, the wielder of the trident, was pleased and said, “From the descent of the weapons, there are wounds on your
body. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! These prove the superhuman deed you have achieved. As you desired,
accept these divine weapons from me.” He obtained the weapons and all the boons that he wished for. Having obtained these diverse objects, Rama lowered his head before Shiva. The immensely ascetic one took the permission
of the lord of the gods and departed. This is the ancient account that was told by the rishi.
‘ “‘Bhargava imparted all his knowledge of dhanurveda to the great-souled Karna, tiger among men, having
been extremely pleased with him. O king! Had Karna not been a deserving person, the descendant of the Bhrigu
lineage would not have given him those celestial weapons. I therefore think that Karna cannot have been born in
the lineage of a suta. I think that he is the son of a god, born in the lineage of kshatriyas. The maharatha is long in
his arms and possessed earrings and armour. How can a doe give birth to such a tiger? Behold his thick arms,
which are like the trunk of a king of elephants. Behold his thick chest, capable of withstanding all enemies.’” ’

Chapter 1175(25)
‘ “D uryodhana said, ‘Thus did the illustrious god, the grandfather of all the
worlds, become the charioteer, when Rudra was the ratha. It is a duty for the
charioteer of a chariot to be braver than the ratha. O tiger among men!
Therefore, you should control the horses in the battle.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “At this, Shalya, the lord of Madra, was delighted and embraced your son. He spoke these words to Duryodhana, the slayer of enemies. ‘O king! O son of Gandhari! O handsome one! If this is what you
think, I will do everything that brings pleasure to you. O best of the
Bharatas! I will perform whatever task I am thought to be ﬁt for. With my
entire heart, I will bear the burden of any task. For the sake of what is beneﬁcial, I may speak words to Karna, pleasant and unpleasant. You and Karna
should pardon all of them.’ Karna replied, ‘O king of Madra! Like Brahma
for Ishana and like Keshava for Partha, may you always serve us for our
beneﬁt.’ Shalya said, ‘There are four kinds of conduct not followed by
those who are aryas—self-censure, self-gloriﬁcation, speaking ill of others
and adulation of others. O learned one! I will speak words for your own
good. They may be full of self-praise. But listen to them attentively. O lord!
In knowledge, skills of medication, controlling and avoiding
distractions,350 I am like Matali, ﬁt to be Shakra’s charioteer. O unblemished one! O son of a suta! When you are engaged in warring with Partha in
the battle, I will guide your horses. Do not be anxious on that account.’” ’

Chapter 1176(26)
‘ “D uryodhana said, ‘O Karna! This king of Madra will act as your charioteer. He is superior to Krishna and is like
Matali, the charioteer of the king of the gods. Just as Matali controls the horses yoked to Hari’s351 chariot, Shalya
will control the ones that are yoked to yours. With you as the warrior on that chariot and with the king of Madra as
the charioteer, it is certain that this foremost of chariots will vanquish Partha in the battle.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “Duryodhana then spoke again to the spirited king of Madra. ‘O king! Control these supreme
horses in the battle. Protected by you, Radheya will defeat Dhananjaya.’ O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Having been thus addressed, he352 agreed and ascended the chariot. When Shalya approached, Karna was delighted in his mind and spoke to the charioteer. ‘O charioteer! Swiftly prepare my chariot and equip it.’ That supreme
and victorious chariot was like a city of the gandharvas. Having prepared it, the lord353 brought it and said, ‘May
you be victorious.’ Karna, foremost among rathas, worshipped the chariot in accordance with the prescribed rites.
It had earlier been sanctiﬁed by a priest who was knowledgeable about the brahman. He circumambulated it carefully and prayed to the sun. The king of Madra was nearby and he asked him to climb onto it ﬁrst. That great and
supreme chariot of Karna’s was unassailable. The immensely energetic Shalya ascended, like a lion atop a mountain. O king! On seeing that Shalya was stationed, Karna ascended his supreme chariot, like the sun atop clouds
tinged with lightning. Ascended on the same chariot, they were like Aditya and Agni together.354 They were as
resplendent as clouds in the ﬁrmament, tinged with Surya and Agni together. Those two brave ones, supreme
among resplendent ones, were praised. They were like Indra and Agni, praised by priests and assisting priests at a
sacriﬁce. Shalya controlled the horses. Karna stood on the chariot and extended his terrible bow, like the sun in its
halo. On the best of chariots, Karna, tiger among men, with his arrows like rays, looked like the sun on Mandara.
‘ “The inﬁnitely energetic and immensely brave Radheya was on the chariot and ready to leave. Duryodhana
spoke these words. ‘O brave one! O Adhiratha’s son! Drona and Bhishma were incapable of accomplishing this
extremely difﬁcult task in the battle, while all the archers looked on. Accomplish it. I have always been convinced
in my mind that maharatha Bhishma and Drona would kill Arjuna and Bhimasena. O brave one! They were unable
to accomplish that valiant deed in this great battle. O Radheya! Like the one with the vajra in his hand, accomplish
that task. O Radheya! Seize Dharmaraja, or kill Dhananjaya, Bhimasena and the twins who are the sons of Madri.
O fortunate one! May you be victorious. O bull among men! Depart. Reduce all the soldiers of the sons of Pandu
to ashes.’ Thousands of trumpets and tens of thousands of drums were sounded. The sound of those musical instruments was like the sound of clouds in the sky.
‘ “Accepting those words and stationed on the chariot, the supreme of rathas, Radheya, addressed Shalya, who
was skilled in ﬁghting. ‘O mighty-armed one! Urge the horses, so that I can kill Dhananjaya, Bhimasena, the twins
and King Yudhishthira.355 O Shalya! Let Dhananjaya behold the strength of my arms today, when I shoot hundreds and thousands of arrows shafted with the feathers of herons. O Shalya! I will unleash supremely energetic
arrows today, for the destruction of the Pandavas and for Duryodhana’s victory.’ Shalya replied, ‘O son of a suta!
Why do you disrespect the Pandavas? All of them are great archers and know about all the weapons. All of them
are maharathas. They do not retreat, are immensely fortunate. They cannot be vanquished and truth is their valour.
They are capable of generating fear in Shatakratu himself. O Radheya! When you hear the twang of Gandiva in
battle, like the tumultuous sound of thunder, you will no longer speak in this way.’ O lord of men! Disregarding
the words spoken by the king of Madra, Karna glanced towards Shalya and asked him to proceed.
‘ “O scorcher of enemies! On seeing that the great archer, Karna, was stationed and ready to ﬁght, all the
Kouravas were ﬁlled with delight and let out a roar. There was the sound of drums and kettledrums. There was the

sound of arrows and the roars uttered by those spirited ones. Those on your side emerged to do battle, resolved to
die, rather than retreat. As Karna advanced, the warriors were delighted. O king! The earth trembled and let out a
mighty roar. The seven great planets and the sun seemed to be moving. Showers of meteors could be seen and the
directions seemed to be blazing. Thunder descended and ﬁerce winds began to blow. Large numbers of animals
and birds kept your army to the right, signifying great fear.356 When Karna advanced, his horses fell down on the
ground. Bones showered down from the sky, portending fear. The weapons seemed to be blazing and the standards
trembled. O lord of the earth! The mounts released tears. O venerable one! These, and many other ominous signs,
were seen there. They signiﬁed the extremely terrible destruction of the Kouravas. However, because they were
confounded by destiny, none of them paid any attention to these. On seeing the son of the suta advance, all the men
on earth cried out for his victory. The Kouravas thought that the Pandavas had already been vanquished.
‘ “Vaikartana Vrisha, elephant among rathas and the slayer of enemy heroes, was stationed on his chariot. He
thought of the deaths of the brave Bhishma and Drona and blazed like a ﬁre. On seeing Partha’s unequalled deeds,
he was consumed by pride and insolence. He blazed in anger and sighing deeply, spoke these words to Shalya.
‘When I am stationed on my chariot with my bow and enraged, I will not be frightened of the great Indra, with the
vajra in his hand. On seeing that Bhishma and the best of others are lying down, do not be anxious. They357 were
like the great Indra and Vishnu. They were unmatched and unblemished. They were the ones who crushed the best
of chariots, horses and elephants. It was as if they could not be slain, but they were killed by the enemy. Nevertheless, I am not alarmed in this battle. The preceptor was a bull among brahmanas and was knowledgeable about
great weapons. On seeing the extremely powerful kings, with their men, horses, elephants and chariots, slain by
arrows, why did he not kill all of them in the battle? O Kurus! Remembering Drona in the great battle, I am telling
you this truthfully. Listen to me. Other than me, there is no one who is capable of withstanding Arjuna, when he
advances in the battle, in the form of a ﬁerce Death. Drona possessed learning, serenity, strength, fortitude, great
weapons and good policy. When that great-souled one had to succumb to death, I think that all the others are distressed now. When I think about it, there is nothing in this world that is certain. Everything is always the outcome
of action. When the preceptor has been brought down, who can proudly say with certainty that he will be alive till
today’s sunrise?358 There is no doubt that weapons, strength, valour, deeds, good policy and supreme weapons
cannot ensure human happiness, since the preceptor has been slain by the enemy in battle. His energy was like that
of the sun or the ﬁre. He was equal to Vishnu and Purandara in valour. He was always like Brihaspati and
Ushanas359 in policy. He was extremely difﬁcult to withstand, but weapons could not save him. Our women and
children are weeping. The manliness of the sons of Dhritarashtra has been defeated. O Shalya! Know that I have to
accomplish the task. Therefore, advance towards the soldiers of the enemy, where the Pandava king who is unwavering in his aim and Bhimasena and Arjuna are stationed. There are Vasudeva, the Srinjayas, Satyaki and the
twins. Who, other than me, can withstand them? O lord of Madra! Therefore, advance swiftly in the battle, towards
the Panchalas, Pandavas and Srinjayas. I think that I will kill those assembled ones in the battle, or follow Drona’s
lead.360 O Shalya! Do not think that I will not advance into the midst of those brave ones. I cannot tolerate this
dissension among friends.361 I will give up my life and follow Drona. Whether wise or foolish, when one’s lifespan is over, one cannot escape with one’s life and advances into Yama’s mouth. O learned one! Therefore, I will
advance against Partha. I cannot negate my destiny. O king! The son of Vichitravirya’s son362 has always been
kind towards me. To accomplish his objective and attain his end, I will give up my beloved pleasures and my life,
which is so difﬁcult to abandon. This expensive chariot is covered with the skins of tigers. Its axles don’t make a
sound. The three frames are golden and the trivenu is made out of silver. It is yoked to excellent horses. Rama363
gave it to me. O Shalya! Behold the colourful bows, standard, clubs, arrows with ﬁerce forms, ﬂaming sword,
supreme weapons and the white conch shell that has a ﬁerce sound. It364 has ﬂags and clatters like the sound of
the thunder. It is yoked to white horses and is adorned with superb quivers. Stationed on this chariot, I will use my
force to slay Arjuna, bull among rathas, in the battle. Even if Death, the destroyer of everything, diligently protects
the son of Pandu in the encounter, I will engage with him and kill him in the encounter, or follow the path to Yama,

along which, Bhishma has led. Even if Yama, Varuna, Kubera, Vasava, together with all their followers, unite to
protect Pandava in this battle, I will defeat him. What is the need to speak more?’
‘ “On hearing the words of the one who was delighted at the prospect of battle and was bragging, the valiant
king of Madra showed him disrespect and laughed at him. To restrain him, he gave him the following reply. ‘O
Karna! Desist. Refrain from such bragging. You are delighted and are saying that which should not be said. Where
is Dhananjaya, supreme among men? And where are you, an extremely stupid person? The abode of the Yadus was
protected by Upendra.365 It was like heaven, protected by the king of the immortals. Who other than Arjuna,
supreme among men, could have violently abducted that beautiful lady, while he looked on?366 He has a power
and valour like that of the king of the gods. Where is the man, other than Arjuna, who at the time of the slaughter
of the animal, could have challenged Bhava, the lord of all lords and the creator of the three worlds, to a battle?367
To honour Agni, Jaya368 vanquished asuras, gods, giant serpents, men, birds, pishachas, yakshas and rakshasas
with his arrows and gave him the oblations he desired.369 Do you remember how Dhritarashtra’s son was seized
by the enemy and was freed by that supreme among men, using arrows that were as bright as the rays of the sun?
In that wilderness, he killed large numbers of the enemy. You were the ﬁrst to run away then. Do you remember
how Dhritarashtra’s quarrelsome son was freed and the Pandava defeated large numbers of those who travel
through the skies?370 At the time of the seizure of the cattle, all of them, though they possessed large numbers of
forces and mounts, were vanquished by that supreme of men. The preceptor, the preceptor’s son and Bhishma were
also there. Why did you not defeat Arjuna then?371 This supreme and excellent encounter has presented itself
now, for the sake of your destruction. O son of a suta! If you do not run away, because of fear of the enemy, you
will be slain today, when you advance to ﬁght.’ The lord of Madra spoke many such harsh words cheerfully, praising your enemy. Vrisha, the leader of the Kuru forces, became supremely enraged and spoke these words to the
lord of Madra. ‘Let it be that way. Even if it is that way, why are you praising him, when a battle is about to commence between him and me? If he defeats me in this great battle, will it be said that the words uttered by you have
been spoken well?’ The lord of Madra agreed with this and did not say anything in reply. Wishing to ﬁght, Karna
asked the lord of Madra to depart. The ratha left in the direction of the enemy with the white horses, with Shalya as
his charioteer. He killed enemies in the battle, like the sun destroying darkness. Karna was on a chariot yoked to
white horses, covered with the skins of tigers. He left cheerfully. He saw the standards of the Pandavas and quickly
asked about where Dhananjaya was.” ’

Chapter 1177(27)
‘S anjaya said, “Karna left, delighting your army. He told every Pandava soldier that he saw, ‘Today, I will grant
the one who points out to me the great-souled one on the white horses, whatever boon he desires for. If he thinks
that is not enough, I will again give a cart full of jewels to the one who tells me about Dhananjaya. If the man who
shows Arjuna to me thinks that is not enough, I will again give him six carts full of gold, drawn by bulls that are
like elephants. I will again give him one hundred ornamented women. They will be virgins,372 with necklaces of
gold, and skilled in singing and dancing. If the man who shows me Arjuna thinks that this is not enough, I will
give him another boon of ﬁve hundred white horses. They will have golden harnesses and be decorated with bejewelled ornaments. I will give him another eight hundred well-trained horses. I will give the person who tells me
about Dhananjaya a golden and sparkling chariot that is yoked to supreme horses from the Kamboja region. I will
give him another boon of six hundred elephants that have golden harnesses and are adorned with golden necklaces.
They have been born in the frontier regions and have been trained well by those who are skilled in elephants. If the
man who shows me Arjuna thinks that this is not enough, I will give him another boon that he will desire himself. I
possess sons, wives and riches. If he desires these, I will again give them to him. I will give the person who shows
me Keshava and Arjuna all their riches, after having killed the two Krishnas.’ In the battle, having spoken these
and many other words, Karna blew on his supreme conch shell. It had been generated from the ocean and produced
a wonderful sound. O great king! Having heard these words of the son of the suta, which were appropriate to his
character, Duryodhana and all his followers were delighted. At this, drums and kettledrums were sounded in every
direction. Together with the musical instruments, there were roars like lions and the trumpeting of elephants. O
king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! These sounds arose among the soldiers. The sounds made by the delighted warriors mingled with these.
‘ “The soldiers were delighted and Radheya, the afﬂicter of enemies, was about to plunge himself into the ocean
of battle. The king of Madra laughed and addressed him in these words. ‘O son of a suta! When a man shows you
Dhananjaya, do not, in your insolence, give him six golden bulls that are like elephants. Like a child, you are giving away riches as if you are Vaishravana.373 O Radheya! Even if you do not make an effort, you will see
Dhananjaya today. Like an extremely foolish person, you are unnecessarily giving them away. Because of your
delusion, you do not realize the sins of giving to the undeserving. With the many riches that you propose to give
away, you are capable of performing many sacriﬁces. O suta! Perform sacriﬁces. Because of your delusion and
your intolerance, you desire to kill the two Krishnas. But we have not heard of two lions being brought down by a
jackal. You desire what should not be desired. Clearly, you have no well-wishers, since they are not restraining you
from swiftly falling into a ﬁre. You do not know what should be done when. There is no doubt that you have been
ripened by time.374 A man who desires to be alive should not speak such words that should not be listened to. You
are like someone wishing to cross an ocean with his arms, with a stone tied around his neck. Or you are like someone who wishes to fall down from the peak of a mountain. If you wish to ensure your own welfare, ﬁght with
Dhananjaya from the midst of this battle formation, with all the warriors, and well protected. I am saying this for
the welfare of Dhritarashtra’s son and not from malice towards you. If you wish to remain alive, pay attention to
the words spoken by me.’
‘ “Karna replied, ‘I wish to encounter Arjuna in the battle on the basis of my own valour and not by relying on
others. You are an enemy in the disguise of a friend and are trying to frighten me. No one is capable of restraining
me from my resolution today, not even Indra himself, with an upraised vajra. What can a mortal seek to do?’”

‘Sanjaya said, “When Karna had ﬁnished speaking, Shalya, the lord of Madra, wished to provoke Karna further
and again spoke these words to him. ‘Forceful arrows will be released from Phalguna’s arms and unleashed from
his bowstring. They will descend on you, sharp at the tip and shafted with the feathers of herons. It is then that you
will regret advancing against Arjuna. Partha will grasp his celestial bow. Savyasachi will scorch the soldiers and
oppress you with his sharp arrows. O son of a suta! You will regret it then. You are like a child supine on a mother’s lap, who wishes to touch the one who removes water.375 Because of your delusion, you wish to vanquish the
resplendent Arjuna today, who is stationed on his chariot. It is as if you are rubbing the extremely sharp edges of a
trident against all your limbs. O Karna! Today, you are wishing to ﬁght with Arjuna, whose deeds are extremely
sharp. This is like the childish folly of a spirited but small deer, who wishes to challenge a large and maned lion. O
son of a suta! Your challenge to Arjuna now is like that challenge. O son of a suta! Do not challenge that prince,
who is extremely valorous and is like a lion. You should be like a fox in the forest, satisﬁed with some meat. Do
not challenge Partha today and be destroyed. O Karna! Your challenging Partha in a battle will be like a rabbit
challenging a mighty elephant with tusks like ploughs and with a shattered temple. You will be like a child, striking a cobra, with great poison and full sacs, in a hole with a stick. Your desire to ﬁght with Partha is like that. O
Karna! Pandava is a lion among men. Like a stupid jackal, you are shouting at a maned and angry lion. For the
sake of its own downfall, a small bird challenges the spirited Suparna, Vinata’s son, supreme among birds.376 O
Karna! You are like that against Partha Dhananjaya. You wish to cross the terrible ocean, the abode of all the waters, on a raft, at a time when the moon is rising and its waves are turbulent and full of thousands of ﬁsh. He is a
bull with sharp horns. His neck is as thick as a drum. He is a striker. O Karna! Like a small calf, you are challenging that Partha Dhananjaya to a ﬁght. A large cloud makes a mighty noise and pours down desired rain on the
world. Arjuna is like a cloud among men and you are croaking back at him, like a frog. From its own house, a dog
barks at a tiger that is roaming in the forest. O Karna! Like that, you are barking at Dhananjaya, tiger among men.
O Karna! Dwelling in a forest and surrounded by rabbits, a jackal thinks itself to be a lion, until it actually sees a
lion. O Radheya! Like that, you think yourself to be a lion. But you do not see Dhananjaya, tiger among men, the
crusher of enemies. You think yourself to be a tiger until you see the two Krishnas on a single chariot, like the sun
and the moon. O Karna! Until you hear the roar of Gandiva in the great battle, till then, you are capable of speaking as you wish. You will hear that tiger377 roar and make the ten directions resound with the clatter of his chariot
and the twang of his bow. You will then become a jackal. You have always been a jackal and Dhananjaya has always been a lion. O foolish one! Because of your hatred towards those who are valiant, you have always seemed to
be a jackal. Because of your own deeds and your strengths and weaknesses, you and Partha are known to be like a
rat to a cat, a dog to a tiger, a fox to a lion and a rabbit to an elephant.’
‘ “Thus rebuked by the inﬁnitely energetic Shalya, whose words were like darts to him,378 Radheya became extremely angry and spoke to Shalya. ‘O Shalya! Qualities, and the absence of qualities, are known to those with
qualities, not to those without qualities. You have always been devoid of qualities. How will you know the difference between qualities and the lack of qualities? O Shalya! I know about Arjuna’s great weapons, anger, valour,
bow and arrows. You do not know their true nature. In that way, I know my valour and Pandava’s valour. O
Shalya! Knowing that, I have challenged him to a battle. I am not like an insect that heads towards a ﬁre. O
Shalya! I possess this arrow. It is well tufted and will drink blood. It has been washed excellently in oil and has
been decorated well. It is lying alone in this quiver. It is lying down in sandalwood powder and has been worshipped by me for many years. This is extremely poisonous and is a serpent.379 It is capable of slaying large numbers of men, horses and elephants. It is powerful and extremely terrible and is capable of shattering body armour
and bones. In my wrath, I can use this to shatter the giant Mount Meru. Listen to me. I am saying this truthfully. I
will never release this at anyone other than Phalguna and Krishna, the son of Devaki. O Shalya! I will use this arrow against Vasudeva and Dhananjaya. I will be extremely angry and ﬁght with them. That will be an act that is
worthy of me. Among all those of Vasudeva’s lineage, Lakshmi380 is vested in Krishna. Among all the sons of
Pandu, victory is vested in Partha. When those two advance, how can one retreat? Those two tigers among men are
united and stationed on a chariot, and will advance against me, who is single-handed. O Shalya! Behold my good
lineage then. They are unvanquished cousins, one the son of a maternal uncle and the other one the son of a fa-

ther’s sister.381 You will see them killed by me, like two gems on a single thread. Arjuna’s Gandiva, Krishna’s
chakra and Tarkshya and the ape on the standards382 only generate fear among cowards. O Shalya! They generate
delight in me. You are evil in nature. You are stupid. You do not know about great battles. You are overcome with
terror and have spoken a lot of words because of your fright. I do not know why you are praising them, perhaps
because you have been born in a wicked country. Having killed them in the battle, I will slay you, with your relatives. You have been born in a wicked country and are evil in intelligence. You are inferior and the worst among
kshatriyas. If you are a well-wisher, why are you frightening me about the two Krishnas, like an enemy? Today, I
will be stationed in battle and either I will kill them, or they will kill me. I am not scared of the two Krishnas. I
know my own strength. I will single-handedly slay one thousand Vasudevas and one hundred Phalgunas. O one
who is born in a wicked country! Do not speak. Women, children, aged ones and those who have completed their
studies often say something about the evil-souled ones from Madraka383 and it has become a universal saying. O
Shalya! I will tell you that saying. Listen. In the assemblies of the kings, this is what the brahmanas also recounted
earlier. O foolish one! Listen attentively to this and then forgive me, or render a reply. A Madraka is always one
who hates those who are his friends. One who always hates, is a Madraka. There are no good feelings in a Madraka. He is inferior in words and is the worst among men. A Madraka is always inferior in his soul. He always lies
and is never straight. We have heard it said that wickedness exists among Madrakas. Fathers, mothers, sons, mothers-in-law, fathers-in-law, maternal uncles, sons-in-law, daughters, brothers, grandsons, kin, friends, others who
have arrived, male servants and female servants mingle together. Noble women, according to their own wishes,
mingle with men, known and unknown. In their homes, even the better ones always eat coarse grain and other undesirable food. They drink liquor,384 eat the ﬂesh of cows and dance and laugh. The songs don’t have proper
rhymes. They indulge in satisfying desire. They speak to each other, incoherent in desire. How can there be dharma there? Among those who have been ruined, the Madrakas are known as the performers of wicked deeds. It is
said that one should have neither enmity, nor friendship, with Madrakas. One should not mix with Madrakas, because Madrakas are always ﬁckle. Contact with Madrakas is futile, like purity among those from Gandhara, just as
oblations proffered at a sacriﬁce are destroyed if the king is himself both the sacriﬁcer and the priest. A brahmana
who performs ceremonies385 for shudras confronts destruction. Like that, one who hates brahmanas always confronts destruction. One who mixes with Madrakas is also destroyed, as if from the poison of a scorpion. I have
paciﬁed everything with mantras from the Atharva Veda. Wise ones who have been stung by a scorpion and have
been afﬂicted by different types of poison, resort to medicines in this way.386 This is seen to be the truth. O
learned one! Keep quiet and listen to more of my words. Women who are intoxicated by liquor cast off their
clothes and dance around. They do not follow restraints and indulge in sexual intercourse, following the dictates of
desire. O Madraka! You are the son of one such. How can you talk about dharma? There are inferior women who
urinate like camels and buffaloes. They are devoid of shame, and shamelessly do this everywhere. You are the son
of one such person. How can you talk about dharma? If asked for collyrium, a Madraka woman scratches her buttocks and unwilling to give it, speaks these terrible words. “No. I will not give any collyrium. I would rather give
my beloved instead. On every occasion, I will give up my son. But I will not give the collyrium.” Madraka women
are ignoble. They are large. They are without modesty and are hairy. They eat a lot and are without any purity.
That is what is generally heard. I, and others, are capable of recounting many such things about them, from the
ends of their hair to the tips of their toes. How can the Madrakas and the Sindhu-Souviras know about dharma?
They have been born in a wicked country. They are mlecchas. They do not know anything about dharma. The most
important dharma for a kshatriya is that he should be slain and should lie down on the ground, honoured by the virtuous. That is what we have heard. It is my prime wish that, in this release and clash of weapons, I should be killed
and should go to heaven. I am also the beloved friend of Dhritarashtra’s intelligent son. My life and the riches that
I posssess are for him. O one who has been born in a wicked country! It is evident that you have been bought by
the Pandavas. That explains your action towards us, always like that of an enemy. Like a person who is knowledgeable about dharma cannot be dissuaded by an atheist, I am headed towards this battle and cannot be dissuaded
by hundreds of people like you. Like a deer that is sweating, you are welcome to lament or thirst. But I am established in the conduct of kshatriyas and you are incapable of frightening me. My preceptor, Rama,387 had earlier

told me about the ends obtained by the lions among men who gave up their lives and did not retreat from battle. I
remember that. I am ready to save those on our side and kill the enemy. Know that I am established in this conduct,
like the supreme Pururava. O Madraka! I do not see anyone in the three worlds who is capable of dissuading me
from that objective. That is my view. Knowing this, why have you spoken such a lot, trying to terrify me? O worst
of the Madrakas! I will not slay you now and give your body to predatory creatures. O Shalya! That is because of
my friendship with Dhritarashtra’s son, to avoid censure and because I am patient. Those are the three reasons that
you are still alive. O king of Madra! But if you speak such words yet again, I will bring down your head with this
club, which is like a vajra. O one who has been born in a wicked country! Today, people will hear and see either
that Karna has killed the two Krishnas, or that Karna has been slain by them.’ O lord of the earth! Having spoken
these words, Radheya again fearlessly addressed the king of Madra, asking him to proceed.” ’

Chapter 1178(28)
‘S anjaya said, “O venerable one! On hearing the words of Adhiratha’s son, who delighted himself in battle, Shalya
again spoke to Karna, citing an example. ‘You seem to be like one who is intoxicated with liquor. But whether you
are like that or not, and irrespective of your intoxication, as a well-wisher, I will try to cure you. O Karna! I will
tell you about the story of the crow. Listen to me. O wicked one! O worst of the lineage! On hearing this, do what
you wish. O Karna! O mighty-armed one! I do not recollect a single taint in me, as a result of which you wish to
kill an unblemished one like me. Had you known what was good for you, you would certainly have listened to my
words, especially because I am your charioteer and the king’s388 well-wisher. The even and uneven terrain, the
strengths and weaknesses of the chariot, the fatigue and perspiration of the horses and the charioteer, the knowledge of the weapons, the cries of animals and birds, what is burdensome and what is extremely burdensome,389
antidotes to wounds from weapons, the use of different weapons in battle and knowledge of portents—all of these
are known to me. And I am familiar with this chariot. O Karna! Therefore, let me recount the example to you once
more. On the other side of the ocean, there lived a vaishya and he possessed a lot of riches and foodgrains. He performed sacriﬁces, was generous and quiet and established in the deeds he ought to perform.390 He was pure. He
had many sons whom he loved and he was compassionate towards all beings. Without any fear, he dwelt in the
kingdom of a king who observed dharma. His illustrious sons were young. There was a crow that lived there and it
subsisted on many kinds of leftover food. The young sons of the vaishya always gave it meat, curds, milk,
payasam,391 honey and butter. The crow subsisted on the leftovers that were given by the young sons of the
vaishya. It became insolent and showed no respect to birds that were its equal or superior. Once, it so happened
that swans descended on the other side of the ocean. They were cheerful in their hearts and could go anywhere at
will. Their speed was like that of Garuda. On seeing the swans, the young boys spoke to the crow. “O bird! You are
superior to all the winged birds.” The one who was born from an egg was thus addressed by those who were of
limited intelligence. Because of his stupidity and insolence, he regarded those words to be true. He asked those
who could travel long distances392 who among them was the swiftest in speed. The swans could travel long distances. But because of insolence and evil intelligence, the crow that fed on leftovers challenged that bird to a test
of ﬂight. On hearing these words of the crow, the swans that had assembled there, powerful and supreme birds, began to laugh. Those birds, which could go anywhere at will, spoke these words to the crow. “We are swans that
roam the earth. We live in Lake Manasa. Among birds, we are always revered as those that can travel long distances. A swan is powerful. Its limbs are like a vajra. It can travel a great distance. O evil-minded one! You are a
crow. How can you issue such a challenge? O crow! How will you ﬂy with us?” They laughed and told him that.
Because of the limited intelligence of its species, the stupid crow repeatedly questioned the words of the swans.
Eventually, it replied, “There is no doubt that I will ﬂy in one hundred and one different kinds of ways. I will ﬂy
each span of a hundred yojanas in a beautiful and varied way. I will rise up and swoop down. I will circle and ﬂy
straight. I will ﬂy slowly and I will ﬂy fast. I will ﬂy diagonally. I will traverse slowly. I will whirl around. I will
move gently and fast. I will then ﬂy extremely fast and even faster than that. I will swoop down and rise up again.
Forward, backwards and sideways, I will show many techniques of ﬂight. I will show all these to you. Behold my
strength.” Having been thus addressed by the crow, one of the swans laughed. The swan spoke these words to the
crow. “Listen to me. O crow! There is no doubt that you will ﬂy in one hundred and one different kinds of ways. I
will however ﬂy in the only way that all the birds know. O crow! That is the way I will ﬂy, because I do not know
any other. O red-eyed one! You ﬂy in whichever way you think appropriate.” At this, the crows who had assembled there began to laugh. “How will the swan ﬂy in only one kind of way and defeat ﬂight in one hundred differ-

ent ways?” They began to ﬂy, one in one technique, and the other used one hundred and one ﬂying techniques.
Powerful and swift in strength, the swan and the crow ﬂew. The swan and the crow ﬂew, rivalling each other. The
one that could ﬂy anywhere393 ﬂew. The crow also ﬂew. Each ﬂew so as to cause wonder in the rival and praised
his own deeds. The crow ﬂew in a myriad and colourful ways. On seeing this, the assembled crows were delighted
and started to caw loudly. The swans laughed at them and uttered many unpleasant words. From one instant to another, they394 repeatedly rose up and swooped down. Descending and ascending, they were on the tops of trees
and on the ground. They uttered many kinds of noises, signifying their victory. O venerable one! With that single
and gentle motion, the valiant swan continued to ﬂy and for an instant, it seemed as if it had been defeated by the
crow. Slighting the swans, the crows spoke these words. “The swan that rose up into the sky is clearly being defeated.” On hearing these words, the swan ﬂew in a westward direction. It increased its speed and ﬂew over the
ocean, Varuna’s abode. At this, fear penetrated the crow and it lost its senses. It did not see any islands or trees,
where it could descend and rest, when it was tired. “When I am tired, where will I descend in this ocean of water?
This ocean is the abode of a large number of beings and is intolerable. There are many large beings that reside here
and it is superior to the sky.”395 O worst of your lineage! The ocean is superior to everything in depth. O Karna! It
is as limitless as the sky. The ocean is impossible to conquer. O Karna! Given its extremely long distance, what
could a crow do? In a short while, the swan travelled a long distance. It could not leave the crow behind and
glanced back at it. Having overtaken the crow, the one that could travel anywhere at will glanced back at it.396
Seeing that it was exhausted, the swan wished to rescue the one who was sinking and remembered the vows observed by righteous people. It said, “You repeatedly spoke about many different kinds of ﬂight. You should not
speak about these techniques of ﬂight. They are a mystery to us. O crow! What is the name of this pattern of ﬂight
that you are now being forced to ﬂy? Your wings and your beak are repeatedly touching the water. You are touching the waters of the ocean with your wings and your beak. O crow! You are extremely exhausted and you will
suddenly fall down.”
‘ “‘The swan said, “O crow! You spoke about one hundred and one different techniques of ﬂight. Earlier, you
spoke about many techniques. All of those have come to nought now.”
‘ “‘The crow replied, “O swan! Having fed on leftovers, I became insolent. I thought myself to be the equal of
Suparna.397 I showed disrespect to many other crows and all birds. I seek my life back from you. Take me to the
shores of an island. O swan! Let me obtain assurance and let me return to my country again. I will never show disrespect to anyone again. Save me.”
‘ “‘It was distressed and spoke in this way.398 Devoid of its senses, it lamented. Submerged in the great ocean,
it cawed. The crow was drenched in water and faced a great hardship. The swan picked it up with its feet and gently raised it onto its399 back. O Karna! The swan made the crow, bereft of its senses, climb astride its back. They
again quickly ﬂew to the island where the match had started. Having placed the bird down there, it comforted
it.400 The swan, as swift as thought, then ﬂew away to the country it wished to. This is what happened to the crow
that fed on leftovers from a vaishya household. There is no doubt that you have subsisted on leftovers from the
sons of Dhritarashtra. O Karna! That is the reason you show disrespect to all those who are your equal and superior. You were protected by Drona, Drona’s son, Kripa, Bhishma and the other Kouravas in Virata’s city. Partha was
single-handed. Why didn’t you kill him then?401 All of you were distressed and vanquished by Kiriti, like jackals
defeated by a lion. Where was your valour then? When you saw that your brother was defeated and killed by
Savyasachi, while all the brave ones among the Kurus looked on, you were the ﬁrst to run away.402 O Karna! Like
that, when you were attacked by the gandharvas in Dvaitavana,403 you abandoned all the Kurus and were the ﬁrst
to run away. Partha killed and defeated the gandharvas, with Chitrasena at the forefront, in battle. O Karna! He
freed Duryodhana and his wife. Then again, in earlier times, in the assembly of the kings, Rama404 himself spoke
about the power of Partha and Keshava. In the presence of the kings, Bhishma and Drona have always said that the
two Krishnas cannot be killed. You have heard that. I have only told you a little bit about how Dhananjaya is superior to you in various ways, like a brahmana is superior to all other beings. You will soon see that expensive chariot and Vasudeva’s son and Pandava Dhananjaya stationed on it. Those two bulls among men are famous among

gods, asuras and humans. They are renowned among men because of their radiance and you are like a ﬁreﬂy. O son
of a suta! Know this to be your state. Those two lions among men, Achyuta and Arjuna, will destroy you. Do not
indulge in self-praise.’” ’

Chapter 1179(29)
‘S anjaya said, “Adhiratha’s son heard these unpleasant words spoken by the lord of Madra. But he was not paciﬁed and spoke to Shalya. ‘Everything about Arjuna and Vasudeva is known to me. Shouri’s skill in driving Arjuna’s chariot, Pandava’s strength and great weapons are just as you have said and are known to me. O Shalya! But
you have not directly seen this.405 They are invincible and foremost among the wielders of weapons. However,
without being overcome with fear, I will ﬁght with the two Krishnas. I am suffering from greater torment because
of Rama. That supreme brahmana has cursed me. In earlier times, wishing to obtain a divine weapon from Rama, I
lived with him, in the disguise of a brahmana. O Shalya! For the sake of Phalguna’s welfare, the king of the gods
caused an obstruction there.406 He penetrated my thigh and entered my body in the distorted form of an insect.
Because of fear of my preceptor, I did not move.407 On waking up, the brahmana saw this. The maharshi asked
me who I was and on learning that I was a suta, he cursed me.408 “O suta! You have obtained this weapon through
a deception. Therefore, when it is time to perform a task, it will not manifest itself before you.409 When it is the
time for your death, it will go elsewhere.” The brahman can certainly not be present in a person who is not a brahmana. “O father!410 In this ﬁerce and tumultuous battle today, I have forgotten that powerful weapon. The powerful and unfathomable lord of the waters dashes forward, to submerge many beings. The ocean is like a mighty
mountain. But the shoreline repulses that immeasurable object. In this world, Kunti’s son is the foremost among
those who stretch bowstrings. He will release a mass of arrows that can’t be resisted. They will be shafted and will
penetrate the inner organs, slaying heroes. However, I will counter him in the battle. He is supremely strong
amongst those who are strong. He possesses great weapons. He will shoot from an extremely long distance and
will be like the ﬁerce ocean. The kings will be submerged in his waves of arrows. But, like the shoreline, I will
withstand Partha’s arrows. I think that he has no equal among men who wield the bow. But I will ﬁght with him in
the battle today, though he is capable of vanquishing the gods and the asuras in a battle. Behold my extremely terrible battle with him today. Pandava is extremely proud and desires to ﬁght. He will advance against me with his
superhuman and great weapons. In the battle, I will counter his weapons with my own weapons. I will bring down
Partha with my supreme arrows. I will scorch like the rays of the sun. I will blaze like the illustrious one’s rays.
Like clouds gather around the dispeller of the darkness, I will envelop Dhananjaya with my arrows. A ﬂaming ﬁre
has trails of smoke. Its energy scorches all the worlds. But like clouds pacify that ﬁre, I will quench Partha with
my arrows in the battle. The ﬁerce wind god is powerful and destroys with a storm. The angry and intolerant
Dhananjaya is like that. But, in the battle, I will withstand him like the immobile Himalayas. He is skilled and
knows about the circular motions of a chariot. He is always foremost among those who are borne in a battle. He is
supreme among all archers in the world. However, I will withstand that Dhananjaya in the battle. I think that there
is no archer who is equal to him among men. I know that he has withstood the entire earth. But today, I will encounter him in the battle. Savyasachi vanquished all the beings, together with the gods, in the region known as
Khandava. Which other man, with me being an exception, can ﬁght with him and seek to protect his own life? I
will cheerfully speak about Pandava’s manliness in an assembly of kshatriyas. O stupid one! O one who has lost
his senses! Why are you telling me about Arjuna’s manliness? Those who are forgiving always forgive an inferior
and cruel person who speaks harsh and unpleasant words. I can kill one hundred who are like you. However, because I am forgiving and bearing the appropriate time in mind, I am forgiving you. For Pandava’s sake, you have
spoken unpleasant words. You have censured me, like a stupid person who performs evil deeds. I did not deserve
it. Yet, you have used your tongue to lash me. You are one who hates friends. One with whom one walks seven
paces is a friend.411 The present time is full of death and is extremely terrible. Duryodhana has chosen this to ad-

vance in battle. I desire that his objectives are accomplished. But you act as if to counter them, as if you are one
who doesn’t love him. A friend delights a friend, and always does that which brings him pleasure. He frees him,
honours him and shares in his delight. This is what the brahmanas have said earlier. Towards Duryodhana, I tell
you that all these traits exist in me. An enemy always chastises and sharpens his weapons. He causes injury, makes
us sigh and distresses us. These many harmful qualities are seen in an enemy and almost all of these exist in you.
You are showing them towards me. For the sake of accomplishing Duryodhana’s objective and for bringing him
pleasure, for the sake of bringing glory to myself and for the sake of accomplishing what the gods want,412 I will
endeavour to ﬁght with Pandava and Vasudeva. Behold my deeds today. Behold my supreme weapons today, brahmastra and other divine and human weapons. I will cushion the one whose valour is ﬁerce, like a supreme elephant
killing another crazy elephant. For the sake of victory, I will use my mental powers to hurl the brahmastra at
Partha. It is unrivalled and is victorious. In the battle, he will not be able to escape from it, unless my wheels get
stuck in uneven terrain. O Shalya! Know that I will not be frightened, even if Vaivasvata413 with his staff, Varuna
with his noose, the lord of riches414 with his club, Vasava with his vajra, or any other assassin advances against
me. Therefore, I have no fear of Partha or Janardana. Today, there will be a clash between me and those two enemies. However, a brahmana told me, “Your miserable wheel will be stuck in the ground and you will confront
great fear in your heart, when you are ﬁghting in a battle.” Since then, I have greatly suffered from fright at the
brahmana’s words. O Shalya! The brahmana was a store of austerities and I had unconsciously used my arrows to
kill the calf that had been born from his homa cow,415 while it was roaming around amongst people. I gave that
foremost among brahmanas seven hundred tusked elephants and hundreds of servants and servant-maids. But he
was not satisﬁed with me. To obtain the favours of that supreme among brahmanas, I brought fourteen thousand
black cows, each with a white calf. I offered him a beautiful house, with every object of desire, and all the riches I
possessed. I honoured him with all this, but he did not wish to receive them. I had committed a crime and begged
him, so that I might remedy it. However, he told me, “O suta! What I have uttered will certainly happen. It cannot
be falsiﬁed. If I utter a falsehood, beings will be killed and I will commit a sin. Therefore, to protect dharma, I
have no interest in speaking a falsehood. You must perform atonement for causing violence towards what provides
a brahmana sustenance. There is no one in this world who can make my words false and you should accept them.”
Though you have censured me, because I am a well-wisher, I have told you this. I know that you are the one who
is censuring me. But be quiet and listen to what I will tell you next.’” ’

Chapter 1180(30)
‘S anjaya said, “O great king! Radheya again addressed the king of Madra, the scorcher of enemies. He restrained
him and spoke these words. ‘O Shalya! You have spoken to me about instances. However, your words are incapable of terrifying me in this battle. Even if all the gods, together with Vasava, ﬁght against me, even then, I will
not be frightened, not to speak of Partha and Keshava. I am incapable of being frightened by words alone. Know
that the person you are capable of terrifying in a battle is someone else. O evil-minded one! You have spoken a lot
of harsh words to me. That is the strength of inferior people. You are incapable of comprehending my qualities. O
venerable one! Karna was not born so as to be frightened. I have been born for valour and for fame. O lord of
Madra! Listen attentively to what I had heard in Dhritarashtra’s presence. Honouring Dhritarashtra, brahmanas recounted the ancient and wonderful accounts of many kingdoms and many kings. An aged one, foremost among
brahmanas, recounted ancient tales and spoke these words of ill repute about those from the lands of Bahlika and
Madra. “They are cast out from the region of the Himalayas and are despised in the region of the Ganga. That is
also true of those who live in the central regions, around the Sarasvati, the Yamuna and Kurukshetra, the ﬁve
rivers416 and with Sindhu as the sixth. It is one’s dharma to avoid the impure Bahlikas, who are outside these regions. From the days of my youth, I remember that the kings of their lineage had a ﬁg tree named Govardhana and
a quadrangular spot named Subhanda near the gate.417 Because of some secret work, I had to live with the
Bahlikas then. Because I dwelt among them, their conduct is known to me. There is a city named Shakala, a river
named Apaga that ﬂows downwards and a lineage of the Bahlikas named Jartika.418 Their conduct is severely
censured. They drink liquor made from grain and molasses. They eat the ﬂesh of cows, laced with garlic. They eat
bread mixed with meat and fried barley that has not been sowed.419 They are devoid of good conduct. Intoxicated,
the women throw away their garments and laugh, sing and dance in the cities, and outside the walls, without garlands and unguents. Intoxicated, they sing many songs, in voices that are like those of asses and camels. They
freely summon others.420 When their husbands and lords are killed, they call out their names in intoxication and
say, ‘Alas! Alas!’ However, those wicked ones do not observe sacred occasions and continue to scream and dance.
A chief among the Bahlikas lived among those women who made such uproar, and then dwelt for some time in
Kurujangala. Cheerless in his mind, he said, ‘She is large and fair.421 She is attired in a thin blanket. When it is
time for lying down, she must be thinking about the Bahlika who now lives among the Kurus. When will I cross
the river Shatadru and the beautiful Iravati and go to my own country, where I will see those handsome women
with large bodies? Those fair women have circles of red arsenic on their limbs and black collyrium on their
heads.422 Those beautiful ones are attired only in skins and are sporting. When will I obtain happiness among
those intoxicated ones, who have the sounds of asses, camels and mules? There will be the sounds of drums, kettledrums and conch shells. There is joy in the forest paths there, full of shami, pilu and karira trees. I will live
amongst those who eat cakes ground with wheat and coarse meal. When will I be prosperous and strong along
those paths, which echo to the many sounds of our oppression and banditry?’423 The evil-souled Bahlikas are inferior and outcasts in this way. Which man would like to and dwell amidst them, even for an instant?” Thus did the
brahmana describe the Bahlikas, whose conduct is vile. Whether it is their good qualities or bad, you possess onesixth of those. Having said this, the virtuous brahmana began to speak again. This is what he said about the illmannered Bahlikas. Listen. “In the large city of Shakala, a rakshasa lady always used to sing every night, on the
fourteenth day of the dark lunar fortnight,424 to the sound of drums. When will those songs be announced and
when will I sing in Shakala again?425 When will I satiate myself with the ﬂesh of cows and drink the great liquor

made from molasses? Having drunk the liquor made from molasses, I will be with the large and ornamented
women. I will wash my mouth after eating copious quantities of the meat of sheep, laced with onions, and also the
ﬂesh of boars, fowl, cows, asses and camels. Those who do not eat the ﬂesh of sheep, are born in vain.” Drunk
with liquor, thus do the residents of Shakala, young and old, cry out. How can there be good conduct among them?
O Shalya! Know this and be surprised. I will tell you more. This is what another brahmana told us in the assembly
of the Kurus. “There is a forest of pilu trees in the spot where the ﬁve rivers ﬂow—Shatadru, Vipasha, Iravati as
the third, Chandrabhaga and Vitasta. As the sixth, Sindhu ﬂows outside that region. There is a country named Aratta426 there, where dharma has been destroyed. One should not go there. The gods, the ancestors and the brahmanas do not receive offerings from those who are outcasts, those born from servants and those from the land of
Videha,427 who do not sacriﬁce. It has been heard that those from Bahlika have destroyed all dharma.” The
learned brahmana also said this in the assembly of the virtuous. “Bahlikas eat from vessels made out of wood and
clay, in which, coarse meal has been ground and which have been licked by dogs. They have no revulsion at this.
They drink the milk of sheep, camels and asses. They drink and eat preparations made from these. Inter-caste sons
are born there and those contemptible ones drink every kind of milk and eat everything. The learned say that the
Bahlikas known as Aratta must always be avoided.” O Shalya! You are certain to know this. But I will tell you
more. In the gathering of the Kurus, in the assembly hall, another brahmana said the following. “Having drunk
milk in the spot known as Yugandhara, how can one go to the place without decay? Having bathed in Bhutilaya,
how can one go to heaven? That is the spot where ﬁve rivers issue from the mountains and ﬂow. A noble person
should not dwell among the Aratta-Bahlikas for even two days. In Vipasha, there are two pishachas named Bahi
and Hlika. They were not created by Prajapati, and the Bahlikas are their offspring. One must avoid those without
dharma—Karashkaras, Mahishakas, Kalingas, Kikatas, Atavis, Karkotakas and Virakas.” He had gone on a tirtha
and had spent a single night under a shami tree.428 He was addressed by a rakshasi, whose hips were as broad as a
mortar. “Those from the land known as Aratta, the people known as Bahlika and those who reside in the SindhuSouvira region are generally reviled.”429 O Shalya! You are certain to know this. But I will tell you more. Listen
with an attentive mind to everything that is spoken by me. On an earlier occasion, a skilled brahmana came to our
house as a guest. Witnessing our conduct, the skilled one was delighted and said, “I have lived for a long time on a
single peak of the Himalayas. I have seen many different countries, where diverse kinds of dharma are followed.
But I have never seen a country where all the subjects act against dharma. All of them professed dharma to be
what those learned in the Vedas have proclaimed it to be. I have always travelled in many countries, where different kinds of dharma are followed. O great king! However, having gone to the Bahlikas, I learnt the following.
There, one ﬁrst becomes a brahmana and then becomes a kshatriya. Thereafter, one becomes a vaishya, a shudra, a
Bahlika, and ﬁnally a barber. Having become a barber, one once again becomes a brahmana. Having become a
brahmana there, one is once again born as a slave. In every family, there is only one virtuous brahmana. Everyone
else follows one’s desires. The Gandharas, the Madrakas and the Bahlikas possess limited intelligence. That is
what I heard there, about the admixture of dharma. Having travelled throughout the entire earth, I heard about this
catastrophe among Bahlikas.” O Shalya! You are certain to know this. But I will tell you more. These were the
censorious words that another one spoke to me about the Bahlikas. In earlier times, a virtuous lady was abducted
by some bandits from Aratta. They displayed adharma towards her. Consequently, she cursed them. “I am young. I
have relatives. But against dharma, you have had intercourse with me.430 Therefore, all the women in your lineages will be ignoble. O worst among men! You will not be able to escape from the consequences of your terrible
act.” The Kurus, the Panchalas, the Shalvas, the Matsyas, the Naimishas, the Kosalas, the ones from Kashi, the
Angas, the Kalingas, the Magadhas and the immensely fortunate Chedis know about eternal dharma. In many
countries, even those who have outwardly deviated know about virtue. Among the Matsyas, those from the lands
of Kuru and Panchala and especially those from Naimisha and Chedi, the virtuous ones lived according to ancient
dharma. But this is not true of the Madras from the land of the ﬁve rivers. They are false in their tongues. O king!
Knowing all this about dharma, be quiet. O Shalya! Be like those who cannot speak. You are the protector and the
king of those people. Therefore, you have one-sixth share in their good and evil deeds. Or else, since you do not
protect them, you only have a share in their evil deeds. A king who protects the good deeds of his subjects obtains

a share in those good deeds. In earlier times, the eternal dharma was revered in all countries. But on seeing the
dharma practised in the land of the ﬁve rivers, the grandfather431 cried, “Shame!” They are outcasts. They are
born from servants. They are the performers of wicked deeds. That is the reason the grandfather condemned the
dharma in the land of the ﬁve rivers. Though they followed their own dharma and that of their varna, he did not
honour it.432 O Shalya! You are certain to know this. But I will tell you more. A rakshasa named
Kalmashapada433 was about to be submerged in a pond and said, “Begging is ﬁlth for a kshatriya. Falsehood is
ﬁlth for a brahmana. Bahlikas are the ﬁlth of the earth. The women of Madra are the ﬁlth among women.” When
the traveller of the night434 was being submerged in the pond, a king saved him. Listen to what he435 said when
he was asked. “Mlecchas are ﬁlth among men. Boxers are ﬁlth among mlecchas. Eunuchs are ﬁlth among boxers.
Kings who act as ofﬁciating priests are the ﬁlth among eunuchs. Among kings who act as ofﬁciating priests, the
Madrakas are ﬁlth. If you do not save me, all of that ﬁlth will be yours.” The rakshasa spoke those supreme words
as antidote, when a person’s valour has been destroyed by the poison of a rakshasa. The Panchalas follow the brahman. The Kouraveyas follow their own dharma. The Matsyas observe truth and the Shurasenas perform sacriﬁces.
Those from the eastern regions are like slaves and those from the southern regions are contemptible. The Bahlikas
are thieves and those from Surashtra are of mixed breed. Shame on those from Aratta and the land of the ﬁve
rivers. They are ungrateful and steal the property of others. They are addicted to drinking liquor and have intercourse with the wives of their preceptors. Those from Panchala, Kuru, Naimisha and Matsya know about dharma.
The aged ones from Kalinga, Anga and Magadha follow the virtuous path of dharma. With the ﬁre god at the forefront, the gods reside in the eastern direction. The south is protected by the ancestors and Yama, the perfomer of
auspicious deeds. The west is protected by Varuna, who takes care of other powerful gods there. The illustrious
Soma is in the north, along with Brahma and the brahmanas. The rakshasas and pishachas are there in the Himalayas and the guhyakas in Gandhamadana. It is certain that Vishnu Janardana protects all the beings in the
world.436 The Magadhas understand signs, the Kosalas from what they see. The Kurus and Panchalas understand
even if the speech is partly uttered, the Shalvas understand only when everything is spoken. Those who live in
mountainous and hilly regions are coarse. O king! The Yavanas know everything, the Shuras especially so. The
mlecchas follow their own signs. Other inferior people understand nothing. The Bahlikas, and not just the
Madrakas, are against anything that has been undertaken. O Shalya! You are like that and you should not venture
to give me a reply. Knowing this, keep quiet. You should not try to contradict me. Do not make me kill Keshava
and Arjuna after I have killed you ﬁrst.’
‘ “Shalya said, ‘O Karna! Abandoning of the distressed and the sale of wives and sons is prevalent among those
from Anga. You are the lord of that region. Bhishma enumerated the list of rathas and atirathas.437 At that time, he
recounted your vices and you were angry. Do not be angry. Brahmanas can be found everywhere. Kshatriyas can
also be found everywhere. O Karna! So can vaishyas and shudras, and women who are virtuous and good in their
vows. Men always sport with other men and laugh at them, trying to hurt each other. In every country, there are
those who are addicted to intercourse. Everyone is always skilled in detecting another one’s faults. No one knows
his own faults, or knowing them, is confounded.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “Karna did not say anything in reply and Shalya faced the direction of the enemy. Radheya
smiled again and urged him to drive.” ’

Chapter 1181(31)
‘S anjaya said, “Karna saw the unmatched vyuha of the enemy Parthas, protected by Dhrishtadyumna. It was capable of resisting the arrays of foes. He advanced, roaring like a lion and making his chariot clatter. The earth trembled from the sound of musical instruments. That scorcher of enemies, irresistible in battle, seemed to be trembling
in rage. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The immensely energetic one constructed a counter vyuha. He began to
kill the Pandava soldiers, like Maghavan against the asuras. Placing Yudhishthira on his right, he advanced towards
him.”
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O Sanjaya! How did Radheya construct a counter vyuha against the Pandavas? The brave
Dhrishtadyumna was at the forefront and they were protected by Bhimasena. O Sanjaya! Who were stationed at
the ﬂanks and the extreme ﬂanks of my army? How were the others divided and where were they stationed? How
did the sons of Pandu construct a counter vyuha against us? How did that extremely extensive and extremely terrible battle commence? When Karna advanced against Yudhishthira, where was Bibhatsu then? In Arjuna’s presence, who is capable of attacking Yudhishthira? In earlier times, he single-handedly vanquished all the beings in
Khandava. Wishing to remain alive, who other than Radheya is capable of ﬁghting with him?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “Listen to the construction of the vyuha and how Arjuna arrived there. The kings on both sides
arrayed themselves and fought the battle there. O king! Sharadvata Kripa, the spirited Magadhas and Satvata Kritavarma were stationed on the right ﬂank. On their extreme ﬂank were Shakuni and maharatha Uluka. Those soldiers were protected by fearless horse riders from Gandhara, armed with sparkling lances, and invincible ones
from the mountainous regions. They were like a storm of locusts and as ﬁerce-looking as pishachas. There were
thirty-four thousand samshaptaka rathas who did not retreat. They were ﬁerce in battle and protected the left ﬂank.
Your sons assembled together, wishing to kill Krishna and Arjuna. The Kambojas, Shakas and Yavanas were on
their extreme ﬂank. On the instructions of the son of the suta, they were there, with their chariots, horses and infantry, and challenged Arjuna and the immensely strong Keshava. Karna armoured and stationed himself at the
head of the vanguard. His armour and armlets were colourful. He was garlanded and protected the front of the
army. He was protected by his extremely wrathful sons, supreme among all the wielders of weapons. As he drew
his bow at the head of the army, the brave one438 was resplendent. Ready to ﬁght, the mighty-armed Duhshasana
was surrounded by soldiers and stationed himself at the rear of the vyuha. He was as resplendent as the sun and the
ﬁre. He was handsome and his eyes were tawny. He was astride a mighty elephant. O great king! King Duryodhana was himself behind him. He was protected by his brothers, Chitrashva and Chitrasena.439 He was also protected by the immensely valorous Madras and Kekayas. O great king! He was as resplendent as Shatakratu, with
the gods. Ashvatthama, the foremost maharathas among the Kurus, elephants that were always crazy and brave
mlecchas stationed themselves behind that army of chariots and followed it. They looked like clouds that poured.
There were standards that signiﬁed victory and supreme and blazing weapons. Stationed on horses, the riders were
as beautiful as mountains covered with trees. Thousands of foot soldiers guarded the feet of the elephants. Those
brave ones were armed with lances and swords and did not retreat. There were ornamented riders, chariots and elephants. That vyuha was as resplendent as one of the gods or the asuras. The learned leader arrayed it well, according to the norms of Brihaspati. That mighty vyuha seemed to dance, causing fear in the hearts of the enemy. Wishing to ﬁght, foot soldiers, horses, chariots and elephants issued forth from the ﬂanks and extreme ﬂanks, like
clouds during the monsoon.
‘ “On seeing Karna stationed at the forefront of the army, King Yudhishthira spoke to Dhananjaya, the single
brave one who was capable of killing all enemies. ‘O Arjuna! Behold the mighty vyuha that Karna has constructed
for this battle. The arrays of soldiers are blazing along its ﬂanks and extreme ﬂanks. On seeing this large army of

the enemy, adopt such measures as are decreed by policy, so that we are not overcome.’ O king! Thus addressed by
the king, Arjuna joined his hands in salutation and replied, ‘Everything will be done as you wish. It shall not be
otherwise. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will act so that they can be killed. I will act so as to destroy and
kill the foremost among them.’
‘ “Yudhishthira said, ‘With that objective, you advance against Radheya, Bhimsena against Suyodhana, Nakula
against Vrishasena, Sahadeva against Soubala, Shatanika against Duhshasana, the bull among the Shini lineage
against Hardikya,440 Dhrishtadyumna against Drona’s son and I myself against Kripa. Let Droupadi’s sons441
and Shikhandi advance against the remaining sons of Dhritarashtra. Let the others on our side kill the enemy.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “Thus addressed by Dharmaraja, Dhananjaya agreed. He instructed his own soldiers and himself
advanced to the front of the army. As that chariot advanced, it was extremely wonderful to behold. Yet again,
Shalya spoke to Adhiratha’s son, invincible in battle. ‘The chariot with the white horses is advancing, with Krishna
as the charioteer. Kounteya is advancing, slaying the enemy. He is the one about whom you had asked. The great
and tumultuous sound of the axles of the chariot can be heard. A dust is arising and has covered the sky. O Karna!
The earth is trembling because of the axles of the chariot. A large and violent wind seems to be blowing on both
sides of your army. Predatory beasts are howling and small animals are emitting a terrible sound. O Karna! Behold.
This is extremely horrible and gives rise to fear. The body hair stands up. A headless torso that is like a cloud has
enveloped the sun. Behold. Herds of many different kinds of animals are howling in all the directions. Powerful
and proud tigers are glancing in the direction of the sun. Behold. Thousands of herons and vultures have assembled
together. They are seated, ﬁercely facing each other, as if they are engaged in a conversation. O Karna! The white
horses yoked to your giant chariot have turned pale. The arrows are blazing and the standard is trembling. Behold.
The horses are extremely large and possess great speed. But they are quivering, though they are as handsome as
ﬂowing Garudas in the sky. From these portents, it is evident that the earth will be covered with kings. O Karna!
They will be slain and will lie down, in hundreds and thousands. The tumultuous sound of conch shells can be
heard and it makes the body hair stand up. O Radheya! There are sounds of drums and double-drums in every direction. There are the whizzing sounds of many kinds of arrows and the roars of men, horses and chariots. O Karna! Listen to the sound produced from the bowstrings and palms of those great-souled ones. O Karna! Behold Arjuna’s chariot. It has been constructed by an aristan and is decorated with golden ﬂags that have many hues. As
they are stirred by the wind, they are resplendent. The ﬂags are decorated with golden moons, stars and suns and
are adorned with bells. They are like ﬂashes of lightning in a cloud. There are other golden penants that are being
stirred by the wind. Those ﬂags are on the chariots of the great-souled Panchalas. They are slaying elephants, horses, rathas, infantry and warriors on your side. The tips of their standards can be seen. The twang of their bowstrings can be heard. Today, you will see the brave one with the white horses, with Krishna as his charioteer. He
will slay the enemy in the battle. He is the one about whom you had asked. O Karna! Today, you will see Vasudeva
and Arjuna stationed on a single chariot. Those two tigers among men are red-eyed and are the scorchers of foes.
Varshneya is his charioteer and Gandiva is his bow. O Radheya! If you are successful in killing him, you will be
our king. He has been challenged by the samshaptakas and has departed in their direction. In the battle, that powerful one is creating a great carnage among the enemy.’ When Karna was thus addressed by the lord of Madra, he
became extremely angry and said, ‘Look. The angry samshaptakas have attacked him from every direction. Partha
cannot be seen and is shrouded, like the sun by the clouds. O Shalya! Immersed in that ocean of grief, Arjuna will
perish.’
‘ “Shalya replied, ‘Who can slay Varuna with water or the ﬁre with kindling? Who can grasp the wind, or drink
up the great ocean? I think that causing hardship to Partha in a battle is equally tough. No one is capable of vanquishing Arjuna, not even Indra, with the gods and the asuras. Be satisiﬁed with your words and be cheerful in
your mind. No matter what your wishes are, you cannot be victorious in this encounter. There may be someone
who can raise the earth with his two arms, or consume all the beings with his anger. That person may bring down
the gods from heaven. No one other than him can defeat Arjuna in a battle. Behold Kunti’s brave son. Bhima is unsullied in his deeds. The mighty-armed one is radiant and is stationed like Mount Meru. He is perpetually angry,
remembering the enmity that has endured for a long time. The valiant Bhima is stationed in the battle, desiring victory. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira is foremost among those who uphold dharma. The conqueror of enemy cities, the

performer of good deeds, is stationed against the enemy in the battle. Nakula and Sahadeva, the brothers who are
tigers among men, have been born from the Ashvins. They are stationed in the battle and are extremely difﬁcult to
defeat. Behold the ﬁve sons of Krishna,442 who are like ﬁve mountains. They are stationed, wishing to ﬁght and
all of them are Arjuna’s equal in a battle. These are the sons of Drupada, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront.
Those brave ones are stationed and are supremely energetic. Satyajit is the youngest among them.’443
‘ “While those two lions among men were conversing in this way, the armies clashed against each other, like the
ﬁerce waters of the Ganga and the Yamuna.” ’444

Chapter 1182(32)
‘D hritarashtra asked, “O Sanjaya! When the arrayed armies clashed against each other, how did Partha advance
against the samshaptakas and Karna against the Pandavas? You are skilled in narrating. Please tell me everything
about the battle. I am never satisﬁed with hearing about the valour of the brave ones in battle.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “Because of the evil policies of your son, Arjuna created a vyuha as a counter vyuha, having
seen that the large army of the enemy had been stationed. That large army445 was full of horse riders, elephants,
foot soldiers and chariots. With Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, its formation was magniﬁcient. Parshata’s horses
had the complexion of pigeons and he was as resplendent as the moon and the sun. With his bow, he was like
Death personiﬁed. Droupadi’s sons were stationed next to Parshata, wishing to ﬁght. With terrible bodies, they followed him, like large numbers of stars after the moon.
‘ “In the battle, on seeing that the samshaptakas were arranged in a formation, Arjuna angrily attacked them,
stretching the bow named Gandiva. Wishing to kill him, the samshaptakas also attacked Partha. They were ﬁrm in
their resolution of obtaining victory and preferred death to retreat. Those brave ones advanced against Arjuna and
they possessed large numbers of horses, crazy elephants and chariots. The clash between them and Kiriti was tumultuous. We have heard about his encounter with the nivatakavachas446 and it was like that. Partha sliced down
the heads of thousands of the enemy and brought down chariots, horses, standards, elephants, foot soldiers, the
leaders of rathas, arrows, bows, swords, chakras and battleaxes, in addition to arms with upraised weapons and
other weapons that had not yet been raised. He was submerged in that large whirlpool of soldiers, like an eddy that
swirls in the nether regions. The samshaptakas were delighted that his chariot was thus submerged and roared. But
Bibhatsu slaughtered the ones who were in front of him, those that were further away, those that were to the rear,
those that were to the right and those that were to the left. He was like an angry Rudra amidst animals.
‘ “O venerable one! The battle that commenced between the Panchalas, the Chedis and the Srinjayas and those
who were on your side was extremely terrible. Kripa, Kritavarma and Shakuni Soubala were with soldiers who
were cheerful, but extremely enraged. They were strikers who could bring down arrays of chariots. Those bravest
of the brave were irresistible in battle and fought with the Kosalas, the Kashis, the Matsyas, the Karushas, the
Kekayas and the Shurasenas. That ﬁerce battle destroyed bodies and sins. Those brave shudras, vaishyas and kshatriyas obtained dharma, heaven and fame. O bull among the Bharata lineage! With his brothers, Duryodhana protected the foremost among the Kurus and the maharathas from Madra. In that battle, the Pandavas, the Panchalas
and Satyaki fought with Karna, who was protected by the brave ones among the Kurus. Karna used his sharp arrows to slaughter that large army and crushed the best of chariots. He then afﬂicted Yudhishthira. He447 severed
the arrows, weapons and bodies of thousands of the enemy, thus ensuring heaven and fame for them and greatly
delighting those on his side.”
‘Dhritarashtra asked, “O Sanjaya! How did Karna penetrate the army of the Parthas, create that destruction of
men and afﬂict the king? Tell me everything about this. Who were the foremost among the Parthas who fought
against Karna and resisted him? Whom did Adhiratha’s son have to crush before afﬂicting Yudhishthira?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “On seeing that the Parthas, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, were stationed, Karna, the
destroyer of enemies, spiritedly attacked the Panchalas. O great king! Like swans heading towards the giant ocean,
desiring victory, the Panchalas also quickly rushed against him. There was the blare of thousands of conch shells,
piercing the heart. From either side, there was the ﬁerce sound of drums. There were the sounds of many musical
instruments and the noise emitted by elephants, horses and chariots. The brave ones roared like lions and it became
terrible. It was as if the earth, with its mountains, trees and oceans, the sky, with clouds tossed around by the wind,

and the ﬁrmament, with its moon, planets and nakshatras, seemed to be whirled around because of that sound. All
the beings thought that the sound was distressing. Those that possessed limited spirit died and fell down. Karna
was extremely enraged and swiftly released his weapons. He slaughtered the Pandava soldiers, like Maghavan
against the asuras. He quickly penetrated the Pandava chariots and shot his arrows, killing seventy-seven of the
foremost among the Prabhadrakas. The best of rathas next used twenty-ﬁve sharp arrows that were well tufted to
kill twenty-ﬁve Panchala rathas. He used gold-tufted iron arrows that were capable of penetrating bodies to slaughter hundreds and thousands of Chedis. He performed superhuman deeds in that encounter. O great king! The Panchalas advanced on their chariots and surrounded him from all sides. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Afﬁxing ﬁve arrows that were extremely difﬁcult to withstand, Vaikartana Vrisha Karna killed ﬁve Panchalas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that encounter, he killed the Panchalas Bhanudeva, Chitrasena, Senavindu,
Tapana and Shurasena. In that great battle, while the brave Panchalas were being slaughtered by the arrows, great
lamentations arose among the Panchalas. Those lamentations covered all the directions and Karna swiftly killed
them with his arrows. O venerable one! The protectors of Karna’s chariot wheels were his invincible sons, Sushena
and Satyasena, who were ready to give up their lives in the ﬁght. Karna’s eldest son, maharatha Vrishasena, himself protected him from the rear and guarded Karna’s back. Wishing to kill Radheya, the strikers, Dhrishtadyumna,
Satyaki, Droupadi’s sons, Vrikodara, Janamejaya, Shikhandi, the brave ones among the Prabhadrakas, the Chedis,
the Panchalas and the armoured Matsyas attacked him. They showered down many kinds of arrows and weapons.
They showered down and oppressed him, like clouds pouring down on a mountain during the rainy season. O
king! Wishing to save their father, the strikers who were Karna’s sons and other brave ones on your side, repulsed
those valiant ones.
‘ “Sushena severed Bhimasena’s bow with a broad-headed arrow. He then pierced Bhima in the chest with seven
iron arrows and roared. Having picked up another bow that was ﬁrmer, Vrikodara, who was terrible in his valour,
strung it and severed Sushena’s bow. He angrily pierced him with nine arrows and seemed to be dancing around.
He swiftly pierced Karna with seventy-three sharp arrows. While all his well-wishers looked on, he struck Karna’s
son, Satyasena, with ten arrows and brought him down, together with his horses, charioteer, standard and weapons.
His beautiful face was like the full moon. The head was struck down with a kshurapra arrow and was like a lotus
severed from its stalk. Having killed Karna’s son, Bhima again afﬂicted those on your side. He severed the bows of
Kripa and Hardikya and oppressed them. He pierced Duhshasana with three iron arrows and Shakuni with six. The
lord deprived Uluka and Patatri of their chariots.448 He next picked up an arrow and said, ‘O Sushena! You have
been killed.’ However, Karna severed this and struck him449 with three arrows. At this, Bhima picked up another
arrow that was well shafted and extremely energetic. He released this at Sushena, but Vrisha severed that too.
Wishing to save his son and cruelly desiring to kill the cruel one,450 Karna again struck Bhimasena with seventythree arrows. Sushena picked up another supreme bow that was capable of bearing a greater load. He struck Nakula, in the arms and in the chest, with ﬁve arrows. Nakula pierced him back with twenty ﬁrm arrows that were capable of bearing a great load and roared powerfully, causing fright to Karna. O great king! At this, maharatha
Sushena pierced him with ten swift arrows and used a kshurapra arrow to quickly sever his bow. Nakula became
senseless with anger and picked up another bow. In that encounter, he repulsed Sushena with many arrows. O king!
That slayer of enemy heroes enveloped all the directions with his arrows. Having killed Sushena’s charioteer, he
pierced him with three arrows. Using three broad-headed arrows, he shattered his ﬁrm bow into three fragments.
Sushena became senseless with rage and picked up another bow. He pierced Nakula with sixty arrows and Sahadeva with seven. That extremely wonderful and ﬁerce battle was like that between the gods and the asuras. Wishing
to kill each other, they quickly struck each other with arrows. Satyaki killed Vrishasena’s charioteer with three arrows. With a broad-headed arrow, he severed his bow and struck his horses with seven. He shattered his standard
with an arrow and struck him in the chest with three. Thus struck, he451 became senseless on his chariot, but
raised himself in a short while. Wishing to slay Shini’s descendant, he rushed against him with a sword and a
shield. Satyaki also swiftly rushed against Vrishasena and used ten arrows, with heads like the ears of a boar, to
strike his sword and shield. Duhshasana saw that he452 was without a chariot and devoid of weapons. He quickly
picked him up on his own chariot and then made him ascend another chariot. Thus, maharatha Vrishasena sta-

tioned himself on another chariot. The invincible one fought for Karna’s sake and again protected his rear. Shini’s
descendant struck Duhshasana with ninety-nine swift arrows. Having deprived him of his charioteer, horses and
chariot, he struck him in the forehead with three arrows. At this, he453 ascended another chariot that had been
duly prepared earlier, and stationing himself within Karna’s army, began to ﬁght with the Pandus. Dhrishtadyumna
pierced Karna with ten arrows. Droupadi’s sons pierced him with seventy-three and Yuyudhana with seven. Bhimasena pierced him with sixty-four arrows and Sahadeva with ﬁve. Nakula pierced him with three hundred arrows, Shatanika with seven, the brave Shikhandi with ten and Dharmaraja with one hundred. O Indra among
kings! These, and many other, brave ones desired victory.
‘ “In the great battle, they struck the son of the suta, the great archer. The son of the suta pierced each of them
back with ten arrows. The brave one, the destroyer of enemies, roamed around on his beautiful chariot and struck
them back. O great king! We witnessed the valour of the weapons and the dexterity of the great-souled Karna. It
was extraordinary. One did not witness a gap between the maharatha’s picking up an arrow, afﬁxing it and releasing it. The sky, the ﬁrmament, the earth and the directions were quickly enveloped by his arrows. It was as if the
sky was covered with beautiful red clouds. With the bow in his hand, the powerful Radheya seemed to be dancing
around. Everyone who struck him was pierced back with three times the number of arrows. Yet again, he pierced
each of them, with their horses, charioteers, standards and umbrellas, with ten arrows each and roared. They had to
yield and let him pass. The great archer Radheya, the afﬂicter of enemies, drove them away with his showers of
arrows and without any hindrance, penetrated the king’s454 division. He slaughtered three hundred Chedi rathas
who refused to retreat. Radheya then used sharp arrows to strike Yudhishthira. O king! The Pandavas, Shikandi
and Satyaki wished to save the king from Radheya and surrounded him. And all the soldiers on your side surrounded Karna, the great archer who was irresistible in battle, in every direction. O lord of the earth! The roar of
many kinds of musical instruments arose. The brave and unretreating ones roared like lions. Without any fear, the
Kurus and the Pandavas clashed again. Yudhishthira was at the forefront of the Parthas and the son of the suta was
at our head.” ’

Chapter 1183(33)
‘S anjaya said, “Karna penetrated the soldiers and attacked Dharmaraja. He was surrounded by thousands of chariots, elephants, horses and infantry. The enemy hurled thousands of diverse weapons at Vrisha. But without any
fear, he used hundreds of ﬁerce arrows to strike these down. He cut down their heads, arms and thighs. In every
direction, they were killed and fell down on the ground. The others were shattered and ﬂed. The Dravidas, the
Andhakas and the Nishadas were again rallied by Satyaki. In that battle, wishing to kill him, they attacked Karna
with their infantry. Struck by Karna’s arrows, they lost their arms and helmets. They fell down simultaneously on
the ground, like a forest of shala trees that had been struck down. In this way, hundreds, thousands and tens of
thousands of warriors lost their lives. Their bodies fell down on the ground and they ﬁlled the directions with their
fame. In that battle, Vaikartana Karna was like Yama. The Pandus and Panchalas tried to counter him, like a disease with mantras and herbs. He repulsed them and again attacked Yudhishthira, like an irresistible disease that
cannot be countered by mantras and herbs. However, though he wished to advance against the king, he was held
back by the Pandus, the Panchalas and the Kekayas. It was like death not being able to conquer those who know
about the brahman.
‘ “Yudhishthira, the slayer of enemy heroes, was some distance away from Karna, who had been checked. His
eyes red with rage, he said, ‘O Karna! O Karna! Your eyesight is in vain. O son of a suta! Listen to my words. You
have always sought to rival the illustrious Phalguna in battle. You have always devoted yourself to the views of
Dhritarashtra’s son and have opposed us. Today, exhibit the strength, the valour and the enmity towards the Pandus. Based on your great manliness, display all of those today. In this great battle today, I will destroy the love you
bear towards ﬁghting.’ O great king! Having thus addressed Karna, Pandu’s son smiled and used ten sharp and
gold-tufted arrows to pierce him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The son of the suta, scorcher of enemies
and great archer, pierced him back with nine vatsadanta arrows455 and laughed. In the battle, the brave and greatsouled one then used two razor-sharp and straight-tufted arrows to slay the two Panchalas who were protecting his
chariot wheels.456 Those two brave ones had been resplendent along Dharmaraja’s ﬂanks. Along his chariot, they
had been like Punarvasu by the side of the moon.457 However, Yudhishthira again pierced Karna with thirty arrows and struck both Sushena and Satyasena with three arrows each.458 He pierced Shalya with ninety arrows and
the son of the suta with seventy-three arrows. He struck each of the ones who were protecting his horses with three
arrows each. At this, Adhiratha’s son laughed and brandished his bow. He pierced the king with a broad-headed
arrow, pierced him again with another sixty arrows and laughed. Then, the brave ones among the Pandus rushed
towards Yudhishthira. Wishing to save him from the son of the suta, they struck Karna with arrows. Among these
were Satyaki, Chekitana, Yuyutsu, Pandya, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Droupadi’s sons, the Prabhadrakas, the
twins, Bhimasena, Shishupala’s son, the Karushas, the remaining Matsyas, the Kekayas and those from Kashi and
Kosala. These spirited and brave ones countered Vasushena. Janamejaya from Panchala pierced Karna with sharp
arrows—varahakarnas, narachas, nalikas, vatsadantas, vipathas, kshurapras and atakamukhas.459 Wielding many
ﬁerce weapons, chariots, elephants, horses and riders surrounded and attacked Karna from every direction, wishing
to kill him.
‘ “He was attacked from every direction by the best among the Pandavas. At this, he invoked brahmastra and
enveloped the directions with his arrows. The ﬁre that was Karna had valour and anger and his arrows ﬂamed
greatly. Consuming the Pandavas, who were like a forest, he resplendently roamed around in that battle. The greatsouled and wonderful archer repulsed all those great weapons. He laughed and used his arrows to sever the bow of
that Indra among men.460 In that battle, in the twinkling of an eye, he afﬁxed ninety sharp arrows with drooping

tufts and penetrated the king’s armour. That armour was decorated with gold. As it fell down, it looked dazzling,
like clouds tinged with lightning and tossed around by the wind, when penetrated by the sun. Having fallen off the
limbs of that Indra among men, the armour looked beautiful, like celestial clouds in the night sky, ornamented with
gems.461 Devoid of armour and wounded by arrows, Partha was covered with blood. He angrily hurled a lance
that was completely made out of iron towards Adhiratha’s son. While it blazed through the sky, he462 cut it down
with seven arrows. It was severed by the great archer’s arrows and fell down on the ground. At this, Yudhishthira
struck Karna in the arms, the forehead and the chest with four javelins and roared delightedly. With blood ﬂowing
from his body, Karna was enraged and sighed like a snake. He struck down Pandava’s standard with a broad-headed arrow and pierced him with three more. He struck down his quivers and shattered his chariot into tiny fragments. With his parshni charioteers slain, Partha retreated. He was incapable of remaining in front of the evilminded Karna. Radheya pursued him and touched him on the shoulder with his hand. O king! He laughed at him
and spoke disparaging words to Pandava. ‘You have been born in a famous lineage and are established in the dharma of kshatriyas. How is it that you are seeking to protect your life in this great battle and are abandoning this encounter with the enemy? I don’t think you know the dharma of kshatriyas well. That is my view. You possess the
strength of the brahman and are devoted to studying and the task of performing sacriﬁces. O Kounteya! Do not
ﬁght again and do not advance against brave ones. Do not speak unpleasant words towards them. Do not advance
towards a great battle.’ Having said this, the immensely strong one released Partha. He began to slaughter the Pandava soldiers, like the wielder of the vajra against the asuras. O king! That lord of men ﬂed in shame. On seeing
that the king was departing, the Chedis, the Pandavas, the Panchalas, maharatha Satyaki, Droupadi’s brave sons
and the Pandavas who were the sons of Madri followed the undecaying one. On seeing that Yudhishthira’s army
was unwilling to ﬁght, Karna pursued them from the rear, together with the brave Kurus. There was the sound of
conch shells and drums and the twang of bows. The sons of Dhritarashtra roared like lions.
‘ “O Kouravya! Yudhishthira swiftly climbed onto Shrutakirti’s chariot.463 Dharmaraja Yudhishthira saw that
his464 strength was like that of Death and that he was slaying thousands of warriors. At this, he465 became angry.
Instructed by the king, all the maharatha Pandavas, with Bhimasena at the forefront, attacked your sons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The warriors raised a tumultuous sound there. Here and there, there were elephants,
horses, chariots, foot soldiers and weapons. ‘Arise. Strike. Advance towards death.’ As they killed each other in
that ﬁeld of battle, these were the words the warriors spoke to each other. Because of the shower of arrows, it was
as if the sky was covered by the shadow of clouds. The best of men clashed against each other and killed each other. In that battle, penants, standards and umbrellas were brought down. Horses, charioteers and warriors were destroyed. Those lords were slain. They lost their limbs and their bodies and fell down shattered on the ground.
Supreme elephants looked like the lofty summits of mountains. Their riders were slain and they fell down, like
mountains shattered by the thunder. Armour, ornaments and bodies were mangled, shattered and dispersed. In
thousands, horses fell down, with their brave riders. The limbs of warriors were scattered. Elephants, horses and
rathas were slain. Thousands of arrays of foot soldiers were crushed by enemy heroes. Everywhere, the earth was
strewn with the heads of ﬁerce warriors. Their eyes were copper coloured and dilated. Their faces were like the lotus and the moon. As on earth, a sound could be heard in the sky. There were large numbers of apsaras on celestial
vehicles and they sounded musical instruments. They welcomed the thousands of brave ones who were headed in
their direction, after having been killed by the valiant enemy. The masses of apsaras made them ascend the celestial vehicles and bore them away. On beholding this great and extraordinary marvel in person, the brave ones were
delighted in their minds. They desired to obtain heaven and angrily struck each other. In that battle, rathas fought a
wonderful battle with rathas. Infantry fought with infantry, elephants with elephants and horses with horses. Thus
did the battle continue, causing carnage among elephants, horses and men. The dust raised by the soldiers covered
everything. Those on the same side slew each other. And those on the enemy’s side slew each other. In the battle,
they pulled each other by the hair. They fought with teeth and with nails. They fought with ﬁsts in an encounter
that destroyed bodies and sins. Thus did the battle continue, destructive of elephants, horses and men. A river of
blood was created from the bodies of men, horses and elephants. It carried away many fallen bodies of men, horses
and elephants. There were the bodies of men, horses and elephants and there were men, horse riders and elephant

riders. That extremely terrible river had currents of blood and its mud was red. It bore along the bodies of men,
horses and elephants and increased the fear of those who were cowards. Desiring victory, some went over to the
other side.466 There were others who were submerged in it and sank and swam. All their limbs were covered with
blood. Their armour, weapons and garments became red. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Some bathed in it.
Others drank the water and lost their senses. There were chariots, horses, men, elephants, weapons, ornaments,
garments and armour of those who were slain, or were being slain. The earth, the sky, the ﬁrmament and the directions were generally seen to be red. Smell, touch and taste became red in form. Above this, there were the sounds
raised by those who were engaged. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In general, the soldiers were overcome by
great distress.
‘ “The soldiers, with Bhimasena at the forefront, and brave rathas with Satyaki at the forefront, again attacked
your soldiers, who had already been routed. The great-souled ones descended with such great force that it was irresistible. O king! The large army of your sons retreated. The chariots, horses and men were scattered. Their armour
and mail were in disarray. Their weapons and bows were dislodged. Your soldiers were agitated and driven away
in different directions. They were like a herd of elephants, afﬂicted by lions in a great forest.” ’

Chapter 1184(34)
‘S anjaya said, “O king! On seeing that your soldiers were being driven away by the Pandavas, your son loudly
tried to rally them. In that battle, the ﬂanks, the distant ﬂanks, the even more distant ﬂanks and the right wings of
the the Kurus raised their weapons and attacked Bhima. O great king! On seeing that the army of the sons of Dhritarashtra was running away, Karna asked Shalya, the adornment of a battle, to drive towards Vrikodara, on the
foremost of horses that possessed the complexion of swans. Those horses reached Bhimasena’s chariot and engaged. On seeing that Karna had approached, Bhima was full of anger. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He
made up his mind to destroy Karna. He told brave Satyaki and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, ‘Protect King Yudhishthira, who has dharma in his soul. In my sight, he escaped from a great calamity. In front of me, for the sake of
Duryodhana’s pleasure, the evil-minded Radheya deprived the king of all his garments.467 O Parshata! Today, I
will bring an end to that misery. In the battle, I will kill Karna, or he will kill me. Either will happen in this extremely terrible battle. I am telling you this truthfully. Today, I am handing over the king in trust to you. Do not be
anxious. But protect him in every way.’ Having said this, the mighty-armed one headed in the direction of the
chariot of Adhiratha’s son. He roared loudly like a lion and this made all the directions resound.
‘ “On seeing that Bhima, who delighted in a battle, was swiftly advancing, the lord who was the king of Madra
spoke to the son of the suta. ‘O Karna! Behold the enraged and mighty-armed descendant of the Pandava lineage.
He has conquered his wrath for a long time and certainly wishes to release it towards you. O Karna! I have never
seen him in such a form earlier, not even when Abhimanyu and rakshasa Ghatotkacha were killed. In his ire, he is
capable of resisting the three worlds. The form that he has assumed is like the resplendent ﬁre of destruction.’ O
king! While the lord of Madra was speaking these words to Radheya, Vrikodara, ﬂaming in his anger, attacked
Karna. On seeing that Bhima, who delighted in ﬁghting, had thus arrived, Radheya laughed and spoke these words
to Shalya. ‘O lord of Madra! O lord! There is no doubt that the words that you have spoken to me now about Bhimasena are true. Vrikodara is brave, valiant and angry. He is indifferent towards protecting his body and his life
and is superior in strength. When he lived in disguise in the city of Virata, for the sake of bringing pleasure to
Droupadi, resorting only to his arms, he secretly killed Kichaka and his followers.468 He is senseless with anger
and armoured now. He is stationed in the forefront of this battle. He is roaming around in this battle, like Death
with a staff, and wishes to do something. I have also harboured a desire for a long time, that either I will kill Arjuna in a battle, or Dhananjaya will kill me. Now that Bhima has advanced against me, perhaps that wish may come
true today. If I kill Bhimasena or deprive him of his chariot, and Partha advances against me, that will be fortunate.
Please do whatever needs to done, quickly.’ On hearing the words of the great-souled Radheya, Shalya spoke these
words to the son of the suta. ‘O mighty-armed one! Advance against the immensely strong Bhimasena. If you restrain Bhimasena, you may be able to reach Phalguna. O Karna! The desire that you have harboured in your heart
for a long time, may well be accomplished. I am telling you this truthfully.’ Having been thus addressed, Karna
again spoke to Shalya. ‘Arjuna will kill me in the battle, or I will kill Dhananjaya. Fix your mind on the battle.
Drive. Drive there.’ O lord of the earth! Having been thus instructed, Shalya swiftly drove the chariot to the spot
where Bhima, the great archer, was driving away the army. At this, there was the extremely loud noise of trumpets
and drums. O Indra among kings! This arose as Karna and Bhima clashed.
‘ “The powerful Bhimasena was extremely angry. He was invincible and drove your soldiers away in different
directions, using sharp and sparkling iron arrows. O lord of the earth! O great king! That ﬁerce battle between Karna and Pandava was tumultuous and terrible in form. O Indra among kings! In an instant, Pandava attacked Karna.
On seeing that he was descending, Karna Vaikartana Vrisha angrily struck him between the breasts with an iron
arrow. The one who was immeasurable in his soul again covered him with a shower of arrows. Having been thus

pierced, he enveloped the son of the suta with arrows. He pierced Karna with nine sharp arrows with drooping
tufts. Karna used his arrows to sever his bow into two fragments from the middle. When he was deprived of his
bow, he struck him between the breasts with extremely sharp iron arrows that were capable of penetrating all armour. O king! Vrikodara picked up another bow and struck the son of the suta with extremely sharp arrows that
were capable of penetrating the inner organs. He roared powerfully and made heaven and earth tremble. Karna
struck him with twenty-ﬁve iron arrows, like a maddened and proud elephant attacked in the forest with ﬂaming
torches. With his limbs mangled by the arrows, Pandava became senseless with rage. His eyes were coppery red
with anger and intolerance and he wished to kill the son of the suta. His bow was extremely powerful and supreme
and capable of bearing a great load. He afﬁxed an arrow that was capable of shattering mountains. The son of the
wind god469 powerfully stretched the bow back, all the way up to his ears. Wishing to kill Karna, the great archer
angrily released the arrow. Having been thus released by the powerful one, the arrow, with a sound like that of the
vajra or thunder, struck Karna in that battle, with a force like that of the vajra against a mountain. O extender of the
Kuru lineage! Thus struck by Bhimasena, the son of the suta, the leader of an army, lost his senses and sank down
on the ﬂoor of his chariot. On seeing that the son of the suta had lost his senses, the lord of Madra bore Karna, the
adornment of a battle, away on the chariot. When Karna was defeated, the large army of the sons of Dhritarashtra
was driven away by Bhimasena, like an army of the danavas by Indra.” ’

Chapter 1185(35)
‘D hritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! This deed performed by Bhima was extremely difﬁcult to accomplish. He brought
down the mighty-armed Karna from the seat of his chariot. There is only one person who can kill the Srinjayas and
the Pandavas in the battle and that is Karna. O suta! That is what Duryodhana has repeatedly told me. On seeing
that Radheya had been defeated by Bhima in the battle, what did my son, Duryodhana, do next?”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! On seeing that Radheya, the son of the suta, was beaten back in that great battle,
470
he
addressed the large army of his brothers. ‘O fortunate ones! Swiftly go and protect Radheya. He confronts a
hardship and has been submerged in the fathomless ocean that is Bhimasena.’ Having been thus instructed by the
king, they wished to kill Bhimasena and attacked him in great anger, like insects heading towards a ﬂame. Shrutayudha, Durdhara, Kratha, Vivitsu, Vikata, Soma, Nishangi, Kavachi, Pashi, Nanda, Upanandaka, Dushpradharsha, Subahu, Vatavega, Suvarchasa, Dhanurgraha, Durmada, Satva and Soma471 —these were valiant and extremely powerful. They attacked Bhimasena with chariots and surrounded him from every direction. They released
a storm of arrows, of many different forms, from every direction. O lord of men! Your sons quickly descended on
the immensely strong Bhimasena and attacked him. He killed ﬁve hundred rathas and ﬁfty other rathas who advanced against him. He angrily severed Vivitsu’s head with a broad-headed arrow. It had earrings and a helmet and
was like the full moon. O great king! Severed by Bhima, it fell down on the ground. O lord! On seeing that their
brave brother had been killed, in that battle, all of them attacked Bhima, who was terrible in his valour, from all
directions. In that great battle, Bhima, terrible in his valour, used other broad-headed arrows to rob the lives of two
more of your sons in the encounter. O king! They fell down on the ground, like trees that had been uprooted by a
tempest. They were Vikata and Soma, who were like ones born from the wombs of the gods. Swiftly, Bhima used
an extremely sharp iron arrow to convey Kratha to Yama’s eternal abode. Slain, he fell down on the ground. O lord
of men! Fierce sounds of lamentation arose there. O king! Your archer sons were being slain there. Agitating your
soldiers in the battle, the immensely strong Bhimasena conveyed Nanda and Upananda472 to Yama’s abode. Your
sons were terriﬁed and lost their senses. On seeing Bhimsena in that battle, like Yama the Destroyer, they ﬂed.
‘ “On seeing that your sons had been killed, the great-minded son of the suta again went to the spot where Pandava was, on horses that possessed the complexion of swans. O great king! The king of Madra swiftly drove those
horses towards Bhimasena’s chariot and powerfully engaged with him. O lord of men! O great king! The clash that
ensued between Karna and Pandava was ﬁerce. It was tumultuous and terrible in form. O great king! On seeing
those two maharathas clash against each other, my mind was certainly anxious to know what would transpire today. O Indra among kings! However, Karna laughed and didn’t have to make a great effort. In a short instant, he
deprived Bhima, whose deeds were terrible, of his chariot. O best of the Bharatas! Despite being deprived of his
chariot, the one who was like the wind god, laughed. The mighty-armed one descended from his supreme chariot,
with a club in his hand. O king! Bhima, the striker and scorcher of enemies, assumed a terrible form and violently
killed seven hundred elephants. He knew about the inner organs and struck them at the base of their tusks, their
eyes, their temples and their loins. Having severely struck them in their inner organs and killed them, he roared.
They ﬂed in fear, but were again rallied back by the riders. They surrounded him, like clouds around the sun. However, using his club, he killed and brought down seven hundred elephants on the ground, with their riders, weapons
and ﬂags, like a mass of clouds driven away by the wind. There were extremely strong elephants that belonged to
Subala’s son.473 In the battle, Kounteya again brought down ﬁve hundred and two of these. He ﬁercely crushed
one hundred chariots and a hundred foot soldiers that belonged to the enemy. They were killed by Pandava in the
battle, while your army looked on. They were scorched by the sun and by the great-souled Bhima. Your soldiers

began to shrink, like a strip of leather held above a ﬁre. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those on your side
were terriﬁed because of their fear of Bhima. In that encounter, they were driven away by Bhima in the ten directions. There were ﬁve hundred other rathas. With shields and armour, they cheerfully and swiftly attacked Bhima,
showering him with arrows from every direction. With his club, Bhima brought down all those rathas and charioteers, with their ﬂags, standards and weapons, like Vishnu against the asuras. On Shakuni’s instructions, three
thousand riders who prided themselves on their bravery, advanced against Bhima, with lances, swords and spears
in their hands. He was the destroyer of enemy heroes and spiritedly counter-attacked those horse riders. He roamed
around in diverse motions and killed and brought them down. When they were thus oppressed by him, a great and
tumultuous sound arose in every direction. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It was as if a clump of reeds was
being severed with a sword. Having slain three thousand supreme horses that belonged to Subala’s son, he ascended a chariot and angrily attacked Radheya.
‘ “O king! In that battle, Karna enveloped Dharma’s son, the scorcher of enemies, with arrows and brought
down his charioteer. On seeing that he474 was ﬂeeing from the encounter on his chariot, the maharatha pursued
him and released swift arrows that were shafted with the feathers of herons. When the ﬂeeing king was thus enveloped with arrows, the son of the wind god angrily covered heaven and earth with his net of arrows. Radheya,
the destroyer of enemies, swiftly repulsed him. In every direction, he enveloped Bhima with sharp arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Karna was in front of Bhimasena’s chariot. Satyaki, whose soul was immeasurable, placed himself at the side and attacked Karna, severely afﬂicting him with arrows. Those two bulls among
archers475 clashed against each other and spiritedly released colourful and dazzling arrows. O Indra among kings!
Those terrible nets of arrows released by them could be seen to ﬁercely stretch out in the sky, like the red backs of
cranes. Because of the thousands of arrows released by them, we could not see the radiance of the sun, the sky, the
directions, or the sub-directions. O king! It was midday and the great radiance of the sun was scorching. But all
that seemed to be dispelled by the storm of arrows that Karna and Madhava476 shot.
‘ “On seeing that Soubala, Kritavarma, Drona’s son, Adhiratha’s son and Kripa were engaged with the Pandavas, the Kurus returned again. O lord of the earth! When they descended, a ﬁerce sound arose. It was like the terrible sound made by oceans during the rainy season. On beholding each other in that great battle, both armies were
anxious. But they were also extremely delighted at having engaged with each other. When the sun attained its midpoint, the battle commenced. Nothing like this has been seen earlier, nor heard of. A large army violently clashed
against another large army in that battle. It was as if a large store of water was heading powerfully towards the
ocean. There was an extremely loud roar as those two armies clashed against each other. It was as if the waters in
the ocean were roaring loudly. Thus, those two armies powerfully clashed against each other. They became one,
like two rivers meeting each other. O lord of the earth! A battle that was ﬁerce in form commenced. The Kurus and
the Pandavas engaged, desiring extremely great fame. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Kurus
roared out loudly to each other there and many different kinds of noises were heard. In that encounter, the warriors
were heard to revile the fathers, the mothers, the deeds and the conduct of their adversaries. In the battle, they were
seen to censure each other. O king! I formed the view that their lifespans had run out. On seeing the angry forms of
those immensely energetic ones, I was overcome by a great fear about what would transpire. O king! The Pandava
and Kourava maharathas began to wound and kill each other with sharp arrows.” ’

Chapter 1186(36)
‘S anjaya said, “O great king! The kshatriyas wished to kill each other. They bore feelings of enmity towards each
other and slew each other in the battle. O great king! Large numbers of chariots, throngs of horses, masses of men
and numerous elephants clashed against each other in every direction. There were clubs, maces, kanapas,477
lances, catapults; and bhushundis478 were seen to move everywhere. They descended in that extremely ﬁerce battle. In every direction, showers of arrows descended like locusts. In the encounter, elephants clashed against elephants and killed each other. Horses clashed against horses, chariots against chariots, infantry against large numbers of infantry and large numbers of horses against horses. O king! In that encounter, foot soldiers, chariots, elephants, rathas, elephants, horses and elephants were seen to swiftly crush the other three kinds of forces.479 The
brave foot soldiers roared at each other. That terrible encounter was like a sacriﬁcial spot for animals. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Covered in blood, the earth was beautiful. It was as if the earth was covered by large
numbers of shakragopa insects during the monsoon.480 The earth was as beautiful as a young lady481 dressed in
a white garment that had been dyed with saffron.482 With the colourful ﬂesh and blood, it seemed to be decorated
in gold. Heads, arms and thighs were severed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Earrings and ornaments were
dislodged. Golden necklaces and armour were dislodged from the bodies of the archers. With large numbers of
ﬂags, they fell down on the ground. Elephants engaged with elephants and gored each other with the tips of their
tusk. Wounded by the tusks, the elephants looked beautiful. Their limbs were covered with blood and they looked
like mobile mountains full of minerals, with red chalk ﬂowing down their sides. The elephants destroyed many
lances hurled by their opponents, including those that were still held horizontally in the hands. With their armour
destroyed by iron arrows, those supreme elephants looked dazzling. O great king! They were like mountains deprived of clouds at the onset of winter. The best of elephants were pierced with gold-tufted arrows. O venerable
one! They looked like beautiful mountain tops, lit with torches. Some elephants, as large as mountains, were struck
by other elephants and fell down on the ground. They fell down in that battle, like mountains with wings.483 Other
elephants were struck by arrows and oppressed by their wounds. These ﬂed. With their temples and frontal globes
shattered, they shrieked and fell down in that great battle. There were others that emitted terrible roars like lions. O
king! There were others that shrieked and ran hither and thither. Horses with golden harnesses and trappings were
killed by the arrows and weakened. They screamed and ran in the ten directions. Others that were afﬂicted and rendered unconscious, fell down on the ground. Oppressed by the arrows and javelins, they screamed in many different kinds of ways. O venerable one! Men were slain there. They screamed and fell down on the ground. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Others saw their relatives, fathers, grandfathers and others running away from the enemy. On seeing this, they called out the names of their lineages and their own names and summoned each other. O
great king! Bedecked with golden ornaments, their arms were severed and having fallen, or while falling down,
were immobile or writhed. Thousands of these fell down on the ground and quivered. In that battle, they quivered
powerfully, like serpents. O lord of the earth! Those arms were like the bodies of serpents, smeared with sandalwood. Drenched with blood, they were as beautiful as golden standards. A ﬁerce encounter ensued in every direction. Without recognizing,484 they fought and killed each other. Because of that descent of weapons, the earth was
covered with dust. O king! Since everything was covered in darkness, one could not differentiate those on one’s
own side from that of the enemy. A terrible and large river with currents of blood, ﬁerce in form, was created there
and began to ﬂow. The severed heads were like rocks. The hair constituted weeds and moss. It was full of the best
of bows and arrows and large numbers of bones. Flesh constituted the mud and mire. There were extremely terrible
currents of blood. The river that was created there extended Yama’s kingdom. That river was fearsome in form and

conveyed them to Yama’s abode. It generated fear in the minds of the kshatriyas who submerged and immersed
themselves in it. O tiger among men! Carnivorous beasts roared in various places there. That horrible ﬁeld of battle
looked like the city of the lord of the dead.485 In every direction, large numbers of headless torsos were seen to
rise up. Satisiﬁed with the ﬂesh and the blood, large numbers of demons danced around. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! They drank the blood there. They drank the marrow. Satiated with the fat and the marrow, crows,
vultures and smaller crows were seen to run around. O king! In that battle, the brave ones cast aside all fear,
though it is difﬁcult to give that up. They resorted to the vow of warriors and performed their tasks without any
fear. There were large numbers of arrows and lances on the ﬁeld of battle and it was infested with innumerable
predatory beasts. The brave ones roamed around there, displaying their manliness. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They made each other listen to their names and lineages. In the encounter, they recounted the names of their
fathers and their families. O lord of the earth! In diverse ways there, the warriors made others listen to these. They
attacked each other, with spears, javelins and battleaxes. An extremely terrible battle commenced, fearsome in
form. The Kourava army was weakened, like a shattered boat on the ocean.” ’

Chapter 1187(37)
‘S anjaya said, “O venerable one! O king! While the kshatriyas immersed themselves in that battle, the tremendous
roar of Gandiva was heard in that encounter, when Pandava was engaged in creating carnage among the samshaptakas, the Kosalas and the narayana army.486 In that encounter, the samshaptakas were intolerant and desired victory. From every direction, they showered down arrows on Partha’s head. O king! However, the lord spiritedly
withstood that violent shower. Plunging into the battle, Partha slaughtered the best of rathas. He assaulted that
army of chariots with arrows that had been sharpened on stone and were tufted with the feathers of herons. In that
battle, Partha approached maharatha Susharma.487 The foremost of rathas brought down a shower of arrows on
him and the samshaptakas did the same to Partha, who was stationed in the battle. Susharma pierced Partha with
nine swift arrows and Janardana in the right arm with three arrows. O venerable one! O king! With another broadheaded arrow, he pierced the large standard that had been fashioned by Vishvakarma, with the best of apes astride
it. At this, the ape let out a large and ﬁerce roar. On hearing this, your army was terriﬁed. O king! That beautiful
army became immobile. It was like Chitraratha’s grove, full of many ﬂowers.488 O best of the Kuru lineage! Having regained their senses, the warriors drenched Arjuna with their arrows, like clouds on a mountain. All of them
surrounded maharatha Pandava. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Swiftly and powerfully, they attacked his
horses, his chariot wheels and his chariot and roared like lions. O great king! Some of them seized Keshava by his
mighty arms, while others seized Partha, as he was cheerfully stationed on his chariot. In the ﬁeld of battle, Keshava ﬂung his arms around and brought all of them down, like an elephant against a wicked elephant. In the encounter, on seeing that Keshava had been oppressed on the chariot, Partha became angry. He attacked and brought
down many maharathas and innumerable foot soldiers who had climbed onto the chariot. He covered all the warriors who were nearby with arrows that were meant for ﬁghting at close quarters.
‘ “In that battle, he then spoke to Keshava. ‘O Krishna! O mighty-armed one! Behold. Those large numbers of
samshaptakas wished to perform an extremely terrible deed against me and have been slaughtered in thousands. O
bull among the Yadu lineage! With my exception, there is no man on earth who is capable of withstanding such a
terrible attack, at close quarters, on the chariot.’ Having spoken thus, Bibhatsu blew on Devadatta.489 Krishna
blew on Panchajanya, ﬁlling heaven and earth. O great king! On hearing the blare of those conch shells, the army
of the samshaptakas wavered. They were extremely terriﬁed. Pandava, the destroyer of enemy heroes, repeatedly
invoked the naga weapon and tied down their feet.490 Partha tied down their feet in the battle. O king! With their
feet tied down by the great-souled Pandava, they became immobile, as if they were made out of stone. The descendant of the Pandu lineage then slaughtered those immobile warriors, just as in ancient times, Indra had killed the
daityas in the battle with Taraka.491 Slaughtered in the battle, they abandoned the best of chariots and threw away
all their weapons. O Indra among kings! On seeing that the army had thus been tied down, maharatha Susharma
quickly invoked the Suparna weapon.492 Suparna birds descended and devoured the serpents. O king! On seeing
the birds, the serpents ﬂed. O lord of the earth! Having been freed from the thongs on the feet, the army looked as
beautiful as the sun, which warms all beings, when it has been freed from a mass of clouds. O venerable one! Having been freed, the warriors released large numbers of arrows and large numbers of weapons towards Phalguna’s
chariot. Having used his own shower of great weapons to sever that shower of arrows, Vasava’s son, the destroyer
of enemy heroes, remained stationed on his chariot in the ﬁeld of battle. O king! Susharma used arrows with
drooping tufts to pierce Arjuna in the chest and pierced him again with three other arrows. Having been severely
wounded and pained, he sank down on the ﬂoor of his chariot. When he regained his senses, the one with the white

horses, immeasurable in his soul and with Krishna as his charioteer, quickly invoked the aindra weapon.493 O
venerable one! Thousands of arrows were created from it and were seen to destroy men and elephants in every direction of the battle, in addition to horses, chariots and hundreds and thousands of weapons. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! When the soldiers were slaughtered, the large numbers of samshaptakas and gopalas were overcome with great fear. There was no man there who could ﬁght back against Arjuna. While those brave ones looked
on, that large army was slaughtered. Despite witnessing the slaughter and despite their valour, they remained immobile. In the battle there, Pandu’s son killed ten thousand warriors. O king! He was resplendent in that battle, like
a ﬂaming ﬁre without any smoke. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He killed fourteen thousand foot soldiers,
ten thousand rathas and three thousand tuskers. At this, the samshaptakas again surrounded Dhananjaya. They refused to retreat, and had determined to set their minds on death or victory. O lord of the earth! There was a great
battle there between those on your side and the brave and powerful Pandava Kiriti.” ’

Chapter 1188(38)
‘S anjaya said, “O venerable one! Kritavarma, Kripa, Drona’s son, the son of the suta, Uluka, Soubala and the
king494 and his brothers saw that the army was afﬂicted because of the fear of Pandu’s son. It was submerged with
great force, like a shattered boat in an ocean. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! However, in a short while, a
battle commenced. It generated fear among cowards and increased the delight of brave ones. In the battle, Kripa
released showers of arrows that moved like locusts and shrouded the Srinjayas. Shikandi was angry and quickly
advanced against Goutama.495 From every direction, he showered down a large number of arrows on the best of
brahmanas. Kripa was knowledgeable about great weapons and destroyed that shower of arrows. In the encounter,
he angrily pierced Shikhandi with ten arrows. Shikhandi became enraged in that battle. He severely pierced Kripa
with swift arrows that were shafted with the feathers of herons. Having been severely pierced, maharatha Kripa,
supreme among brahmanas, deprived Parshata496 of his horses, charioteer and chariot. With his horses slain, the
maharatha497 descended from his chariot and grasping a sword and a shield, quickly advanced against the brahmana. On seeing him violently attack in the battle, he enveloped him with straight-tufted arrows and it was wonderful. What we witnessed was extraordinary, as if there was a torrent of rocks. O king! Shikhandi remained immobile in that encounter. O supreme among kings! On seeing that Shikhandi had been shrouded by Kripa, maharatha Dhrishtadyumna quickly counter-attacked Kripa. On seeing that Dhrishtadyumna was advancing towards
Sharadvata’s chariot, maharatha Kritavarma powerfully repulsed him. On seeing that Yudhishthira was advancing
towards Sharadvata’s chariot, together with his sons and soldiers, Drona’s son countered him. Your son received
the spirited maharathas Nakula and Sahadeva and countered them with showers of arrows. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! In that battle, Karna Vaikartana countered Bhimasena, the Karushas, the Kekayas and the Srinjayas. O venerable one! Meanwhile, in the encounter, Sharadvata Kripa swiftly dispatched arrows towards
Shikhandi, as if wishing to burn him down. However, with his sword, he498 repeatedly sliced down all the arrows
that were embellished with gold and were shot at him from all directions, while they were still in mid-air. At this,
Goutama quickly shattered Parshata’s shield, which was decorated with the marks of one hundred moons, with his
arrows. The men roared loudly. O great king! Deprived of his shield, he attacked with the sword in his hand. But
he had come under Kripa’s control, like a diseased person in the mouth of death. The immensely strong one was
afﬂicted by Sharadvata’s ﬁerce arrows. On seeing this, Suketu,499 Chitraketu’s son, spiritedly advanced. In the
battle, he showered the brahmana with many sharp arrows. The one whose soul was immeasurable, dashed towards
Goutama’s chariot. O supreme among kings! On seeing that the brahmana, devoted to his vows, was engaged in a
ﬁght with someone else, Shikhandi quickly withdrew. O king! Suketu struck Goutama with nine arrows, pierced
him again with seventy, and struck him yet again with three arrows. O venerable one! He next severed his500 bow,
with an arrow afﬁxed to it. With another arrow, he severely struck his charioteer in the inner organs. Goutama became angry at this and picked up another new bow that was ﬁrm. He struck Suketu in all his inner organs with thirty arrows. All his limbs were weakened and he wavered on that supreme chariot. He was like a tree, trembling and
moving during an earthquake. His head was adorned with ﬂaming earrings. It had a headdress and a helmet. While
he was moving, he501 brought it down with a kshurapra arrow. That head fell down on the ground, like a piece of
meat being carried by a hawk. Thereafter, the head was dislodged and fell down on the ground. O great king!
When he was slain, those who followed him were frightened. They abandoned the ﬁght with Goutama and ﬂed in
the ten directions.

‘ “Kritavarma repeatedly asked Parshata to wait.502 In the battle, there was a tumultuous encounter between
those from the Vrishni and Parshata lineages.503 O king! It was like a ﬁght between a hawk and a vulture over a
piece of meat. In the battle, Dhrishtadyumna angrily struck Hardikya, Hridika’s son, in the chest with nine arrows
and afﬂicted him. In the encounter, Kritavarma was ﬁrmly struck by Parshata. In turn, he shrouded Parshata, his
chariot and his horses, with arrows. O king! With his chariot enveloped by arrows, Dhrishtadyumna could no
longer be seen. It was like the sun enveloped by clouds at the onset of the rains. Those large numbers of arrows
were decorated with gold. O king! But having repulsed them with his arrows, though he was covered with wounds,
Dhrishtadyumna looked resplendent in the battle. Parshata, the leader of an army, became angry and unleashed an
extremely terrible shower of arrows towards Kritavarma. On seeing that violent and incessant shower of arrows
descend in the encounter, Hardikya destroyed them with thousands of arrows. On seeing that the extremely irresistible shower of arrows had been countered in the battle by Kritavarma, Parshata advanced and repulsed him. He
used a broad-headed arrow, sharp at the edges, to swiftly dispatch his charioteer to Yama’s abode. Slain, he fell
down from the chariot. Dhrishtadyumna vanquished his powerful maharatha enemy. In the battle, he then quickly
countered the Kouravas with arrows. At this, the warriors on your side attacked Dhrishtadyumna. They roared like
lions and a battle commenced.” ’

Chapter 1189(39)
‘S anjaya said, “On seeing that Yudhishthira was protected by Shini’s descendant and by the brave sons of Droupadi, Drona’s son cheerfully attacked him. He showered large numbers of gold-tufted and ﬁerce arrows that had been
sharpened on stone. He displayed many different kinds of motion, his learning and the dexterity of his hands. The
one who was learned in the use of weapons invoked his arrows with the mantras of divine weapons and surrounded
Yudhishthira in the battle. Everything was shrouded by the arrows of Drona’s son and nothing could be seen. It
was as if the heads of all the warriors were covered by arrows. The ﬁrmament was covered by a net of arrows and
seemed to be shrouded by a golden net. O best of the Bharata lineage! It was beautiful, as if it had been covered
with a canopy. O king! In that battle, enveloped by that radiant net of arrows, the sky seemed to be obstructed by
arrows, as if by the shadow of clouds. Because of the arrows, the sight that we beheld there was extraordinary. As
a result of the valour of Drona’s son, nothing could be seen to descend on earth.504 O great king! On beholding
the dexterity of Drona’s son, the maharathas there were astounded and were incapable of glancing at him. It was as
if all the kings were being scorched by the sun.
‘ “Though Satyaki, Dharmaraja Pandava and the other soldiers made efforts, they could not withstand his valour.
When the soldiers were being slaughtered, Droupadi’s maharatha sons, Satyaki, Dharmaraja and the Panchalas
united, abandoning their fear of death and ﬁercely attacked Drona’s son. Satyaki pierced Drona’s son with twentyﬁve arrows with stone heads. He again pierced him with seven iron arrows that were decorated with gold. Yudhishthira struck him with seventy-three, Prativindhya with seven, Shrutakarma with three arrows, Shrutakirti with
seven arrows, Sutasoma with nine and Shatanika with nine.505 Many other brave ones pierced him from all directions. O king! He became angry at this and sighed like a venomous serpent. He pierced Satyaki back with twentyﬁve arrows that had been sharpened on stone, Shrutakirti with nine, Sutasoma with ﬁve, Shrutakarma with eight
and Prativindhya with three arrows. He struck Shatanika with nine arrows and Dharma’s son506 with seven. He
struck each of the other brave ones with two arrows each. With sharp arrows, he severed Shrutakirti’s bow. At this,
maharatha Shrutakirti picked up another bow and pierced Drona’s son with three arrows, following this up by
striking him with many other sharp arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona’s son showered down arrows and covered the soldiers and the kings from every direction with arrows. Drona’s son, immeasurable in his
soul, again severed Dharmaraja’s bow with three sharp arrows and laughed. O king! At this, Dharma’s son picked
up another giant bow and struck Drona’s son in the arms and the chest with seventy arrows. In the battle, Satyaki
angrily struck Drona’s son and used an extremely sharp arrow that was in the form of a half-moon to sever his
bow. Having done this, he roared loudly. With his bow severed, Drona’s son, supreme among strong ones, hurled a
lance and swiftly brought down the charioteer of Shini’s descendant from his chariot. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Drona’s powerful son then picked up another bow and enveloped Shini’s descendant with a shower of arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With his507 charioteer brought down in the encounter, his horses were
seen to run around here and there. With Yudhishthira at the forefront, they508 powerfully attacked Drona’s son,
supreme among the wielders of weapons, and showered down sharp arrows. In that great battle, on seeing that they
were rushing to the attack and adopting ﬁerce forms, Drona’s son, scorcher of enemies, laughed and received them.
In that battle, Drona’s maharatha son used hundreds of ﬂaming arrows to consume the ﬂanks of the soldiers, like a
ﬁre burning dead wood in the forest. O foremost among the Bharatas! The army of Pandu’s son was afﬂicted by
Drona’s son, like the mouth of a river by a whale. O great king! On witnessing the valour of Drona’s son, everyone
thought that the Pandus had already been slain by Drona’s son.

‘ “Spiritedly approaching Drona’s maharatha son, Yudhishthira spoke to Drona’s son, anger and intolerance
ﬂooding his mind. ‘O tiger among men! Since you wish to kill me today, your name is not affection, nor is your
name gratitude. A brahmana’s task is austerities, donations and studying and a bow should be stretched by a kshatriya. You say that you are a brahmana. O mighty-armed one! While you look on, I will vanquish the Kouravas in
the battle.’ O great king! Having been thus addressed, Drona’s son smiled. He thought about what was proper and
did not say anything in reply. Without saying anything, he showered arrows on Pandava and enveloped him in the
battle, like an angry Yama against beings. O venerable one! Having been thus shrouded by Drona’s son, Partha
abandoned that large army and swiftly departed from the spot. O king! Dharma’s son, Yudhishthira, departed.
However, Drona’s great-minded son still remained stationed in that region. Thus, King Yudhishthira abandoned
Drona’s son in the great battle and advanced against your soldiers, having decided to perform cruel deeds.” ’

Chapter 1190(40)
‘S anjaya said, “Vaikartana himself countered and restrained Bhimasena, supported by the Panchalas, Chedis and
Kekayas, with his arrows. While Bhimasena looked on, Karna angrily killed many Chedi, Karusha and Srinjaya
maharathas. Bhimasena avoided Karna, supreme among rathas, and advanced against the Kourava soldiers, like a
blazing ﬁre amidst dead wood. The son of a suta, the great archer, slaughtered thousands of Panchalas, Kekayas
and Srinjayas in the battle. The maharathas caused great carnage—Partha against the samshaptakas, Vrikodara
against the Kouravas and Karna against the Panchalas. O king! Because of your evil counsel, those three were like
ﬁres and consumed and destroyed the kshatriyas in the encounter.
‘ “O foremost amongst the Bharata lineage! Meanwhile, Duryodhana was angry and struck Nakula with nine arrows, also piercing his four horses. O lord of men! Your son, immeasurable in his soul, again severed Sahadeva’s
golden standard with a razor-sharp arrow. O king! Nakula became enraged and struck your son with seventy-three
arrows in the battle. Sahadeva pierced him with ﬁve. Those two were the best amongst the Bharata lineage and the
best among all archers. But he509 angrily struck each of them with ﬁve arrows. O king! With other broad-headed
arrows, he severed the bows of the twins and laughed, piercing them with seven arrows. Those two brave ones
were resplendent in the battle, equals of the sons of the gods. They picked up other supreme bows that were as
beautiful as Shakra’s bow. O king! In that encounter, the two brothers proudly fought against a brother. They
showered down arrows on him, like two giant clouds on a mountain. O great king! Your maharatha son became
enraged and repulsed Pandu’s sons, great archers, with arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the encounter, the circle of his bow could be seen. In every direction, arrows could be seen to whiz around. The two Pandavas were enveloped by his arrows and looked beautiful, like the sun and the moon in the sky, when covered by
clouds and robbed of their radiance. O great king! Those arrows were gold-tufted and sharpened on stone. Like the
rays of the sun, they covered all the directions. The ﬁrmament was covered by those arrows. The forms of the
twins were like that of Yama, at the time of the destruction of an era. On witnessing your son’s valour, the maharathas thought that the sons of Madri had attained the presence of death. O king! At this, the great-souled commander-in-chief of the Pandavas, Parshata, went to the spot where King Suyodhana was.
‘ “Abandoning the valiant and maharatha sons of Madri, your son oppressed Dhrishtadyumna with arrows. O
bull among men! Your son, immeasurable in his soul, was intolerant, and piercing Panchala with twenty-ﬁve arrows, laughed. O lord of the earth! Your son, immeasurable in his soul, again pierced Panchala with sixty-ﬁve arrows and roared. O venerable one! In the battle, the king used extremely sharp kshurapra arrows to sever his bow,
with an arrow afﬁxed to it, and his arm-guards. Discarding his severed bow, Panchala, the destroyer of enemies,
quickly picked up a new bow that was capable of bearing a great load. The great archer, Dhrishtadyumna, was covered with wounds. But he blazed violently because of his anger, with eyes that were red as blood. He looked beautiful. Dhrishtadyumna sighed like a serpent and wishing to kill the foremost among the Bharata lineage, shot ﬁfteen iron arrows that had been sharpened on stone. Those forceful arrows were shafted with the feathers of herons
and peacocks. They penetrated the king’s gold-decorated armour and entered the ground. O great king! Having
been severely struck, your son looked dazzling, like a blossoming kimshuka dotted with ﬂowers during the spring.
His armour was shattered by the iron arrows. He was exhausted because of the blows. However, he angrily severed
Dhrishtadyumna’s bow with a broad-headed arrow. O king! Having severed the bow, the lord of the earth swiftly
struck him between the eyebrows with ten arrows. These arrows had been polished by artisans and with these,
his510 face looked beautiful, like a ﬂowering champaka tree visited by bees desiring honey.511 The great-minded
Dhrishtadyumna abandoned the severed bow and quickly picking up another bow, struck Duryodhana with sixteen
broad-headed arrows, slaying his horses and charioteer with ﬁve arrows. With a broad-headed arrow that was em-

bellished with gold, he sliced down his bow. With nine broad-headed arrows, Parshata severed your son’s chariot,
his seat, his umbrella, his lance, his sword, his club, his standard and his colourful and golden armlet, sparkling
with gems and the sign of an elephant.512 All the kings saw that the standard of the lord of the Kurus had been
brought down. In the battle, Duryodhana was without a chariot and deprived of his weapons. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! His brother, Dandadhara, sought to rescue his brother. O king! While Dhrishtadyumna looked on,
he raised the frightened king onto a chariot and bore him away.
‘ “Having defeated Satyaki, the immensely strong Karna wished to save the king. In the battle, he advanced
against Drona’s ﬁerce slayer.513 Shini’s descendant quickly pursued him from the rear, showering down arrows,
like an elephant goring another elephant from the rear with its tusks. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The
great-souled warriors fought extremely ﬁerce and great battle in the space between Karna and Parshata. The Pandava warriors, nor those on our side, desired to retreat. On seeing this, Karna swiftly advanced against the Panchalas. O best among men! At that time, there was a destruction of elephants, horses and men. When the sun attained
midday, this gave rise to great fear. O great king! The Panchalas desired victory and quickly attacked Karna from
all sides, like birds ﬂocking to a tree. Adhiratha’s son was spirited and sought to angrily repulse them. With ﬁerce
arrows, he clashed against those who were at the forefront—Vyaghraketu, Susharma, Shanku, the ﬁerce Dhananjaya,514 Shukla, Rochamana, Simhasena and Durjaya. Those valiant ones advanced forcefully on their chariots
and surrounded the best of men. They angrily released many arrows towards Karna, the ornament of a battle.
Those brave and powerful kings of men fought there. But Radheya killed all eight of them with sharp arrows. O
great king! O king! In that encounter, the powerful son of a suta, skilled in ﬁghting, then angrily slew many thousands of other warriors—Vishnu, Vishnukarma, Devapi, Bhadra, Danda, Chitra, Chitrayudha, Hari, Simhaketu,
Rochamana,515 maharatha Shalabha and many other maharathas amongst the Chedis. While he was slaughtering
them, the body of Adhiratha’s son was smeared in blood in all his limbs and he looked like the great Rudra himself. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Many elephants were afﬂicted by Karna’s arrows. Terriﬁed, they ﬂed in
all the directions, causing greater destruction. Afﬂicted by Karna’s arrows, they shrieked and fell down in the encounter, roaring in many different ways, as if mountains had been shattered by the thunder. In every direction, elephants, horses and men fell down and the earth became impassable because of the large numbers of chariots and
horses. No other person on your side had performed such a deed in the battle—not Bhishma, nor Drona. O tiger
among men! The son of a suta created a great destruction of elephants, chariots, horses and men. He was seen to
fearlessly roam around, like a lion amidst deer. In that fashion, Karna fearlessly roamed around amidst the Panchalas. Just as large numbers of deer are driven away in diverse directions by a lion, in that way, the array of Panchala
chariots was routed by Karna. On approaching a lion, a deer does not remain alive. In that way, on approaching
Karna, the maharathas did not remain alive. People are usually burnt if they approach a blazing ﬁre. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! In that way, in that battle, the Srinjayas were consumed by the ﬁre that was Karna. O descendant of the Bharata linege! Proclaiming his name, Karna single-handedly killed many amongst the Chedis and
the Panchalas who prided themselves on their bravery. O Indra among men! On witnessing Karna’s valour, I
thought that not a single one among the Panchalas would escape from Adhiratha’s son in the battle.
‘ “O venerable one! Having slain the Panchalas in the battle, the powerful son of a suta angrily rushed against
Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son. Dhrishtadyumna and Droupadi’s sons surrounded the king. The destroyer of
enemies516 was surrounded by hundreds of others—Shikhandi, Sahadeva, Nakula, Nakula’s son, Janamejaya, Shini’s grandson and many Prabhadrakas. In that encounter, they placed Dhrishtadyumna at their forefront. Those inﬁnitely energetic ones looked beautiful, as they attacked Adhiratha’s son with weapons. In that battle, Adhiratha’s
son single-handedly descended on those Chedis, Panchalas and Pandavas, like Garuda on numerous serpents.
‘ “In that battle, Bhimsena, the great and angry archer, single-handedly attacked the Kurus, Madras and Kekayas
and looked extremely resplendent in the encounter. Elephants were struck in their inner organs by Bhima’s iron arrows. With their riders slain, they fell down, making the earth tremble. Horses and their riders were slain and foot
soldiers lost their lives. They were mangled and lay down on the ground, vomiting copious quantities of blood.
Thousands of rathas fell down, their weapons dislodged. Those that were not wounded lost their lives because of
their fear of Bhima. The earth was strewn with chariots, horses, charioteers, foot soldiers and elephants that were

destroyed by Bhimasena’s arrows. O king! Duryodhana’s army was afﬂicted because of Bhimasena’s strength and
though it remained there, it was dispirited and covered with wounds. In that great and tumultuous battle, it was
seen to be immobile and cheerless. O king! It looked like an ocean when the waters are still. Your son’s army had
possessed the best of anger, valour and strength. But because of the arrows, it lost all that strength. It was covered
in waves of blood and was drenched in blood. In the battle, the son of a suta angrily attacked the Pandava soldiers
and the resplendent Bhimasena drove away the Kurus. There was a ﬁerce battle there and it was extraordinary to
behold.
‘ “In the midst of the army, having slain large numbers of samshaptakas, Arjuna, best among victorious ones,
spoke to Vasudeva. ‘O Janardana! This army, which was ﬁghting, has been shattered. The samshaptaka maharathas
are running away, together with their followers. They cannot bear my arrows, like deer cannot stand the sound of a
lion. In the great battle, the large army of the Srinjayas has also been shattered. O Krishna! The intelligent Karna’s
standard, with the mark of an elephant’s housing, can be repeatedly seen, resplendent in the midst of the king’s soldiers. In a battle, I don’t think those maharathas are capable of defeating Karna. You know about Karna’s bravery
and valour. Go to the spot where Karna is driving away our army. Abandon the battle here and advance against the
maharatha son of a suta. O Krishna! Unless you are exhausted, do that, or whatever else you desire.’ O great king!
Having been thus addressed, Govinda laughed. He told Arjuna, ‘O Pandava! Slay the Kouravas swiftly.’ Urged by
Govinda, those horses, with the complexion of swans, penetrated that large army, bearing along Krishna and Pandava. The horses were controlled by Keshava. They were white, with golden harnesses. They penetrated your army
and drove it away in the four directions. When Keshava and Arjuna entered, that large army was shattered. Those
two greatly resplendent ones were angry and dazzling. Their eyes were red with rage. They took delight in ﬁghting
and in that ﬁeld of battle, were challenged by the enemy. They looked like the gods, the two Ashvins, summoned
to a sacriﬁce by the ofﬁciating priests in the proper way. Since they were enraged, the speed of those tigers among
men increased. In that great battle, they were like elephants enraged by the sound of slapping palms.517 Phalguna
roamed around the arrays of chariots and the numerous horses. In the midst of those formations, he was like Yama
with a noose in his hand. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On witnessing his valour in the battle, your son
again urged the large numbers of samshaptakas. At this, one thousand chariots, three hundred elephants, fourteen
thousand horses and two hundred thousand foot soldiers and archers attacked him in the great battle. They were
known for their bravery. They were skilled. Those maharathas attacked and enveloped those two brave ones.518
Having been thus shrouded in the battle by arrows, the destroyer of enemy forces displayed his ﬁerce self, like
Yama with a noose in his hand. Partha slaughtered the samshaptakas and became a sight worth beholding. His arrows, decorated with gold, dazzled like lightning. Kiriti incessantly covered the sky with these. Mighty arrows
were released from Kiriti’s arms and descended. They covered everything, with the radiance of Kadru’s
offspring.519 They were gold-tufted and ﬁerce at the tip. They were arrows with drooping tufts. Pandava, immeasurable in his soul, was seen to shoot them in all the directions. The maharatha killed ten thousand kings. Kounteya
then swiftly attacked the extreme ﬂank of the samshaptakas. Having approached the extreme ﬂank, protected by
the Kambojas, Partha crushed it with the force of his arrows, like Vasava against the danavas. Using broad-headed
arrows, he swiftly servered the arms, with the hands still holding on to weapons, and the heads of those among the
enemy who wished to slay him. Limbs and bodies were sliced down. Deprived of weapons, they fell down on the
ground. They were shattered, like trees with many branches broken by a storm. The storm that was Arjuna destroyed elephants, horses, chariots and infantry. Sudakshina’s younger brother showered down a hail of arrows on
him.520 His arms were like clubs. However, with two arrows in the shape of a half-moon, he521 sliced off those
arms. His face was like the full moon. However, with a kshurapra arrow, he severed that head. He fell down from
his vehicle, exuding blood, like the summit of a mountain, when it is struck by the thunder and exudes red arsenic.
Sudakshina’s younger brother, from Kamboja, was seen to be slain. He was tall. His eyes were like the petals of
lotuses. He was extremely handsome. He was like a golden pillar, or a golden mountain, and was shattered. Thereafter, the battle continued and it was ﬁerce and wonderful to behold. In many different ways, the warriors fought
there. The Kambojas, the Yavanas and the Shakas abandoned their horses. O lord of the earth! All of them were
covered with blood and everything seemed red. Chariots lost their rathas, horses and charioteers. The riders of

horses were slain. The riders of elephants were killed. The drivers of elephants were slain. O great king! They
fought with each other and created a great destruction of men.
‘ “The great-souled Arjuna, foremost among victorious ones, destroyed the ﬂank and the extreme ﬂank.522
Drona’s son brandished his great bow, decorated with gold, and swiftly advanced against him. He released many
terrible arrows that were like the rays of the sun. O great king! The arrows released by Drona’s son descended in
all the directions. They enveloped Krishna and Dhananjaya, who were stationed on the chariot. Bharadvaja’s powerful descendant released hundreds of sharp arrows and in that battle, immobilized Madhava and Pandava. On seeing that the protectors of the mobile and the immobile were thus shrouded by arrows, lamentations arose everywhere, amidst the mobile and the immobile. Large numbers of siddhas and charanas assembled there from every
direction and began to reﬂect about the welfare of the worlds. O king! I have not witnessed valour like this earlier,
as Drona’s son enveloped the two Krishnas with his arrows. The twang of the bow of Drona’s son generated great
terror in the battle. O king! It was repeatedly heard, like the roaring of a lion. He roamed around in that battle, to
the left and to the right. His bowstring was as beautiful as a cloud tinged with lightning. Pandava was swift in acting and his hand was ﬁrm. However, on seeing Drona’s son, he seemed to be overcome with great stupefaction. He
thought that his own valour had been surpassed by the great-souled one. O king! In that battle, his523 form was
impossible to behold. O Indra among kings! In that great battle between Drona’s son and Pandava, the great
strength of Drona’s son was seen to increase. On seeing that Kounteya was waning, Krishna was overcome with
rage. O king! He sighed repeatedly with rage and glanced towards Drona’s son and Phalguna in that encounter, as
if burning them down with his eyes. Krishna angrily spoke to Partha, though with affection. ‘O Partha! On seeing
you in this encounter, I ﬁnd it to be extraordinary. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona’s son is surpassing
you today. O Arjuna! Is Gandiva not in your hand? Or are you not stationed on your chariot? Are your arms well?
Is your valour still there?’ Having been thus addressed by Krishna, he524 was enraged. At a time when speed was
of the essence, he quickly used fourteen broad-headed arrows to destroy the bow and chariot of Drona’s son and
also his standard, umbrella, ﬂags, chariot, javelin and club. With vatsadanta arrows, he struck him severely in the
shoulder joints. Having become completely unconscious, he525 grasped the pole of his standard. To protect him
from Dhananjaya, his charioteer bore him away from the ﬁeld of battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At
that time, Vijaya, the scorcher of enemies, destroyed hundreds and thousands of your soldiers, while your brave
son looked on. Thus, as they engaged with the enemy, there was the destruction of your soldiers. O king! That cruel and terrible destruction was because of your evil counsel. In that battle, Kounteya completely destroyed the
samshaptakas, Vrikodara the Kurus and Vasushena the Panchalas.” ’

Chapter 1191(41)
‘S anjaya said, “Krishna was advancing quickly and again spoke softly to
Partha. ‘O Kouravya! Behold. The kings are advancing towards
Pandava.526 Behold Karna in this great arena, blazing like a ﬁre. This Bhima is a great archer and has returned to ﬁght again. With Dhrishtadyumna
at the forefront, the others have also returned and are following him—with
the Panchalas, the Srinjayas and the Pandavas leading the way. The large
army of the enemy is being shattered by the returning Parthas. O Arjuna!
The Kouravas who were running away have been held together by Karna.
His force is like that of Yama and his valour is Shakra’s equal. O Kouravya!
Drona’s son, supreme among the wielders of weapons, is advancing there.
In the battle, maharatha Dhrishtadyumna is advancing against him.’ In this
way, the invincible Vasudeva described it to Kiriti. O king! Then, an extremely great and extremely ﬁerce battle commenced. As the clash started,
roars like lions’ were heard. O king! Both sets of soldiers preferred death to
retreat.” ’

Chapter 1192(42)
‘S anjaya said, “Without any fear, the Kurus and the Srinjayas started to ﬁght again. The Parthas had Yudhishthira
at the forefront and we had Vaikartana at the forefront. There was a ﬁerce battle between Karna and the Pandavas
and it extended Yama’s kingdom and made the body hair stand up. That tumultuous battle created waves of blood.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Only a few of the samshaptakas remained. O great king! With Dhrishtadyumna and all the kings, the maharatha Pandavas rushed against Karna. They were cheerful and attacked in that battle,
desiring victory. Alone in that battle, Karna received them, like a mountain receives a ﬂood of water. Having
clashed against Karna, those maharathas were shattered and beaten back in all the directions, like a ﬂood of water
against a mountain. O great king! The battle that commenced made the body hair stand up. Dhristhadyumna angrily asked Radheya to wait and struck him with an arrow with drooping tufts. The maharatha527 brandished Vijaya,
foremost among bows, and severed Parshata’s bow with arrows that were like venomous serpents. He angrily
struck Parshata with nine arrows. O unblemished one! The great-souled one shattered his gold-decorated armour
and, covered with blood, they528 looked as beautiful as shakragopa insects. Maharatha Dhrishtadyumna discarded
his severed bow and picked up another bow. With seven straight-tufted arrows that were like venomous serpents,
he pierced Karna. O king! In that fashion, Karna, the great archer, pierced Parshata, the scorcher of enemies and
Drona’s enemy,529 with sharp arrows. O great king! Karna angrily dispatched a gold-decorated arrow that was
like Yama’s staff. O lord of the earth! O king! On seeing it suddenly descend, terrible in form, Shini’s descendant
displayed the lightness of his hand and shattered it into seven fragments. O lord of the earth! On seeing that the arrow had been repulsed by arrows, Karna showered arrows from every direction on Satyaki. In that encounter, he
pierced him with seven iron arrows and Shini’s descendant pierced him back with arrows that were decorated with
gold. The battle that raged was fearful to those who saw and heard. O king! Though it was fearful in every direction, it was wonderful to see. O king! On witnessing the deeds of Karna and Shini’s descendant in the battle, the
body hair of all the beings there stood up.
‘ “Drona’s son was extremely strong. At that time, he rushed against Parshata, the destroyer of enemies who
could rob the valour of the foe. Dhananjaya was still at a distance and Drona’s son angrily addressed him.530 ‘O
slayer of a brahmana! Stay. Stay. You will not escape from me with your life.’ Having spoken thus, the brave one
swiftly struck Parshata and enveloped him with sharp arrows that were terrible in form and extremely energetic.
The maharatha531 strove to the best of his capacity. O venerable one! In the encounter, Drona’s son glanced towards Parshata and in that encounter, Parshata, the slayer of enemy heroes, also glanced towards Drona’s son. In
the battle, Drona’s son was delighted to see Parshata, the slayer of enemy heroes. But he was not greatly delighted,
thinking that his own death might be before him.532 O Indra among kings! On seeing Dhrishtadyumna stationed
in the battle, Drona’s brave son sighed with anger and attacked Parshata. On seeing each other, they were overcome with supreme rage. O great king! O lord of the earth! Drona’s powerful son swiftly approached Dhrishtadyumna and said, ‘O worst of the Panchala lineage! I will send you to death. On an earlier occasion, you committed an evil deed by killing Drona. O stupid one! You will regret that today and no longer remain hale, as long as
you are stationed in the battle and not protected by Partha. I am telling you this truthfully.’ Having been thus addressed, the powerful Dhrishtadyumna replied. ‘I will reply to your words with my sword, which also answered
your father when he endeavoured in the battle. You are a brahmana only in name. If Drona could be slain by me,
why should I not use my valour and kill you in the battle?’ O great king! Having spoken thus, the intolerant Parshata, the commander-in-chief, pierced Drona’s son with sharp arrows. O king! In that encounter, Drona’s son became wrathful and enveloped Dhrishtadyumna from every direction with straight-tufted arrows. O great king!

Shrouded by thousands of arrows everywhere, the sky, the directions and the warriors could not be seen. O king!
In that fashion, while the son of a suta looked on, Parshata enveloped Drona’s son, the ornament of a battle, with
arrows. O great king! Meanwhile, while everyone looked on from every direction, Radheya single-handedly countered the Panchalas, the Pandavas, Droupadi’s sons, Yudhamanyu and maharatha Satyaki. In the battle, Dhrishtadyumna severed the bow of Drona’s son. Abandoning that bow in the battle, he picked up another bow that was
powerful and terrible. O Indra among kings! Using arrows that were like venomous serpents, he sliced down Parshata’s bow, javelin, club and standard and in an instant, used his arrows to destroy his horses, charioteer and chariot. His bow was severed. He was without a chariot. His horses were slain. His charioteer was killed. He grasped a
giant sword and a shield that blazed like the sun and was marked with the sign of one hundred moons. O Indra
among kings! However, Drona’s maharatha son was brave. He was ﬁrm in using weapons and light in use of his
hands. Before he533 could descend from his chariot, he swiftly severed these with his broad-headed arrows and it
was extraordinary. Dhrishtadyumna was without a chariot. His horses had been slain and his bow had been severed. O best of the Bharata lineage! The maharatha534 tried his best. But though he tried his best, pierced him with
many arrows and shattered his weapons, he could not kill him. O king! When Drona’s son could not kill him with
his arrows, the brave one cast aside his bow and quickly advanced towards Parshata. O king! The great-souled one
attacked and descended powerfully, like Garuda descending to pick up the best of serpents.
‘ “At this moment, Madhava spoke to Arjuna. ‘O Partha! Behold. Drona’s son is making great efforts for Parshata’s destruction and there is no doubt that he will kill him. O mighty-armed one! Free Parshata, the scorcher of
enemies. He has reached the mouth of Drona’s son, as if he is within the mouth of death.’ O great king! Having
said this, the powerful Vasudeva swiftly urged the horses towards the spot where Drona’s son was. Those horses
possessed the complexion of the moon and were urged by Keshava. As they advanced towards the chariot of
Drona’s son, they seemed to drink up the sky. O king! On seeing that the immensely valorous and radiant Krishna
and Dhananjaya were advancing, the immensely strong one535 made great efforts to kill Dhrishtadyumna. O lord
of men! On seeing that Dhrishtadyumna was being dragged,536 the immensely strong Partha shot arrows towards
Drona’s son. Those arrows were decorated with gold and dispatched from Gandiva. They severely struck Drona’s
son and penetrated, like serpents entering a termite hill. Drona’s powerful son was devastated by those ﬁerce arrows. Afﬂicted by Dhananjaya’s arrows, the brave one climbed onto his chariot. He picked up his supreme bow
and pierced Partha with arrows. O lord of men! At this time, the brave Sahadeva picked up Parshata, the scorcher
of enemies, on his chariot and bore him away. O great king! Arjuna pierced Drona’s son with arrows and Drona’s
son angrily struck him on the arms and the chest. Becoming enraged in that battle, Partha used an iron arrow that
was like death. It was like Yama’s staff and he released it towards Drona’s son. Immensely radiant, it descended on
the brahmana’s shoulder. O great king! In that battle, because of the force of that arrow, he lost his senses. Overcome by supreme lassitude, he sank down on the ﬂoor of his chariot. O great king! On seeing Arjuna engaged in
the battle, Karna repeatedly brandished his Vijaya bow. In the great battle, he desired to have a duel with Partha.
On seeing that the brave one537 had lost his senses, his charioteer used his chariot to swiftly bear the destroyer of
enemies away from the ﬁeld of battle. O great king! On seeing that Parshata had been freed and Drona’s son afﬂicted, the Panchalas were delighted and became hopeful of victory. Thousands of divine musical instruments
were sounded. On witnessing such terrible and extremely wonderful deeds, they roared like lions. Having done
this, Partha Dhananjaya spoke to Vasudeva. ‘O Krishna! Proceed towards the samshaptakas. That should be my
next task.’ On hearing the words spoken by Pandava, Dasharha departed on the chariot that had many banners and
possessed the speed of the wind or thoughts.” ’

Chapter 1193(43)
‘S anjaya said, “At this time, Krishna spoke these words to Partha, pointing out to Kounteya, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira. ‘O Partha! Pandava, your brother, is being swiftly pursued by the immensely strong sons of Dhritarashtra. They are great archers and wish to kill him. The angry Panchalas, invincible in battle, are also following at
great speed, wishing to save the great-souled Yudhishthira. O Partha! Duryodhana is the king of all the worlds. He
is armoured and is following the king with an array of chariots. With his brothers, the powerful one desires to kill
that tiger among men. Their touch is like that of venomous serpents and they are skilled in all manner of ﬁghting.
Wishing to kill him, these elephants, horses, chariots and foot soldiers are also advancing. The sons of Dhritarashtra are after Yudhishthira, like those after a supreme jewel. Behold. They have been checked by Satvata and the
lord Bhima. They are like daityas desiring amrita, but held in check by Shakra and Agni. However, many of them
are again swiftly advancing towards Pandava. Those maharathas are like waters made turbulent by the wind, rushing towards the ocean during the monsoon season. They are roaring like lions, or like clouds at the end of the summer. The powerful and great archers are brandishing their bows. I think that Yudhishthira, Kunti’s son, has entered
the jaws of death. The fortunate one has come under Duryodhana’s subjugation and is like an oblation poured into
the ﬁre. O Pandava! The army of the sons of Dhritarashtra has been prepared properly. Even Shakra will not be
able to escape, if he comes within the range of their arrows. Duryodhana, Drona’s son and Sharadvata are brave.
The force of Karna’s arrows can shatter mountains. Duryodhana is valiant and shoots a storm of arrows quickly.
When he is angry, he is like Yama. Who is capable of withstanding his force in battle? The king, the scorcher of
enemies, has already been forced to retreat by Karna, who is powerful, dexterous and accomplished, and skilled in
ﬁghting. Radheya is capable of oppressing the best of the Pandavas in the battle. In addition, the brave one is with
the great-souled sons of Dhritarashtra. He538 is controlled in his soul. When he fought with them in the battle, other maharathas robbed Partha of his armour. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The king is severely emaciated
because of his fasts. He is established in the strength of the brahman, but he does not possess a great deal of
strength of the kshatriya variety. O Partha! I do not think that Yudhishthira, the great king, will remain alive, even
though Bhimasena is with him and is roaring intolerantly, like a lion. O scorcher of enemies! The sons of Dhritarashtra are roaring repeatedly. Desiring victory in the battle, they are blowing on their giant conch shells. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! Pandaveya Yudhishthira will be killed. Karna will urge the immensely strong sons of
Dhritarashtra towards Partha. He will shroud the king with sthunakarna, indrajala and pashupata and the maharathas will follow him.539 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is my view that the king must be in distress.
At a time when speed is of the essence, the Panchalas and the Pandavas, supreme among all wielders of weapons,
are following him. They are like powerful ones dashing to save someone who has been submerged in the nether
regions. O Partha! The king’s ﬂags cannot be seen. They may have been brought down by Karna’s arrows, while
the twins, Satyaki, Shikhandi, Dhrishtadyumna, Bhima, the lord Shatanika and all the Panchalas and Chedis
looked on. O Partha! In this battle, Karna is destroying the Pandava soldiers with his arrows, like an elephant
among lotuses. O descendant of the Pandu lineage! The rathas on your side are being driven away. O Partha! Look
at how the maharathas are retreating. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the battle, the elephants have been
struck by Karna. They are shrieking and are running away in the ten directions. O Partha! Behold. Arrays of chariots are ﬂeeing in different directions. They have been routed in the battle by Karna, the destroyer of enemies. In
the battle, behold the chariot of the son of the suta roaming around here and there. He is stationed on it. He has the
best of standards and it is marked with the sign of an elephant’s housing. Radheya is advancing towards Bhimasena’s chariot. He is showering down hundreds of arrows and slaughtering your army. Behold the Panchalas being
driven away by the great-souled one. He is like Shakra destroying the daityas in a great battle. This Karna has de-

feated the Panchalas, Pandus and Srinjayas. He is now searching around in all the directions for you. That is my
view. O Partha! Behold. He looks beautiful, as he is stretching the best of bows. Having defeated the enemy, he is
like Shakra, surrounded by large numbers of gods. On witnessing Karna’s valour, the Kouravas are roaring. Thousands of Parthas and Srinjayas have been frightened in the battle. In this great battle, he has wholeheartedly terriﬁed the Pandus. O one who grants honours! Radheya is addressing all the soldiers. “O Kouravas! Attack them
quickly. Advance and drive them away, so that no one among the Srinjayas can escape from this encounter with his
life. Act united in this way and we will follow you.” Having said this, he is advancing behind them, showering arrows. O Partha! Behold Karna in the battle. He is under a white umbrella and is as radiant as the sun behind Mount
Asta. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A white umbrella that is like the full moon and possesses a hundred
spokes is held aloft his head in the battle. O lord of the earth! Karna is casting his glances around, looking for you.
He will certainly make the best of efforts in this battle. O mighty-armed one! Behold him brandishing his giant
bow. The immensely strong one is releasing arrows that are like venomous serpents. O one with the ape on the
banner! Radheya can be seen to be headed in this direction. He is advancing for his own destruction, like an insect
towards a lamp. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that Karna is alone, Dhritarashtra’s son has turned
his array of chariots towards him, controlling them so as to protect him. If you desire fame, the kingdom and
supreme happiness, make efforts to kill him, with all the evil-souled ones who are with him. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! You have controlled your soul. Glance towards your own self. Radheya is ﬁrm in his hatred for
the great-souled Yudhishthira. Accomplish the end that Radheya has set for himself. O noble one! Set your mind
on ﬁghting and repel that leader of rathas. O supreme among rathas! Five foremost rathas are powerfully advancing towards you,540 with hundreds of others. They are strong and ﬁerce in their energy. There are ﬁve thousand
elephants and twice that number of horses. O Kounteya! Ten thousand foot soldiers are also advancing. O brave
one! Protecting each other, that army is advancing towards you. Reveal your own self to the son of a suta, the great
archer. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Make the best of efforts and repulse them. This Karna is extremely angry and is attacking the Panchalas. Behold his ﬂag in the direction of Dhrishtadyumna’s chariot. O scorcher of enemies! I think that he will uproot the Panchalas. O Partha! O bull among the Bharata lineage! But I will tell you
something that will please you. Kouravya King Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, is alive. The mighty-armed Bhima has
returned and is stationed at the head of the army. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He is surrounded by the
Srinjaya soldiers and by Satyaki. O Kounteya! In this encounter, Bhimasena and the great-souled Panchalas are
slaying the Kouravas with sharp arrows. The soldiers of Dhritarashtra’s son are retreating and running away from
the ﬁeld of battle. Slain by Bhima’s forceful arrows, they are being routed. With blood ﬂowing from their wounds,
they look like the earth after a crop has been harvested. O best of the Bharatas! The army of the Bharatas541
presents a miserable sight. O Kounteya! Behold. They have been forced to retreat. Bhimasena, the lord of warriors,
who is like a venomous serpent, has angrily driven away the army. O Arjuna! Yellow, red, black and white ﬂags,
with the signs of stars, the moon and the sun, and many umbrellas are strewn around. There are golden and silver
standards and those that are made of other metals. They have been brought down and are scattered around, and so
are elephants and horses. Deprived of their lives, rathas have fallen down from their chariots. They have been slain
by many-hued arrows released by the Panchalas, who are not running away. O Dhananjaya! The army of the sons
of Dhritarashtra is without men, elephants, horses and chariots, and the Panchalas are spiritedly driving it away. O
scorcher of enemies! The enemy’s army was unassailable. But ready to give up their lives and seeking refuge with
Bhimasena, they542 are driving it away. The Panchalas are roaring, like clouds at the end of the summer. They are
driving away the enemy in the battle and slaying them with arrows. O scorcher of enemies! Behold the greatness
of heaven before the Panchalas.543 They are angrily slaying the sons of Dhritarashtra, like lions against elephants.
Every part of the large army of the sons of Dhritarashtra has been attacked. The force of the Panchalas is like that
of swans that leave Manasa544 for the Ganga. Kripa, Karna and other brave ones are severely trying to counter the
valorous Panchalas, like bulls against bulls. However, the maharathas among the sons of Dhritarashtra are deeply
submerged in Bhima’s weapons. On seeing that the rathas in the great army of the sons of Dhritarashtra are distressed, the brave ones, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, are slaying the enemy in thousands. Behold. The
elephants have been shattered by Bhima’s iron arrows and are falling down. They are like summits that have fallen

down on the ground, after being struck by the vajra of the wielder of the vajra. Mighty elephants have been struck
by Bhimasena’s straight-tufted arrows. As they are running away, they are slaying their own soldiers. Do you not
know Bhima’s unbearable leonine roar? O Arjuna! Desiring victory in the battle, the brave one is roaring. Astride a
supreme elephant, the Nishada545 is advancing against Pandava. He is angrily attacking him with javelins, like
Yama with a staff in his hand. Bhima is roaring and breaking down those javelins with his bare hands. He has then
used ten sharp iron arrows, which are like the ﬂames of the ﬁre, to slay him. Behold. Having slain him, the striker
has again attacked other elephants that are like blue clouds and are driven by skilled drivers. Vrikodara has slain
those elephants, seven at a time, with spears and javelins and has brought down their victorious standards. They
have been slain and mangled with sharp arrows by Partha’s elder brother. Each of ten elephants has been slain by
ten sharp arrows. The roars of the sons of Dhritarashtra can no longer be heard now. They have been forced to retreat by the angry bull among the Bharata lineage,546 who is Purandara’s equal. Three akshouhinis from the sons
of Dhritarashtra united against him. However, Bhimasena, lion among men, angrily countered them.’ On seeing
that Bhimasena had accomplished that extremely difﬁcult deed, Arjuna slaughtered the remaining ones with his
sharp arrows. O lord! Large numbers of samshaptakas were slaughtered in that battle. Bereft of sorrow and ﬁlled
with delight, they became Shakra’s guests. With straight-tufted arrows, Partha, tiger among men, destroyed the
fourfold547 army of the sons of Dhritarashtra.” ’

Chapter 1194(44)
‘D hritarashtra asked, “When Bhimasena and Pandava Yudhishthira returned and my army was slaughtered by the
Pandus and the Srinjayas, when my army that was like an ocean was repeatedly distressed, what was done by the
Kurus? O Sanjaya! Tell me that in detail.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O king! On seeing the mighty-armed Bhima, the eyes of the powerful son of a suta became
red with rage. He attacked Bhimasena. O king! On seeing that your army had retreated before Bhimasena, the
powerful one made great efforts to rally it. Having rallied your son’s army, the mighty-armed Karna advanced
against the Pandavas, who were indomitable in battle. Radheya counter-attacked the maharatha Pandavas. He brandished his bow and showered down arrows on Bhimasena, Shini’s grandson, Shikhandi, Janamejaya, the powerful
Dhrishtadyumna and all the Prabhadrakas. The Panchalas, tigers among men, angrily attacked your army from all
sides in that battle, desiring victory. O king! In that fashion, the maharathas on your side wished to kill them and
impetuously attacked the Pandava army. O tiger among men! The place was beautiful with chariots, elephants,
horses, foot soldiers and standards and the armies were wonderful to see. O great king! Shikhandi advanced
against Karna and Dhrishtadyumna against your son, Duhshasana, who was surrounded by a large army. Nakula
advanced against Vrishasena and Yudhishthira against Chitrasena.548 O king! In the encounter, Sahadeva attacked
Uluka, Satyaki attacked Shakuni and Bhimasena the Kouravas. In the battle, Drona’s maharatha son made endeavours against Arjuna. In the battle, Goutama attacked the great archer, Yudhamanyu, and Kritavarma advanced
against the powerful Uttamouja. O venerable one! Single-handedly, the mighty-armed Bhimasena countered all
your sons, the Kurus, together with their soldiers.
‘ “O great king! Shikhandi, the slayer of Bhishma, roamed around fearlessly and countered Karna with his arrows. Countered, Karna’s lips quivered in rage. He struck Shikhandi between his eyebrows with three arrows. With
those arrows stuck there, Shikhandi looked exceedingly beautiful. He was like a silver mountain with three peaks.
In the battle, having been thus grievously struck by the son of a suta in the encounter, he pierced Karna with ninety
sharp arrows. Karna slew his horses and charioteer with three arrows. The maharatha then brought down his standard with a kshurapra arrow. With his horses slain, the maharatha, the scorcher of enemies,549 jumped down from
his chariot and angrily ﬂung a javelin towards Karna. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the battle, Karna cut
that down with his arrows and then mangled Shikhandi with nine sharp arrows. Shikhandi, supreme among men
and supreme among victorious ones, avoided the arrows released from Karna’s bow and retreated quickly.
‘ “O great king! Karna then scattered the Pandu soldiers, like a mass of cotton by the speed of a mighty wind. O
great king! Dhrishtadyumna was afﬂicted by your son and struck Duhshasana between the breasts with three arrows. O venerable one! Duhshasana pierced his left arm with a sharp, gold-tufted and broad-headed arrow with
drooping tufts. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus pierced, Dhrishtadyumna became ﬁerce in his wrath and
angrily dispatched an arrow towards Duhshasana. O lord of the earth! The arrow released by Dhrishtadyuma descended with great force, but your son sliced it down with three arrows. He then used another seventeen broadheaded and gold-decorated arrows to strike Dhrishtadyumna in the arms and in the chest. O venerable one! Becoming angry, Parshata severed his bow with an extremely sharp kshurapra arrow and people roared in applause. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! Your son picked up another bow and showered a storm of arrows from every direction on Dhrishtadyumna. On witnessing the valour of your great-souled son, the warrior, in the battle, the large
numbers of siddhas and apsaras smiled.
‘ “O scorcher of enemies! Thus the battle raged between those on your side and that of the enemy. It was ﬁerce,
as terrible in form as the destruction of all beings at the end of a yuga. Vrishasena pierced Nakula with ﬁve iron

arrows and stationing himself near his father,550 pierced him again with three arrows. Nakula became angry and
laughed at Vrishasena. He then pierced him ﬁrmly in the chest with an extremely sharp iron arrow. Having been
severely struck by the powerful enemy, the destroyer of foes struck his adversary with twenty arrows and was
pierced back with ﬁve. Those two bulls among men shot thousands of arrows at each other and, supported by their
respective soldiers, enveloped each other. O lord of the earth! On seeing that the soldiers of the sons of Dhritarashtra were ﬂeeing, the son of a suta followed them and powerfully checked them. O venerable one! When Karna had
withdrawn, Nakula advanced against the Kouravas. In the battle, Karna’s son also abandoned Nakula and swiftly
went to the spot where Radheya was.
‘ “In the battle, the angry Uluka was checked by Sahadeva. The powerful Sahadeva slew his four horses and
conveyed his charioteer towards Yama’s abode. O lord of the earth! At this, Uluka, loved by his father, descended
from his vehicle and swiftly joined the army of the Trigartas.
‘ “Satyaki pierced Shakuni with twenty sharp arrows and severing Soubala’s standard with a broad-headed arrow, laughed. O king! The powerful Soubala became enraged in that battle. Having shattered Satyaki’s armour, he
again brought down his golden standard and pierced him back with sharp arrows. O great king! He551 brought
down his charioteer with three arrows and swiftly used other arrows to convey his mounts to Yama’s eternal abode.
O bull among the Bharata lineage! Maharatha Shakuni suddenly alighted from his chariot and swiftly ascended
that of Uluka. He was quicky borne away from Satyaki, who was skilled in ﬁghting. O king! In that battle, Satyaki
attacked your soldiers with great force and shattered the formation. O lord of the earth! Your soldiers were enveloped by arrows shot by Shini’s descendant and were quickly scattered in the ten directions. They lost their lives
and fell down.
‘ “Your son552 countered Bhimasena in the battle. But in an instant, Bhima deprived that lord of men of his
horses, charioteer, chariot and standard. This satisﬁed the charanas. At this, he withdrew from Bhimasena’s presence. Wishing to kill the single-handed Bhimasena, all the Kuru soldiers let out a mighty roar and attacked him.
‘ “Yudhamanyu attacked Kripa and quickly severed his bow. Kripa, supreme among the wielders of weapons,
picked up another bow. He brought down Yudhamanyu’s standard, charioteer, umbrella and bow on the ground.
Maharatha Yudhamanyu withdrew on another chariot. Hardikya was terrible in his valour and Uttamouja suddenly
shrouded him with arrows, like clouds raining down on a mountain. O scorcher of enemies! O lord of the earth!
The encounter between them was extremely great and terrible. I have not seen anything like that earlier. O king! In
that battle, Kritavarma pierced Uttamouja in the chest and he sank down on the ﬂoor of his chariot. His charioteer
bore the best of rathas away on his chariot. O king! The Pandu soldiers were then quickly routed.” ’

Chapter 1195(45)
‘S anjaya said, “O king! Surrounded by a large array of chariots, Drona’s son swiftly descended on the spot where
the king553 was. On seeing him violently descend, the brave Partha,554 with Shouri as his aide, violently checked
him, like the shoreline against the abode of makaras. O great king! At this, Drona’s powerful son became enraged
and enveloped Arjuna and Vasudeva with arrows. The maharathas saw that the two Krishnas were afﬂicted. The
Kurus saw this and were overcome by great wonder. Arjuna seemed to smile and invoked a divine weapon. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the battle, the brahmana countered it. Wishing to kill, whichever weapon Pandava used in the battle was bafﬂed by Drona’s son, the great archer, in the encounter. O king! A terrible clash with
weapons ensued. We saw Drona’s son in that encounter, like Death with a gaping mouth. Having enveloped the directions and the sub-directions with his arrows, he struck Vasudeva in the right arm with three arrows. Arjuna slew
all the horses of the great-souled one and in the encounter, made the earth ﬂow with a river of blood. Arrows released from Partha’s bow killed rathas and brought them down. Freed from their yokes, horses were seen to run
around here and there. On witnessing the deeds performed by Partha, Drona’s son, the ornament of a battle, countered Krishna555 in that encounter and covered him from every direction with sharp arrows. O great king! In the
battle, Drona’s son used another arrow to strike Arjuna in the chest. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having
been severely struck in the battle by Drona’s son, he picked up a terrible club and hurled it towards Drona’s son.
That club was decorated with gold and descended. However, Drona’s son suddenly shattered it and people applauded. O king! Shattered into many fragments by the arrows of Bharadvaja’s son, it fell down on the ground, like
a mountain that has been shattered by the wind god. In the encounter, Arjuna pierced Drona’s son with ten arrows
and used a broad-headed arrow to bring down his charioteer from his seat on the chariot. Drona’s son, swift in his
valour, controlled the mounts himself and swiftly enveloped the two Krishnas with arrows. We beheld that wonderful sight. He controlled and drove the horses and fought with Phalguna. O king! In the battle, all the warriors
applauded this feat. When Drona’s son advanced before Phalguna in the encounter, Jaya556 used a kshurapra arrow to slice down the harnesses that yoked the horses to the chariot. Driven by the force of the arrows, the horses
ﬂed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A loud uproar arose amidst your troops. Having obtained victory, the
Pandavas drove away your soldiers. Desiring victory, they released sharp arrows from every direction. O great
king! The large army of the sons of Dhritarasthra was repeatedly routed by the brave ones, who were urged on by
the prospect of victory.
‘ “O great king! Your sons, colourful in ﬁghting, Shakuni Soubala and the great-souled Karna looked on. O lord
of men! But they were unable to rally the large army of your sons. Afﬂicted in every way, they no longer remained
in the battle. O great king! The warriors ﬂed here and there. On seeing this, the large army of your sons was terriﬁed and, extremely anxious, ran away. The son of a suta repeatedly asked them to remain. However, slain by the
great-souled ones, the soldiers did not stay there. O great king! Desiring victory, the Pandavas roared repeatedly,
having seen that the army of the sons of Dhritarashtra was running away in various directions. At this, Duryodhana
spoke these affectionate words to Karna. ‘O Karna! Behold. The soldiers have been severely oppressed by the Pandavas. Though you are here, they are frightened and are running away in every direction. O mighty-armed one! O
destroyer of enemies! Knowing this, do what must be done. O bull among men! O brave one! Driven away by the
Pandavas in the battle, thousands of warriors are calling out to you alone.’ Hearing these important words spoken
by Duryodhana, Radheya, the descendant of the suta lineage, spoke these words to the lord of Madra. ‘O lord of
men! Behold the valour of my arms and my weapons. In the battle today, I will kill all the Panchalas, together with
the Pandus. O tiger among men! O lord of men! Drive the horses well.’ Having spoken these words, the powerful

and brave son of a suta, picked up Vijaya, his ancient and excellent bow. O great king! Having strung it, he repeatedly rubbed the string. He asked the warriors to return.
‘ “The immensely strong one with an immeasurable soul took a pledge of truth and invoked the bhargava
weapon.557 O king! In the great battle, thousands, millions, billions and crores of extremely sharp arrows issued
from it. They were extremely terrible and blazed, shafted with the feathers of herons and peacocks. The Pandava
soldiers were mangled and nothing could be seen. O lord of the earth! Great sounds of lamentation arose among
the Panchalas. In the encounter, they were afﬂicted by the power of the bhargava weapon. O king! Elephants and
men were brought down in thousands. O tiger among men! Chariots and horses were strewn around in every direction. O king! The slain were strewn around here and there and the earth trembled. The entire large army of the Pandavas was agitated. Karna alone was the foremost among warriors. He was like a ﬁre without smoke. O tiger
among men! That scorcher of enemies consumed the enemy and was resplendent. Having been slain by Karna, the
Panchalas and the Chedis became unconscious. They were like elephants in a forest conﬂagration. O tiger among
men! Those best among men lamented loudly. In the ﬁeld of battle, loud woes of the terriﬁed ones could be heard.
O king! Terriﬁed, they ﬂed in different directions. There was the great sound of lamentation there, like that made
by beings at the time of a ﬂood. O venerable one! They were seen to be slaughtered there by the son of a suta. All
the beings, including those belonging to an inferior species,558 were frightened. The Srinjayas were slaughtered in
the battle by the son of a suta and repeatedly cried out to Arjuna and Vasudeva. They were unconscious, like those
in the city of the king of the dead, calling out to the king of the dead.559
‘ “At this, Kunti’s son, Dhananjaya, spoke to Vasudeva. ‘Behold the extremely terrible bhargava weapon. O
Krishna! O mighty-armed one! Behold the valour of the bhargava weapon. There is no means of countering that
weapon in a battle. O Krishna! Behold the angry son of a suta in the great battle. The brave one is like Yama and
has performed a terrible deed. He is repeatedly casting extremely terrible glances towards me. I do not see any
means of running away from Karna in this battle. If a man remains alive in a battle, there may be victory, or there
may be defeat. O Hrishikesha! For the sake of victory, how can one be victorious if one is dead?’ O venerable one!
Janardana wished to leave to see Yudhishthira and thought that Karna would be overcome with exhaustion in the
battle.560 Krishna told Arjuna, ‘The king561 has been severely wounded. O best among the Kuru lineage! Let us
reassure him ﬁrst and you will kill Karna after that.’ Dhananjaya also wished to see the king who had been afﬂicted with arrows. On Keshava’s instructions, he abandoned the battle and quickly departed on his chariot. Kounteya
left, because he wished to see Dharmaraja. Though he looked at all the soldiers, he could not see his elder brother
anywhere. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having fought with Drona’s son and having defeated the descendant of Bhrigu lineage,562 whom even the wielder of the vajra found difﬁcult to withstand in battle, he departed.
He defeated Drona’s son, the wielder of a ﬁerce bow. He thus accomplished an extremely difﬁcult deed.
‘ “Dhananjaya, irresistible to enemies, then glanced towards his own soldiers. The bravest of the brave, who
were battling at the forefronts of their divisions, were delighted to see Savyasachi. They were famous because of
their earlier deeds and he instructed the rathas to be stationed with their divisions. However, the garlanded Kiriti
did not see the eldest of the warriors, his brother Ajamidha.563 He quickly approached Bhima and asked, ‘How is
the king? Where is the king?’ Bhima replied, ‘King Yudhishthira, Dharma’s son, has retreated. His limbs have
been mangled by Karna’s arrows. I doubt that he is alive.’ Arjuna said, ‘Therefore, you should quickly go and ﬁnd
out about the king, supreme among the Kurus. Having been severely pierced by Karna’s arrows, there is no doubt
that the king has gone to his camp. When it was night,564 though he was severely and grievously struck by Drona,
the spirited one remained, desiring victory, and waited until Drona had been killed. In the battle today, the generous eldest among the Pandavas, has faced a disaster because of Karna. O Bhima! Quickly go and ﬁnd out about
him. I will remain here and restrain the large numbers of the enemy.’ Bhima replied, ‘O magnaminous one! O bull
among the Bharata lineage! You go and ﬁnd out how the king is. O Arjuna! If I go there, these brave ones565 will
say that I am frightened.’ At this, Arjuna told Bhimasena, ‘The samshaptakas are arranged in a counter-formation
against me. Without killing them, it is not possible for me to abandon these large numbers of the enemy.’ Bhimasena told Arjuna, ‘O brave one amongst the Kuru lineage! In this encounter, I will rely on my valour and ﬁght

against all the samshaptakas. O Dhananjaya! Go.’ In the midst of the enemy, he566 heard these extremely difﬁcult
words of assurance given by Bhimasena, his brother. Wishing to leave and see the best of the Kuru lineage,567 he
then spoke these words to the best of the Vrishni lineage. ‘O Hrishikesha! Drive the horses and let us leave this
ocean of chariots. O Keshava! I wish to see King Ajatashatru.’ Before urging the horses, the foremost among the
Dasharha lineage spoke these words to Bhima. ‘O brave one! For you, the task to be accomplished now is not at all
wonderful. O Bhima! I am leaving. Slay these masses of the enemy.’ O king! O Indra among kings! Hrishikesha
then went to the spot where King Yudhishthira was, urging the steeds that were Garuda’s equal to a greater and
greater speed, having stationed Bhimsena, the scorcher of enemies, in the counter-formation and having given
Vrikodara instructions about the ﬁght. Those two, the best of men, approached the king, who was lying down
alone. They descended from the chariot and bowed in obeisance at Dharmaraja’s feet.568 On seeing that the bull
among men was well, those two bulls among men, the two Krishnas, were ﬁlled with delight, like the two Ashvins
on seeing Vasava. The king honoured them, like the ﬁre god, the Ashvins, or the preceptor greeting Shakra and
Vishnu when the great asura Jambha was killed.569 Thinking that Karna had been killed, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira
was delighted and addressed those two scorchers of enemies in a voice that was choking with joy.” ’

Chapter 1196(46)
‘S anjaya said, “On seeing the great-spirited Keshava and Arjuna arrive together, he thought that Adhiratha’s son
had been killed in the battle by the wielder of Gandiva. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Kounteya, the destroyer
of enemies, greeted them in extremely affectionate words and, honouring them, smiled.
‘ “Yudhishthira said, ‘O Devaki’s son! Welcome. O Dhananjaya! Welcome. I am extremely delighted to see
Achyuta and Arjuna together. Since neither of you is injured, how was your battle with the maharatha?570 He is
like virulent poison in a battle and is skilled in the use of all weapons. He is the leader of all the sons of Dhritarashtra and is their armour and their mail. He was protected by the archers Vrishasena and Sushena. The invincible and
immensely valorous one had learnt weapons from Rama571 himself. He was the protector of the sons of Dhritarashtra and advanced at the forefront of their army. He was the one who killed enemy soldiers. He is the one who
crushed large numbers of the enemy. He was engaged in Duryodhana’s welfare and was always ready to rise up
against us. In a great battle, he could not be assailed even by the gods, together with Vasava. In his energy and his
strength, he was like the wind and the ﬁre. He was as deep as the nether regions and brought joy to his well-wishers. By killing Karna in the great battle, you have brought an end to my enemies. It is through good fortune that
you have come to me, like two immortals after killing an asura. O Achyuta! O Arjuna! I fearlessly fought a battle
with him today. He was like an enraged Yama, wishing to slay all beings. He brought down my standard and slew
my parshni charioteers. While Yuyudhana looked on, I was rendered without a chariot and without horses. Dhrishtadyumna, the brave twins, Shikhandi, Droupadi’s sons and all the Panchalas looked on. O mighty-armed one!572
Having defeated large numbers of the enemy, the immensely valorous Karna vanquished me in the great battle,
though I strove to my utmost. He pursued me in the battle and spoke many harsh words. There is no doubt that he
defeated the best among the warriors. O Dhananjaya! It is because of Bhimasena’s powers that I am still alive.
There is no need to speak a lot. That humiliation was overwhelming. O Dhananjaya! I have been frightened about
him for thirteen years. I was not able to sleep at night. Nor could I be happy during the day. O Dhananjaya! Because of my enmity towards him, it was as if I was burning. I was like a rhinoceros or an elephant, knowing that it
was going to die.573 O lord! I continuously thought about the time when he would go to Yama. How would I bring
about Karna’s destruction in the battle? O Kounteya! Whether I was awake or sleeping, Karna was always in front
of me. I saw him everywhere. The entire universe was full of Karna. O Dhananjaya! Wherever I went, I was frightened of Karna. And wherever I went, I saw him stationed in front of me. I was forced to run away from that brave
one in the battle. O Partha! I was defeated, with my horses and my chariot and he let me escape with my life. What
is the point of remaining alive? What again is the point of the kingdom? I have been shamed by Karna, the ornament of a battle. What was not obtained by me earlier in the battle with Bhishma, Kripa and Drona, has been obtained by me in the encounter with the maharatha son of a suta. O Kounteya! That is the reason I am asking you
about your welfare now. Tell me everything about how Karna has been slain by you. His valour in a battle is like
that of Shakra. His bravery is like that of Yama. He is like Rama574 in weapons. How was he killed? He is famous
as a maharatha. He is skilled in every method of ﬁghting. Among all the wielders of the bow, he is the only man
who is the foremost. O lord of the earth! He was always honoured by Dhritarashtra and his sons for your sake.575
How was Radheya killed by you? O Arjuna! Among all the warriors, Dhritarashtra always used to regard Karna,
bull among men, as the cause of your death in battle. O tiger among men! How was he killed by you in the encounter? O Bibhatsu! Tell me everything about how Karna has been killed by you. O tiger among men! In the sight
of his comrades and well-wishers, did you sever his head, like a tiger against a ruru deer? In the battle, the son of a
suta was searching for you and looked in every region and every direction. In the battle, Karna wished to give a

bull-elephant to anyone who pointed you out. Has he been brought down by your extremely sharp arrows shafted
with the feathers of herons? Having been killed by you in the battle, is the evil-souled son of a suta lying down on
the surface of the earth? Perhaps you have brought me supreme delight today, by killing the son of a suta in the
battle. Intoxicated with his pride, the son of a suta looked everywhere for you. He prided himself on his valour.
Having clashed against you in the battle today, has he been killed by you? For your sake, he was prepared to give
others a golden chariot and the best of elephants yoked to that chariot.576 He always sought to challenge you in an
encounter. O son!577 Has that wicked one indeed been killed by you in the battle? He was always crazy with insolence about his bravery and he spoke about it in the assembly of the Kouravas. He was always dear to Suyodhana.
Has that evil one been killed by you today? When he clashed against you, were red arrows released from your
bow, like birds? That wicked one’s body has been mangled and he is lying down today. Has the arm of Dhritrarashtra’s son been broken? Full of insolence, he always prided himself in the midst of the kings, delighting
Duryodhana. Because of his delusion, he said, “I will slay Phalguna.” Has that ratha been killed by you? The one
with limited intelligence said that he would not wash his feet as long as Partha was alive.578 He always observed
that vow. O Shakra’s son! Has Karna been killed by you today? In the assembly hall, in the midst of the brave Kurus, the evil-minded Karna spoke to Krishna579 and said, “O Krishna! Why don’t you abandon the Pandavas?
They have fallen and are extremely feeble. They have been deprived of their spirits.” For your sake, Karna took a
pledge that he would not return without having slain Krishna and Partha. Is the one with wicked intelligence lying
down, his body mangled with arrows? The clash between the Srinjayas and the Kouravas and the state I was reduced to then are known to you. Having clashed against you, has he been slain by you today? Have you released
ﬂaming arrows from Gandiva towards that extremely evil-minded one? He possessed earrings on his head, given to
him by the sun god.580 Has Savyasachi really severed that head in the battle? O brave one! When he released arrows in my direction, I thought about Karna’s death. Have you today accomplished what I thought about, by bringing down Karna? Protected by Karna, Suyodhana was full of insolence and looked down on us. Having clashed
against you today, has Suyodhana’s valour been destroyed? In earlier times, in the assembly hall and in the presence of the kings, he called us sterile sesamum seeds earlier.581 Has the evil-minded and intolerant son of a suta
encountered you in the battle and been killed by you? In earlier times, when Yajnaseni was won by Soubala,582
the evil-souled son of a suta laughed at us and, laughing at her, said that she should be brought. Has he been killed
by you today? When the grandfather, the best wielder of weapons on earth, classiﬁed him as only half a ratha, the
one with limited intelligence censured him.583 Has Adhiratha’s evil-souled son been killed by you? The ﬁre of intolerance has always blazed in my heart and has been fanned by the breeze of humiliation. Having clashed against
the wicked one, have you quenched it today? O Phalguna! Tell me and pacify me.’” ’

Chapter 1197(47)
‘S anjaya said, “Having heard the angry words spoken about Adhiratha’s great-souled
son by the king who followed dharma, the unassailable Jishnu, whose valour was inﬁnite and whose spirit was never depressed, spoke these words to Yudhishthira. ‘O
king! When I fought with the samshaptakas today, Drona’s son suddenly stationed
himself in front of me and at the forefront of the Kuru soldiers. He released arrows
that were like venomous serpents. On seeing my chariot, which was like a cloud, the
soldiers from Ambashtha were ready to die. O foremost among kings! I killed ﬁve
hundred of those and advanced against Drona’s son. He stretched his bow back all the
way up to his ears and aimed many arrows. He possessed the strength of learning and
weapons and showered down, like a dark cloud. In the battle, I could not distinguish
between his afﬁxing an arrow and releasing it. Drona’s son circled around in that battle, sometimes to the left and sometimes to the right. Drona’s son pierced me with ﬁve
sharp arrows and Vasudeva with another ﬁve. In an instant, and without any gap, I
struck him with thirty arrows that were like the vajra. Blood began to ﬂow from all
over his body. Those soldiers had been overcome by me and their bodies were overﬂowing with blood. On seeing this, he584 entered the array of chariots that belonged
to the son of a suta. The warriors were overcome and the soldiers were devastated.
Warriors, horses and elephants were running away. On seeing this, Karna swiftly dispatched ﬁfty supreme rathas against me. After having killed them and avoided Karna,
I have quickly come here to see you. On seeing Karna, all the Panchalas are ﬁlled with
fright and are like cattle driven away by a lion. The Prabhadrakas are being driven
away by Karna, as if they have entered the mouth of a large ﬁsh. O king! Having
clashed against Karna, the Prabhadrakas are like those who have entered Death’s gaping mouth. Come and see me and the son of a suta ﬁght, striving for victory. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Desiring heaven and the worlds,585 six thousand princes
and rathas have immersed themselves. O foremost among kings! I will engage with the
son of a suta in battle, like the wielder of the vajra against Vritra. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! If you wish to see it, there will be a ﬁerce battle today between me
and the son of a suta. O king! I will engage in a battle with Karna and kill him today,
together with his relatives. O lion among men! There are ends meant for those who

make a pledge and do not keep it. If I fail, let that end be mine. I am inviting you. Tell
me that victory in the battle will be mine. In front of us, the sons of Dhritarashtra are
about to devour Bhima. O lion among kings! I will slay the son of a suta today, together with all the large numbers of enemy soldiers.’” ’

Chapter 1198(48)
‘S anjaya said, “On hearing that the immensely valorous Karna was still alive, the inﬁnitely energetic Partha586
became angry with Phalguna. Tormented by Karna’s arrows, Yudhishthira spoke these words to Dhananjaya. ‘In
Dvaitavana, you should have said, “O king! I am not interested in ﬁghting with Karna.” O Partha! Had you said
that, at the right time, we would have thought of other arrangements. O brave one! But you promised me that you
would kill that powerful one. You have brought us into the midst of enemies and then you have shattered us by
ﬂinging us down on the ground. O Arjuna! We showered down many blessings on you and we expected many
things that would be beneﬁcial for us. O prince! All of that has been rendered unsuccessful, like an upper garment
expecting fruits, but obtaining ﬂowers instead.587 Like a ﬁsh hook covered with ﬂesh, or like impure food covered
with pure food, I can only see worthless things in you. We desired the kingdom. But we are faced with destruction
in the form of the kingdom. O evil-minded one! On the seventh day after you were born, an invisible voice spoke
to Pritha588 from the sky. “The son that has been born to you will be like Vasava in his valour. He will triumph
over all the brave enemies. He will be inﬁnitely energetic and will defeat large numbers of gods and all the beings
in Khandava. He will vanquish the Madras, the Kalingas and the Kekayas and in the midst of the kings, kill the
Kurus. There will be no archer who will be superior to him. No being will be born who will be able to defeat him.
This noble one will bring all the beings under his subjugation and will accomplish all kinds of learning. He will be
as handsome as the moon and as swift as the wind. He will be like Meru in fortitude and like the earth in forgiveness. He will possess the radiance of the sun and the prosperity of the lord of riches.589 He will be like Shakra in
his valour and like Vishnu in his strength. This great-souled son that has been born to Kunti will be like Aditi’s son
Vishnu,590 the slayer of all enemies. He will bring victory to his own and slay the enemy. He will be famous and
inﬁnitely energetic and will be the originator of a lineage.” This was heard from the sky, on the slopes of the
Shatashringa mountains.591 The ascetics heard the words that were spoken. This is what was spoken about you.
But it has not come to pass. The gods have certainly uttered a falsehood. I heard words of praise spoken about you
by the supreme of rishis and have always honoured you. I did not know that you were affectionate towards Suyodhana. Nor did I know that you feared Adhiratha’s son. You are borne on a vehicle that has been created by Tvashtra.592 Its axles rattle. The ape sits astride your auspicious standard. You have girded a sword that is decorated
with gold. Gandiva bow is as long as a palm tree. O Partha! Keshava drives you. How have you withdrawn as a
result of your fear of Karna? O evil-souled one! Had you given the bow to Keshava and become his charioteer in
the battle, then Keshava would have slain the ﬁerce Karna, like the lord of the Maruts593 bringing down Vritra
with his vajra. It would have been better had you not been born in Pritha’s womb, but had been aborted in the ﬁfth
month itself. O prince! O evil-souled one! That would have been better than withdrawing from the ﬁeld of battle.’”
’

Chapter 1199(49)
‘S anjaya said, “Having been thus addressed by Yudhishthira, Kounteya, borne on the white horses, angrily grasped
his sword, wishing to kill the bull among the Bharata lineage. On witnessing his wrath, Keshava, who knew about
thoughts, spoke. ‘O Partha! Why have you grasped your sword in this way? O Dhananjaya! I do not see anyone
here with whom you need to ﬁght. All the sons of Dhritarashtra have been devastated by the intelligent Bhima. O
Kounteya! You withdrew to seek the king. King Yudhishthira is cheerful and well. You have seen that tiger among
men, whose valour is like that of a tiger. This is a time for rejoicing. Why are you overcome by anger? O
Kounteya! I do not see anyone here who should be killed by you. Why have you quickly taken up this large
sword? O Kounteya! I am asking you about this. What do you wish to do? O one who is extraordinary in valour!
You have angrily grasped this supreme sword.’ Having been thus addressed by Krishna, Arjuna glanced towards
Yudhishthira. He sighed like a serpent and told Govinda, ‘If anyone asks me to hand over Gandiva to someone
else, I will slice off his head. That has been my secret vow. O inﬁnitely valorous one! You have heard what the
king with the miserable soul told me in your presence. O Govinda! I have no interest in pardoning him. Therefore,
I will kill the king who is always scared about deviating from dharma. I will kill that supreme among men and protect my pledge. O descendant of the Yadu lineage! That is the reason I have picked up the sword. I will kill Yudhishthira and repay my debt to the cause of truth. O Janardana! In that way, I will be without sorrow and without
fever. Now that such an occasion has arisen, what do you think? O father!594 You know everything about the universe, its past and its future. I will do whatever you ask me to.’
‘ “Krishna replied, ‘O Partha! I now know that you have never attended to those who are old. O tiger among
men! You have fallen prey to wrath at the wrong time. O Dhananjaya! No one who knows about the gradations of
dharma acts in this way. Thinking something to be a duty, you are engaging in a task that is not a duty. O Partha! It
is the worst of men who performs tasks that should not be performed. You should follow the dharma that wise ones
have resorted to. They certainly spoke about this in detail to those who approached them.595 O Partha! The man
who does not know about these decrees and about the determination of what should be done and what should not
be done, is certainly confounded. You are acting in that foolish way. It is always difﬁcult to clearly know what
should be done and what should not be done. Everything can be known through the sacred texts, but you are not
acquainted with them. Based on your ignorance, you think that you are following dharma and that you are acting in
accordance with dharma. O Partha! You say that you are for dharma. But you do not understand that the killing of
a living being is a sin. O son!596 Not killing living beings is the best course of action. That is my view. One can
utter a falsehood, but one should never indulge in violence. The king, your eldest brother, is knowledgeable about
dharma. How can you, like an ordinary man, kill that best of men? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It has
been said that one must not kill someone who is not ﬁghting, someone who is without weapons, someone who is
reluctant to ﬁght, someone who is running away, someone who has sought sanctuary and someone who has joined
his hands in salutation. The learned do not approve of killing such people. O Partha! In earlier times, you took that
vow of yours when you were a child. Because of that, you now wish to undertake an act that is full of adharma. O
Partha! How can you rush to kill your superior? Remember dharma. The course of dharma needs to be reﬂected
about. It is subtle and difﬁcult to follow. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I will tell you about the mysteries of
dharma. Bhishma told you about this and so did Yudhishthira, who knows about dharma, kshatta Vidura and the
illustrious Kunti. O Dhananjaya! I will tell you about the details. Listen. One who speaks the truth is virtuous.
There is nothing superior to truth. However, it is extremely difﬁcult to understand how one should base oneself on
truth. Sometimes, truth should not be spoken. And sometimes, a lie should be spoken. When all one’s possessions

are being robbed, one should utter a lie. One should also utter a lie when one’s life is in danger, or at the time of a
marriage. Those are the times when falsehood becomes truth and truth becomes falsehood. A person who is always
based on truth is but a child. A person who can differentiate between truth and falsehood can alone follow dharma.
Isn’t it wonderful that a man can become wise even after performing an extremely terrible deed? Like Balaka, he
can obtain great merits, even though he has killed a blind being. And even though one strives for great virtue, one
may commit a great sin, like Koushika, who lived along rivers.’
‘ “Arjuna said, ‘O illustrious one! So that I may gain knowledge, tell me about these accounts, about Balaka and
his connection with a blind being, and about Koushika, who lived near rivers.’
‘ “Krishna replied, ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Balaka was a person who hunted animals. He went to
kill animals for his son and his wife, not to satisfy any desire. He looked after his blind mother and father and other
dependents. He was always devoted to his own dharma. He was always truthful and not malicious. One day,
though he made a lot of effort to search for animals, he could ﬁnd none. Finally, he saw a carnivorous beast drinking water, using smell for its sight.597 Though he had not seen such an animal before, he killed it. Immediately, a
shower of ﬂowers fell down from the sky. Apsaras began to sing and charming musical instruments were sounded.
Celestial vehicles descended from heaven, to take that hunter of animals away. O Arjuna! Because of its austerities, that animal had been granted a boon by the self-creating one598 that it would be able to kill all beings, but
would be blind. He killed the beast that had made up its mind to kill all beings. That is the reason Balaka went to
heaven. The dharma of the gods is extremely difﬁcult to comprehend. There was a brahmana named Koushika. He
was an ascetic and extremely learned. He lived at a conﬂuence of rivers, far away from villages. He had taken a
vow that he would always speak the truth. O Dhananjaya! Because he always spoke the truth, he became famous.
At that time, scared of robbers, some people entered the forest. The cruel robbers made every effort to follow in
their footsteps. They approached Koushika, who always spoke the truth, and asked, “O illustrious one! There were
many people. What path have they taken? You are being asked in the name of truth. If you know, tell us.” Having
been asked, Koushika spoke to them truthfully. “This forest has many trees, creepers and lantanas and they have
entered it.” Those cruel men sought them out and killed them. So it has been heard. Koushika committed great adharma by speaking what should not have been said. He suffered great hardships in hell, because he did not know
about the subtleties of dharma. He was just like a foolish person who does not possess a great deal of learning and
does not ask the elders about the divisions of dharma, so that his great confusion can be resolved. Such indeed are
the signs and indications. Supreme knowledge is extremely difﬁcult and some try to obtain it through arguments.
There are many other people who hold that dharma is only what is in the sacred texts. I will not contradict this, but
everything is not laid down there. The words of dharma have been laid down for the propagation of beings. Dharma is so called because it holds everything up.599 Dharma upholds beings. Whatever has this property of holding
up is certainly dharma. There are those who wish that it should be otherwise. For those who desire otherwise, free
yourself from them, without speaking a lot. There is no need to speak to them. If you have to speak to them, or if
they are suspicious if you do not speak to them, it is better to utter a falsehood. That will be like speaking the truth.
When life is in danger, at the time of marriage, when the entire lineage or all the riches are about to be destroyed
and at the time of amusements, it is better to utter a lie. Those who know about the true nature of dharma do not
see any adharma there. When one takes an oath to free oneself from an association with robbers, it is better to utter
a lie. That is like speaking the truth. If one can, one should never give up one’s riches to them. If one gives riches
to the wicked, it is the giver that is afﬂicted. Therefore, a falsehood uttered for the sake of dharma does not amount
to speaking a lie. These are the signs and indications and I have instructed you about them properly. O Partha!
Having heard this, tell me if Yudhishthira should be killed.’
‘ “Arjuna said, ‘You have spoken like an immensely wise one! You have spoken like an immensely intelligent
one. Your words are those that will ensure our welfare. You are like our mother. You are like our father. O Krishna!
You are our supreme refuge and these words have been spoken by you. There is nothing in the three worlds that is
not known to you. You also know everything about supreme dharma. I think that Pandava Dharmaraja Yudhishthira cannot be killed. At this point in time, please tell me what I should do. Listen also to something else that is going on in my mind. O Dasharha! O Keshava! My vow is known to you. If there is any man who tells me, “O
Partha! Give your Gandiva to someone else who is superior to you in weapons,” I must kill him. Bhima also said

he would kill anyone who called him an eunuch. O lion among the Vrishni lineage! In your presence, the king has
asked me to hand over my bow. O Keshava! If I kill him, I will not be able to remain in the world of the living
even for a short instant. O best among those in the world! O best among those who uphold dharma! O Krishna!
Tell me how my pledge remains true and yet, Pandava remains alive. Provide me with the appropriate counsel.’
‘ “Vasudeva replied, ‘The king was exhausted. In particular, in the battle, he was wounded by the large numbers
of sharp arrows that Karna shot at him. O Partha! That is the reason he spoke harsh words to you. Karna is the
stake in the battle today.600 If he is slain, the Kurus will be vanquished. That is what the king, Dharma’s son,
thought. When a person suffers great shame, it is said, that though alive, such a person is dead. You have always
honoured the king, together with Bhima and the twins, and so have the foremost and aged men in this world. You
should offer him a triﬂing insult. O Partha! Address the king as “tvam”.601 O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Having been thus addressed, a senior will be as good as dead. O Kounteya! Act in this way towards Dharmaraja
Yudhishthira. O extender of the Kuru lineage! Adopt this path of adharma. This supreme learning has been laid
down in the sacred texts of Atharva and Angiras.602 Men must always follow this superior course, without thinking about it. O Pandava! Having been addressed by you as “tvam”, Dharmaraja will think that he has been killed.
You can later worship his feet and speak soft and conciliatory words to Partha.603 The Pandaveya king, your
brother, is wise and will never be angered. O Partha! You will be freed from uttering a falsehood and will not have
to kill your brother. You can then cheerfully slay Karna, the son of a suta.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “Having been thus addressed by Janardana, Partha applauded what his well-wisher had told him.
And Arjuna used harsh words towards Dharmaraja, the likes of which he had never spoken earlier. ‘O king!
You604 should not censure me about having withdrawn, since you have yourself been stationed more than one
krosha away from the battle. You should not censure Bhima either. He is ﬁghting with the foremost of the warriors.
At this time, he has been afﬂicted by the enemies in the battle and has slain brave kings. He has killed more than
one thousand elephants, emitting ﬁerce roars like a lion. The brave one has performed an extremely difﬁcult deed.
You605 have never done anything like this. He has jumped down from his chariot. With a supreme club, he has
slaughtered horses, men and elephants in the battle. Using his supreme sword and broken parts of chariots and his
bow, he destroyed horses, chariots, steeds606 and elephants belonging to the enemy. Then again, intolerant and
brave, he struck and killed with his feet and his hands. He is immensely strong and like Vaishravana607 and Yama.
He slew the enemy, as only he can. That Bhimasena has the right to censure me, but not you, who have always
been protected by your well-wishers. Bhima is single-handedly agitating the sons of Dhritarashtra, their maharathas, elephants and the best of horses. That scorcher of enemies has the right to reprimand me. He is killing
large numbers of the enemy, Kalingas, Vangas, Angas, Nishadas, Magadhas and is always as angry as a dark-blue
cloud. He is like an elephant and has the right to speak to me. At the right time, he is riding on his chariot and
brandishing his bow, with his ﬁsts full of arrows. The brave one is releasing a shower of arrows in the great battle,
like a torrent of rain from a cloud. The learned say that speech is the strength of the best of brahmanas and strength
of arms that of kshatriyas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You are cruel and your strength is in speech. You
think that I am also like you. I have always sought to act for your beneﬁt, with my wives, sons and with my own
life and soul. And you have struck a person like me with the arrows of your words. Therefore, we will never be
able to obtain any happiness from you. I have killed maharathas for your sake. But you lie down on Droupadi’s
bed and slight me. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You are suspicious and cruel. Therefore, we will never be
able to know any happiness through you. O lord among men! He608 was always devoted to the truth and in the
battle, for the sake of your welfare, himself told you about the means of his death. Protected by me, Drupada’s
great-souled and brave son, Shikhandi, killed him. Since you are addicted to the vice of gambling, I am not delighted at the prospect of your winning back the kingdom. There are many sins associated with gambling and it is
against dharma. You heard Sahadeva recount them.609 But you have always been addicted to that practice of
wicked ones and that is the reason all of us have been reduced to this hardship. O Indra among kings! It was because of your gambling that the kingdom was lost and our difﬁculties are due to you. O king! O unfortunate one!
Therefore, do not anger us by using these cruel words against us again.’ Savyasachi, who was ﬁrm in his wisdom,

made him listen to these harsh words. But the son of the king of the gods repented this and sighed repeatedly, unsheathing his sword.
‘ “On seeing this, Krishna asked, ‘Why have you unsheathed your sword, which sparkles like the sky, again?
Tell me truthfully and I will give you an answer. I will tell you how you can accomplish your objective.’ Having
been thus asked by the supreme of men, he was extremely distressed and spoke these words to Keshava. ‘I will kill
myself, because I have acted in a wicked way.’610 In an attempt to pacify Partha, the best among the upholders of
dharma spoke these words to Dhananjaya. ‘O Partha! Tell him about your own qualities now. Thereby, you will
kill yourself today.’611 Dhananjaya, Shakra’s son, approved of Krishna’s words and, lowering his bow, spoke
these words to Yudhishthira, supreme among those who uphold dharma. ‘O king! O god among men! Listen. There
is no other archer who is my equal, except the god who wields Pinaka.612 I am revered even by that great-souled
one. In an instant, I can destroy the universe, with its mobile and immobile objects. O king! It is I who vanquished
all the directions and the kings there and brought them under your subjugation. The rajasuya sacriﬁce that you
completed, with donations, and the divine assembly hall that you obtained, were because of my inﬁnite energy.613
The arrows have left marks on my palms, when I afﬁxed arrows to the bow in battle. The soles of my feet bear the
marks of arrows and a standard.614 That is the reason someone like me cannot be defeated in a battle. I have slain
those from the north. I have killed those from the west. I have restrained those from the east. I have destroyed
those from the south. There are only a few of the samshaptakas who remain. I have destroyed half of the entire
army. O king! The soldiers of the Bharatas, with an army like that of the gods, have been slain by me and are lying
down. I will use weapons to kill only those who know about weapons. That is the reason I have not reduced the
world to ashes.’ Having said this, Partha again spoke to Yudhishthira, supreme among the upholders of dharma. ‘O
king! Know this. Today, Radha615 will lose her son, or Kunti will lose me. O king! Be paciﬁed and pardon the the
words that I have spoken. In due course, you will understand what I have told you.’616 The foremost one paciﬁed
the king, who was capable of withstanding all enemies. He stood there, and then again spoke these words. ‘I will
wholeheartedly try to kill the son of a suta and extricate Bhima from the battle. O king! My life is devoted to ensuring your pleasure. Know that this is the truth.’ Having said this, Kiriti, blazing in his energy, touched his feet
and then stood up and said, ‘All this will come to pass very quickly and I will then return to you.’
‘ “On hearing the harsh words of his brother, Phalguna, Dharmaraja Pandava raised himself617 and with his
heart ﬁlled with misery, spoke these words to Partha. ‘O Partha! I have not acted in a way that virtuous ones do.
That is the reason we are confronted with this extremely terrible calamity. Therefore, sever my head today. I am
the worst of men and the exterminator of my lineage. I am wicked and addicted to evil. I am stupid in my intelligence. I am lazy and a coward. I am a man who disrespects those who are superior. What is the point of following
a harsh one like me for a long time? I am wicked and I will retire to the forest today. Without an inferior one like
me, let all of you be happy. The great-souled Bhimasena is ﬁt to be a king. What will a eunuch like me do with a
kingdom? I am incapable of again listening to such harsh words, spoken by you in anger. Let Bhima be the king. O
brave one! Having been insulted, what is the purpose of my remaining alive?’ Having said this, the king suddenly
arose from his bed and prepared to leave for the forest. Vasudeva bowed down to him and said, ‘O king! You know
that the wielder of Gandiva is devoted to the truth and is famous for Gandiva. Any man in the world who asks him
to give Gandiva to another, will be slain by him and lose his body. You spoke such words to him. O lord of the
earth! Wishing to preserve the truth of Partha’s pledge, I asked him to show disrespect towards you. It is said that
disrespect towards one’s seniors is equivalent to death. O mighty-armed one! O king! I asked him to cross you and
you should pardon both Partha and me. O great king! Both of us are seeking refuge with you. O king! We are bowing in obeisance before you and you should pardon us. Today, the earth will drink the blood of the wicked Radheya. I know this to be the truth. Today, the son of a suta will be slain. Today, the one whose death you desire will
pass beyond his span of life.’ Having heard Krishna’s words, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira respectfully raised
Hrishikesha and joining his hands in salutation, affectionately spoke these words. ‘It is exactly as you have said. I
have been guilty of a transgression. O Govinda! I have been taught by you. O Madhava! I have been saved by you.
O Achyuta! Today, we have been saved by you from a terrible calamity and fear. We were immersed in an ocean of
hardship and you have been our protector. We were confused by our terrible ignorance today and have crossed it.

Both618 of us were submerged in an ocean of grief and sorrow and your intelligence has been the raft. O Achyuta!
We have an adviser. We have a protector and we have crossed it.’” ’

Chapter 1200(50)
‘S anjaya said, “Having heard the words spoken by Krishna to the noble Yudhishthira, Partha became cheerless in
his mind, since he had committed a wicked deed. Vasudeva laughed and spoke to him. ‘O Partha! How would you
have felt had you, established in dharma, used you sharp sword to slay Dharma’s son? You have only spoken to the
king and are overcome by this lassitude. O Partha! Had you killed the king, what would you have done next? It is
extremely difﬁcult to know dharma, especially by those who are stupid in their understanding. You are scared of
dharma and there is no doubt that you would have suffered greater misery. Had you killed your elder brother, you
would have gone to a terrible hell. The king is foremost among those who uphold dharma. He is devoted to dharma. Pacify the best of the Kurus now. That is my view. Once you pacify him devotedly, King Yudhishthira will be
pleased. We can then swiftly advance towards the chariot of the son of a suta to ﬁght. Karna is extremely difﬁcult
to defeat. But he will be killed by your sharp arrows. O one who grants honours! Dharma’s son will be ﬁlled with
great delight. O mighty-armed one! It is my view that the time has come for this. Having accomplished this task,
your objective will be attained.’ O great king! O unblemished one! At this, ﬁlled with shame, Arjuna touched
Dharmaraja’s feet with his head. He repeatedly said, ‘O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Forgive me. O king!
Pardon what I have spoken because of my fear about dharma.’ O bull among the Bharata lineage! Dharmaraja
Yudhishthira saw that Dhananjaya, the destroyer of enemies, was prone at his feet and was weeping.
‘ “King Dharmaraja raised his brother, Dhananjaya. Having embraced him with affection, the lord of the earth
wept. Those two immensely radiant brothers wept for a long time. Having overcome their sorrow, those two tigers
among men became cheerful again. He affectionately inhaled the fragrance of Pandava’s head.619 Filled with
great delight, he smiled and spoke to Jaya.620 ‘O mighty-armed one! O great archer! Though I made every effort
in the battle, while all the soldiers looked on, Karna used his arrows to deprive me of my armour, my standard, my
bow, my javelin, my horses and my club. O Phalguna! Having known and seen his deeds in the battle, I have been
overcome with great grief and am no longer fond of remaining alive. O brave one! If you do not kill the son of a
suta today, I will give up my life. What is the point of my remaining alive?’ O bull among the Bharata lineage!
Having been thus addressed, Vijaya replied, ‘O king! O best of men! O lord of the earth! Through your favours, I
swear on you, Bhima and the twins that I will slay Karna in the battle today, or be killed by him. I swear on my
weapons that I will bring him down on the ground.’ Having spoken these words to the king, he spoke these words
to Madhava. ‘O Krishna! There is no doubt that I will slay Karna in the battle today. O fortunate one! With your
blessings, the death of that evil-souled one is certain.’ O supreme among kings! Having been thus addressed, Keshava spoke to Partha. ‘O foremost among the Bharata lineage! You are capable of doing this. O maharatha! This
has always been my desire. I have always thought about the means whereby you can kill Karna in the battle.’ The
intelligent Madhava again spoke to Dharma’s son. ‘O Yudhishthira! You should console Bibhatsu. With your permission, he will kill the evil-souled Karna today. O descendant of the Pandava lineage! On hearing that you were
afﬂicted by Karna’s arrows, we returned here to ascertain your welfare. O king! It is through good fortune that you
are well and have not been seized. O unblemished one! For the sake of Bibhatsu’s victory, console him.’ Yudhishthira replied, ‘O Partha! O Bibhatsu! O Pandava! Come and embrace me. You spoke beneﬁcial words to me.
You have been forgiven by me. O Dhananjaya! I give you permission to go and kill Karna. O Partha! Do not be
angry at the terrible words that I have spoken to you.’ O king! O venerable one! At this, Dhananjaya bowed his
head down before his elder brother and grasped his feet with his hands. The king raised the sorrowing one and embraced him.
‘ “He inhaled the fragrance of his head and again spoke these words. ‘O Dhananjaya! O mighty-armed one! I
have been greatly honoured by you. May you again attain victory and eternal greatness.’ Arjuna replied, ‘Radheya

is evil in his deeds and insolent about his strength. I will approach him in the battle and slay him, and his relatives,
with arrows. He stretched a ﬁrm bow and afﬂicted you with arrows. Karna will reap the terrible consequence of
that deed today. O lord of the earth! Having slain Karna today, I will return to you. I will give you the good news
and follow you. I tell you this truthfully. Without killing Karna today, I will not return I am touching your feet and
telling you this truthfully.’ Having paciﬁed Dharmaraja, Partha was cheerful in his mind. Prepared to kill the son of
a suta, Partha spoke to Govinda. ‘Prepare the chariot again and yoke the best of horses. Let the great chariot be
equipped with all the weapons. Get horse riders to cover the well-trained horses. Let all kinds of equipment quickly be arranged on the chariot.’ O great king! Having been thus addressed by the great-souled Phalguna, Krishna
told Daruka,621 ‘Do everything that Arjuna, foremost among the Bharatas and best among all archers, has asked
to be done.’ O supreme among kings! Having been instructed by Krishna, Daruka yoked and covered the chariot,
which scorched the enemy, with the skins of tigers. The chariot was yoked by the great-souled Daruka. He622
sought Dharmaraja’s leave and the blessings of the brahmanas. With auspicious rites and benedictions, he ascended that supreme chariot. The immensely wise King Dharmaraja Yudhishthira blessed him, supremely delighted at
the prospect of Karna’s death.
‘ “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing the great archer depart, all the beings thought that Karna had
already been slain by the great-souled Pandava. O king! On every side, all the directions sparkled. O lord of men!
At that time, blue jays, shatapatras623 and curlews circumambulated the descendant of the Pandu lineage. There
were many other sacred and auspicious male birds.624 They were cheerful in form and seemed to urge Arjuna to
hurry to the ﬁeld of battle. O lord of the earth! Herons, vultures, crows and wild crows advanced in front of him,
wishing to devour,625 and signiﬁed an ominous portent. The signs were good and auspicious for Partha. They signiﬁed the destruction and death of Karna’s soldiers. As Partha advanced, he perspired copiously. He was extremely
anxious about how he would accomplish his objective.
‘ “On seeing that Partha was overcome with anxiety as he proceeded, Madhusudana spoke to the wielder of
Gandiva. ‘O wielder of Gandiva! With this bow, you have defeated those in battle, whom no other man is capable
of vanquishing. We have seen many brave ones, equal to Shakra in their valour. Having encountered you in a battle, those brave ones have attained the supreme objective. O venerable one! Whether it is Drona, Bhishma, Bhagadatta, Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti, Sudakshina from Kamboja, Shrutayusha and the immensely valorous
Achyutayusha, none of them have been able to do anything against you. There is no one who can withstand you.
You possess celestial weapons. You are dexterous and strong. O Arjuna! You aim, strike and hit the target with
yoga. You are not confused in a battle and know about what must be done. You are capable of killing all the gods
and asuras, together with everything mobile and immobile. O Partha! There is no warrior or man on this earth who
is equal to you in a battle. There are kshatriyas who pick up bows and are invincible in battle. But I have not seen,
or heard of, anyone like you among them, or among the supreme gods. Brahma, the creator of all beings, constructed the extremely wonderful Gandiva.626 O Partha! This is what you use to ﬁght and that is the reason there
is no one who is your equal. O Pandava! However, I must speak words that are beneﬁcial for you. O mighty-armed
one! Do not think lightly of Karna. He is the ornament of a battle. Karna is strong and insolent. He is skilled in
weapons and a maharatha. He is accomplished and colourful in ﬁghting. He knows about time and place.627 He is
like the ﬁre in his energy. He is like the wind in his speed. He is like Yama in his anger. The powerful one is capable of withstanding a lion. The mighty-armed one’s chest is one aratni in breadth.628 He is extremely difﬁcult to
defeat. He is very proud and brave. He is extremely valiant and handsome. He has all the qualities of a warrior and
is terrible to his enemies. He has always hated the Pandavas and has been engaged in the welfare of the sons of
Dhritarashtra. Radheya cannot be killed by any enemy, even the gods, including Vasava. In my view, you are the
only exception. Today, slay the son of a suta. All the warriors made out of ﬂesh and blood, and even the gods, are
incapable of defeating him in a battle, even if they were to unite. The evil-souled one is wicked in intelligence. He
is cruel. His evil intelligence has always been used to bring injury to the Pandaveyas. He has opposed the Pandaveyas. Kill Karna today and accomplish your objective. He thinks himself to be brave, as does the wicked Suyodhana. He is the root of all wickedness. O Dhananjaya! Defeat the son of a suta.’” ’

Chapter 1201(51)
‘S anjaya said, “Keshava, immeasurable in his soul, again spoke these words to Arjuna, who, in every way, had
ﬁrmed up his resolution to kill Karna. ‘O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Today is the seventeenth day629 of
this extremely terrible destruction of men, elephants and horses. Those on your side possessed an extremely large
army and so did the enemy. O lord of the earth! Having clashed against each other in the battle, only remnants are
left on both sides. O Partha! The Kouravas possessed innumerable elephants and horses. Having encountered you
as an enemy, they have been destroyed in the ﬁeld of battle. All these Panchalas, the Srinjayas and the others are
unassailable. They united and stationed themselves with the Pandavas. O slayer of enemies! Protected by you, the
Panchalas, the Pandavas, the Matsyas, the Karushas, the Chedis and the Kekayas caused a great destruction of the
enemy. O son!630 In a battle, who is capable of vanquishing the assembled Kouravas, other than the maharatha
Pandavas, who are protected by you in the encounter? You are capable of defeating the gods, asuras and men in a
battle, even if the three worlds rise up against you, not to speak of the army of the Kouravas. O tiger among men!
Who other than you was capable of vanquishing King Bhagadatta, who was Vasava’s equal? O Partha! O unblemished one! This large army has been protected by you and all the kings are incapable of even glancing at it. O
Partha! It is because they have always been protected by you that Dhrishtadyumna and Shikhandi could bring
down Bhishma and Drona in the battle. O Partha! Otherwise, in the battle, how could those two maharatha Panchalas have defeated Bhishma and Drona in an encounter? They were like Shakra in their valour. In a battle, who
could have withstood Shantanu’s son,631 Drona, Vaikartana, Kripa, Drona’s son, Somadatta’s son,632 Kritavarma,
Saindhava,633 the king of Madra and King Suyodhana? They were brave and skilled in the use of weapons in a
battle. None of them retreated. They were the leaders of akshouhinis. They were ﬁerce, angry and unassailable in a
battle. Many arrays have been destroyed. Horses, chariots and elephants have been exhausted. There were ﬁerce
and intolerant kshatriyas from many kingdoms. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were Govasas,
Dasamiyas, Vasatis, Vratyas, Vatadhanas and the proud Bhojas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! That large
army was destroyed in Brahmakshetra.634 Having clashed against you, they advanced towards death, with their
horses, chariots and elephants. There were Tukharas, Yavanas, Khashas, Darvabhisaras, Daradas, Shakas, Ramathas, Tanganas, Andhrakas, Pulindas, Kiratas who are terrible in their valour, mlecchas, those from the mountainous regions and those who live on the boundaries of the ocean. They were ﬁerce and the performers of terrible
deeds. They were insolent, delighted in battle and were strong, with ﬁrm ﬁsts. For Suyodhana’s sake, they angrily
sided with the Kurus. O scorcher of enemies! Other than you, no one else was capable of defeating them in a battle. We saw the immensely strong formations of the sons of Dhritarashtra being destroyed. Without you as a protector, which man could have advanced against that? That army, covered with dust, looked like a swollen ocean. O
lord! Protected by you, the angry Pandavas shattered and destroyed it. Jayatsena, the lord of Magadha, was immensely strong. Since he was killed in the battle by Abhimanyu, seven days have passed.635 There were ten thousand elephants, terrible in their deeds, which followed the king.636 Bhima killed them with his club. Using his
great force, he destroyed hundreds of other elephants and chariots. O son!637 Thus did the extremely fearful battle
continue. O Pandava! Having encountered Bhimasena and you, with their horses, chariots and elephants, the
Kouravas went to the world of the dead. O Partha! The vanguard of the army was destroyed by the Pandavas. O
venerable one! Bhishma showered down ﬁerce arrows. He was skilled in the use of harsh weapons and enveloped
and killed the Chedis, the Kashis, the Panchalas, the Karushas, the Matsyas and the Kekayas with his arrows. Arrows issued from his bow and mangled the bodies of the enemy. Those gold-tufted arrows covered the entire sky.

Having followed the tenth direction, they slew horses, rathas and elephants.638 Those arrows were released so that
they avoided those nine undesirable directions. Bhishma slaughtered your troops for ten days. He emptied the seats
of chariots and killed horses, elephants and steeds.639 He showed a form in battle that was like that of Rudra or
Upendra.640 He afﬂicted the Pandava soldiers and caused great destruction. He slaughtered kings from Panchala,
Chedi and Kekaya. He destroyed the Pandava army, which teemed with men, horses and elephants. It was as if he
was rescuing the wicked Suyodhana, who was submerged in an ocean without a raft. He roamed around in the battle, scorching like the sun. The Srinjayas and the other kings were incapable of glancing towards him. Desiring
victory, he roamed around in the battle. However, the Pandavas made every effort and attacked him violently. He
single-handedly drove the Pandavas and the Srinjayas away in the encounter and came to be regarded as the only
one who was brave. Shikhandi was protected by you and killed the maharatha, tiger among men, with his sharp
and straight-tufted arrows. The grandfather was brought down in that way and is lying down on a bed of arrows. O
tiger among men! Having encountered you, he was like a crow clashing against a vulture. Drona fought ﬁercely for
ﬁve days, destroying the army of the enemy. He constructed a vyuha in the great battle and brought down maharathas. The maharatha protected Jayadratha in the battle. When ﬁghting took place during the night,641 he was
as ﬁerce as Yama and consumed beings. Bharadvaja’s powerful and brave son clashed against Dhrishtadyumna and
attained the supreme objective. Today is the second day after that. On that day’s battle, had you not checked the
enemy in the encounter, the son of a suta and the other rathas, Drona would not have been killed. You restrained
the entire army of the sons of Dhritarashtra. O Dhananjaya! That is how Parshata killed Drona in the battle. Which
other kshatriya would have been able to accomplish this in the battle? O Partha! That is also the way you accomplished the death of Jayadratha. You countered the large army and killed the brave kings. King Saindhava was
killed through the strength of your weapons and your energy. The kings know that the death of the king of Sindhu
was extraordinary. O Partha! But since you know that you are a maharatha, it wasn’t that wonderful. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! If all these kshatriyas clash against you, I think they will be tormented by you and killed on
a single day. That is my view. O Partha! With the likes of Bhishma and Drona killed, this extremely ﬁerce army of
the sons of Dhritarashtra can be regarded as having lost all its brave warriors in the battle. The best of warriors
have been destroyed. Horses, men and elephants have been killed. The army of the Bharatas is like the sky without
radiance, devoid of the sun, the moon and the stars. O Partha! Because of Bhima’s valour, the army has been devastated in the battle, like the army of the asuras through Shakra’s valour in ancient times.
‘ “‘Other than those who have been slain, only ﬁve maharathas remain—Ashvatthama, Kritavarma, Karna, the
lord of Madra and Kripa. O tiger among men! If you kill those ﬁve maharathas today, you will destroy the enemies
and give the kingdom, with its islands and cities, to the king. Let Partha,642 whose energy and prosperity are inﬁnite, obtain the earth, with its sky, waters, the nether regions, mountains and large forests. Just as Vishnu killed
daityas and danavas in earlier times, you will give the earth to the king, like Hari643 to Shakra. With the enemies
slain by you today, the Panchalas will rejoice, like the gods when the danavas were slain by Vishnu. Do not honour
your preceptor Drona, foremost among men, and show compassion towards Ashvatthama, or show mercy towards
Kripa because of the honour due to a preceptor, or show excessive respect towards your relatives and honour your
brothers,644 or encounter Kritavarma and don’t convey him to Yama’s abode, or clash against your mother’s
brother, Shalya, the lord of Madra,645 and not strike him down and kill him because of compassion. Karna is evilminded and extremely injurious towards the Pandavas. O best of men! Kill him today with your sharp arrows. This
is your supreme task and there is nothing wrong in it. We applaud this and there is no sin attached to it. O unblemished one! O Arjuna! Whether it was the attempt to burn down your mother with her sons in the night,646 or whatever Suyodhana attempted towards you in the course of the gambling match, the evil-souled Karna was the root of
all that. Suyodhana always thought that he would be saved by Karna and angrily tried to seize me too.647 O one
who grants honours! It is the ﬁrm belief of that Indra among men, Dhritarashtra’s son, that Karna will certainly defeat all the Parthas in battle. O Kounteya! Though Dhritarashtra’s son knew about your strength, he found pleasure
in a conﬂict with you because he depended on Karna. Karna has always said, “I will defeat the assembled Parthas,
Vasudeva and the kings in the great battle.” The evil-minded one has encouraged Dhritarashtra’s evil-souled son

and roared in the assembly hall. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Kill Karna today. In all the evil acts that
Dhritarashtra’s son has done towards you, in all of these, the evil-souled and extremely wicked Karna has been
present. Subhadra’s brave son had the eyes of a bull. We saw him killed by six cruel maharathas on the side of the
sons of Dhritarashtra.648 The brave maharatha made Drona, Drona’s son and Kripa tremble. The maharatha made
elephants and chariots bereft of men. His shoulders were like that of a bull and he brought fame to the Kuru and
Vrishni lineages. He deprived steeds of horse riders and foot soldiers of weapons and lives. He destroyed the soldiers and maharathas. He conveyed large numbers of men, horses and elephants to Yama’s eternal abode. Subhadra’s son advanced, scorching the army with his arrows. O friend! O lord! I tell you truthfully that my limbs
burn at the thought that even then, the evil-souled Karna attacked him. In that battle, he was unable to remain in
front of Abhimanyu. He was mangled by the arrows of Subhadra’s son. He was unconscious and blood ﬂowed
from his body. He blazed and sighed in rage. However, afﬂicted by the arrows, he retreated. He retreated and lost
all enterprise. He gave up all hope of remaining alive. He was supremely unconscious in that battle and exhausted
because of the blows. Hearing the appropriate, but cruel, words of Drona in the battle then, Karna severed his bow.
When he was devoid of weapons in that battle, ﬁve maharathas, skilled in deceit, killed him with their showers of
arrows. In front of the Pandaveyas and the Kurus, Karna spoke harsh and cruel words to Krishna649 in the assembly hall. “O Krishna! The Pandavas have been destroyed and have gone to eternal hell. O wide-hipped one! O one
who is sweet in speech! Choose another one as a husband. Enter Dhritarashtra’s abode as a servant-maid. O one
with long eyelashes! Your husbands are no longer there.” He does not know about dharma and is extremely evilminded. Those were the words that he spoke then. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Karna spoke those wicked
and sinful words in your hearing. Those were the evil one’s words. Arrows decorated with gold, sharpened on
stone and capable of taking away life, released by you, will pacify those words and other wicked deeds that the
evil-souled one has done towards you. Let your arrows rob him of his life and pacify those and other things today.
Let his limbs be touched by terrible arrows shot from Gandiva. Let the evil-souled Karna remember the words of
Bhishma and Drona. Let gold-tufted iron arrows, capable of killing the enemy and with the radiance of lightning,
be shot by you. Let them pierce his inner organs and drink his blood. O Arjuna! Let ﬁerce, immensely forceful and
sharp arrows be shot by you and let them penetrate his inner organs. Strike Karna with great force and convey him
to Yama’s eternal abode. Let all the lords of the earth see Karna brought down from his chariot, oppressed by your
arrows. Let them utter woes of lamentation and let them be miserable and distressed. Let all his well-wishers see
Karna prostrate, deprived of his weapons. Let them be cheerless on seeing him shattered, drenched in his own
blood and lying down on the ground. The standard of Adhiratha’s son is large and is marked with the sign of an
elephant’s harness. Let it shudder and fall down on the ground, uprooted by you with a broad-headed arrow. When
the gold-decorated chariot is shattered with hundreds of your arrows, with its warrior slain, let the terriﬁed Shalya
abandon it and run away. O Dhananjaya! Let Suyodhana see that Adhiratha’s son has been killed by you and give
up all hope of the kingdom, or of remaining alive. The Panchalas are being slaughtered and driven away by Karna’s sharp arrows. O best of the Bharata lineage! But wishing to serve the Pandavas, the Panchalas, Droupadi’s
sons, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Dhrishtadyumna’s sons, Nakula’s son Shatanika, Nakula, Sahadeva, Durmukha,
Janamejaya, Sudharma and Satyaki are succumbing to Karna. Karna is attacking the Panchalas in the great battle.
O scorcher of enemies! Uttered by your relatives, a terrible roar can be heard. The Panchalas are not frightened.
Nor are they unwilling to ﬁght. Those maharathas, great archers, are not concerned about death in this battle. Single-handedly, Bhishma surrounded the Pandava soldiers with his torrents of arrows. But even then, the Panchalas
clashed against him and did not retreat. The preceptor, Drona, was energetic and his blazing weapons were like the
ﬁre. He scorched all the archers in battle and was unassailable. Those scorchers of enemies650 always tried to
cheerfully defeat that foe in the encounter. The Panchalas will never be terriﬁed and retreat before Adhiratha’s son.
The brave Panchalas spiritedly advanced against him and Karna is destroying them with his arrows, like insects
before a ﬁre. For the sake of their friends, those brave ones are advancing, ready to give up their lives. However, in
the battle, Radheya is bringing destruction to hundreds of Panchalas. Karna obtained a weapon from Bhargava
Rama, supreme among rishis in earlier times, and it has exhibited its extremely terrible and calamitous form. Its
form is ﬁerce and extremely terrible and it is scorching all the soldiers. Blazing in its energy, it has surrounded the

large army.651 The arrows released from Karna’s bow are traversing in the ﬁeld of battle. They are tormenting
those on your side, like a storm of bees. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having encountered Karna’s irresistible weapon in the battle, the weak-spirited among the Panchalas are seen to run away in all the directions. O
Partha! Bhima is ﬁrm in his anger and, surrounded by the Srinjayas on all sides, is ﬁghting with Karna. However,
he is oppressed by his sharp arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Pandavas, Srinjayas and Panchalas,
will be slain by Karna, like a body destroyed by a disease that has been neglected. Amongst all the warriors in
Yudhishthira’s army, with your exception, I do not see a single one who can clash against Radheya and return safely home. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Slay him with your sharp arrows today. O Partha! Act according to the
oath you had taken earlier and obtain fame. O foremost among warriors! You are the one who is capable of defeating Karna and the Kouravas in battle, and no other warrior. I am telling you this truthfully. Perform the great deed
of killing maharatha Karna. O Partha! O supreme among men! Be successful in your objective and be happy.’” ’

Chapter 1202(52)
‘S anjaya said, “O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing the words spoken by Keshava, Bibhatsu cast off
his sorrow and in a short instant, became cheerful. He quickly touched the bowstring and stretched Gandiva bow
for the sake of Karna’s destruction. He spoke to Keshava. ‘O Govinda! Protected by you, my victory is certain.
You are the lord of the past, the present and the future and you are pleased with me. O Krishna! With you as my
aide, I can kill the three worlds and attain the supreme world in a battle, not to speak of Karna. O Janardana! I can
see that the army of the Panchalas is being driven away. I can see Karna roaming around fearlessly in the encounter. I can see Bhargava’s weapon coursing in every direction. O Varshneya! It has been released by Karna, like
the great vajra by Shakra. O Krishna! But as long as the earth exists, beings will talk about what will be done by
me in the battle. O Krishna! Today, my arrows without barbs will convey Karna to the land of the dead. They will
be released and shot from Gandiva and dispatched by my arms. Today, King Dhritarashtra will curse his intelligence, as a result of which, he instated Duryodhana in the kingdom, though he did not deserve the kingdom. O
mighty-armed one! Today, Dhritarashtra will be deprived of his kingdom, his happiness, his prosperity, his kingdom, his city and his sons. Today, King Duryodhana will lose all hope of remaining alive. O Krishna! Karna will
be slain. I am telling you this truthfully. On seeing Karna mangled by my arrows, the lord of men652 will remember the words that you had spoken about peace. O Krishna! Today let Soubala know that my arrows are dice, Gandiva is the box used to throw them and my chariot the spread on which the game is played. In a battle, the son of a
suta thinks that there is no other man who is equal to him on earth. Let the earth drink his blood today. Released
from Gandiva, they653 will grant Karna the supreme objective. Today, Radheya will repent the words that he
spoke to Panchali. In the midst of the assembly hall, he spoke cruel words and cast aspersions on the Pandavas.
They were described as sterile sesamum seeds then,654 but will turn out to be sesamum today, when Vaikartana
Karna, the evil-souled son of a suta, has been killed. He said, “I will save you655 from fear about the sons of Pandu.” My sharp arrows will render his words false. He said, “I will kill all the Pandavas and their sons.” While all
the archers look on, I will kill that Karna today. Resorting to his valour, the great-minded656 son of Dhritarashtra,
evil-souled and evil in his intelligence, always disregarded us. O Madhusudana! I will kill that Radheya Karna today. O Krishna! When Karna has been killed today, the sons of Dhritarashtra and the kings will be terriﬁed and run
away in different directions, like deer frightened of a lion. King Duryodhana will see the earth, with Karna killed
by me in the battle today, with his sons and his well-wishers. O Krishna! On seeing that Karna has been killed,
Dhritarashtra’s intolerant son will know me to be the foremost among all archers in a battle. O Krishna! Today, I
will repay the debt I owe to all wielders of the bow, to my anger, to the Kurus, to my arrows and to Gandiva. Today, I will free myself of the sorrow I have borne for thirteen years. O Krishna! I will kill Karna in the battle, like
Maghavan against Shambara.657 Today, when Karna has been slain in the battle, the Somaka maharathas, who
wish to serve their friends in the battle, will think that their task has been accomplished. O Madhava! I do not
know whether Shini’s descendant will be more delighted at Karna having been killed, or at the prospect of victory.
In the battle, I will kill Karna and his maharatha son and bring delight to Bhima, the twins and Satyaki. O Madhava! Having slain Karna in the great battle today, I will free myself of the debt I owe to Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi
and the Panchalas. The wrathful Dhananjaya will be seen in the battle today, ﬁghting with the Kouravas in the encounter and bringing down the son of a suta. In your presence, let me again indulge in self-praise. In the world,
there is no one who is my equal in knowledge of dhanurveda. Where is the person who is my equal in valour? Is
there anyone else who is as forgiving as me? There is no one else who is my equal in anger. With the bow in my
hand and resorting to the strength of my arms, I can defeat the gods, the asuras and all the beings united together.

Know that my manliness is supreme among the best. With the arrows from Gandiva, which are like rays, I alone
will consume all the Kurus, Bahlikas and Kashis, with large numbers of their followers, like the ﬁre burning dead
wood at the end of winter. The arrows have left marks on my palms. An arrow is afﬁxed to the left of the bow. The
soles of my feet have the marks of a chariot and a standard. When someone like me advances into a battle, he cannot be vanquished.’” ’

Chapter 1203(53)
‘S anjaya said, “Their soldiers possessed large standards and advanced, swelling in
numbers. Trumpets and other musical instruments blared in the vanguard, like large
masses of clouds roaring at the end of summer. The mighty elephants were like
clouds. There were the sounds of musical instruments, axles and the slapping of
palms. The colourful weapons, decorated with gold, were like lightning. The giant
chariots raised a mighty sound. Currents of blood began to ﬂow with a great
force.658 It was full of swords and bore along the lives of kshatriyas. There was
carnage of beings, cruel, like a shower at the wrong time that brings destruction.
Chariots, charioteers, horses and elephants and all the other enemies were made to
die by Partha’s storm of arrows. He killed horses with their riders and large numbers of foot soldiers. Kripa and Shikhandi clashed against each other in the battle
and Satyaki attacked Duryodhana. Shrutashrava fought with Drona’s son and Yudhamanyu with Chitrasena. Uttamouja from the Srinjayas clashed against Karna’s
son, the ratha Sushena. Sahadeva rushed against the king of Gandhara, like a hungry lion attacking a giant bull. The young Shatanika, Nakula’s son, attacked Karna’s son, the young Vrishasena, with a storm of arrows. Karna’s brave son struck
the Panchala with many showers of arrows.659 Madri’s son, Nakula, colourful in
ﬁghting and a bull among rathas, attacked Kritavarma. Yajnasena’s son, the lord of
Panchala,660 attacked Karna, the overall commander, and his soldiers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With the army of the Bharatas, extended by the arrays
of the samshaptakas, Duhshasana attacked Bhima, supreme among wielders of
weapons and unassailable because of his force, in the battle. The brave Uttamouja
attacked Karna’s son and severed his head, which fell down on the ground. He then
roared loudly and that sound echoed in the sky. On seeing that Sushena’s head had
fallen down on the ground, Karna adopted a fearful form. He used extremely sharp
arrows to sever his661 horses, chariot and standard. Uttamouja used sharp arrows
to strike Kripa and used a radiant sword to slay his horses and parshni charioteers.
He then ascended Shikhandi’s chariot. Shikhandi was stationed on his own chariot.

On seeing that Kripa was without a chariot, Shikhandi wished to strike him with
arrows. However, Drona’s son repulsed him with his chariot. He saved Kripa, who
was submerged, like a cow in mud. Meanwhile, Bhima was clad in golden armour
and used his sharp arrows to torment the soldiers of your son. He was like the sun,
at the auspicious time when it is midday.” ’

Chapter 1204(54)
‘S anjaya said, “While that tumultuous engagement was going on, Bhima was ﬁghting alone and countering the
army of the sons of Dhritarashtra. He was surrounded by large numbers of the enemy. In that situation of great
fear, he told his charioteer, ‘O charioteer! Bear me swiftly on these horses. I will send all the sons of Dhritarashtra
to Yama.’ Having been thus addressed by Bhimasena, the charioteer advanced with a ﬁerce speed against the army
of your son, that is, towards the army that Bhima wished to advance against. A large number of Kurus advanced
against him from every direction and the enemy possessed elephants, chariots, horses and foot soldiers. With innumerable arrows, they powerfully struck the best of horses from every side. The great-souled one severed those descending arrows with his gold-tufted arrows. Those gold-tufted arrows were severed into two and three fragments
by the arrows released by Bhima and fell down.662 O king! In the midst of the kings on your side, elephants,
rathas, horses and foot soldiers were slain by Bhima and roared loudly. O Indra among men! They were like mountains shattered by the thunder. The foremost among kings were shattered by Bhimasena, who was single-handed.
In that encounter, they rushed against Bhima from every side, like birds in search of ﬂowers heading towards a
tree. When they attacked him, in the midst of your soldiers, he663 exhibited a force that was greater than the greatest. He was like the Destroyer at the time of destruction. He was the like the one who exterminates all beings, with
a staff in his hand.664 In that battle, his speed was greater than that of the greatest. Those on your side could not
withstand it. It was as if the one who destroys all beings, when the time of destruction has arrived, had descended
with a gaping mouth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, the great-souled one scorched the army of
the Bharatas. They were frightened of Bhima and ﬂed in different directions, like large masses of clouds driven
away by a great wind.
‘ “The intelligent and powerful Bhimasena then spoke cheerfully to his charioteer again. ‘O suta! Chariots and
standards have assembled and are advancing towards us. Find out whether they belong to the enemy or to us. Since
I am engaged in ﬁghting, I cannot make out. I should not envelop our own soldiers with arrows. O Vishoka!665 I
see the enemy on all sides and I am extremely anxious that the king666 should not be suffering. Kiriti has not yet
returned. O suta! That is the reason I am overcome by great sorrow. O charioteer! I am grieving that Dharmaraja
has abandoned me in the midst of the enemy and has departed. I do not know whether he and Bibhatsu are alive or
dead. That is the reason I am overcome with grief. However, I will assume a terrible form and drive away these
soldiers. Once they have been destroyed, I shall rejoice. Stationed in the midst of the enemy, I will slay the assembled ones. Then, I will rejoice with you. Count all the quivers and arrows and tell me. How many arrows are still
left on my chariot? What kinds are there and what is their length? O suta! Determine this and tell me.’ Vishoka
replied, ‘O brave one! There are sixty thousand arrows, ten thousand kshurapra arrows and the same number of
broad-headed arrows. O brave one! There are two thousand iron arrows. O Partha! There are three thousand
pradaras.667 O Pandaveya! The weapons that still remain cannot be carried on six carts pulled by bullocks. Release these and others in thousands. You possess clubs, swords, your arms and other stores.’ Bhima said, ‘O suta!
Behold. In this awful engagement today, I will shatter all the kings with my speed and force. In the encounter, my
ﬁerce arrows will be terrible in form. The sun will disappear and it will be like the world of the dead. O suta! The
kings will know this today, and so will their sons, that Bhima has been submerged in this battle and has singlehandedly vanquished the Kurus in the encounter. All the Kurus will be destroyed in the battle, or let the worlds
know about my deeds since childhood.668 Single-handedly, I will bring all of them down or let all of them crush
Bhimasena. There are those who pronounce benedictions on virtuous deeds. Let those gods bless me. Let Arjuna,
the slayer of enemies, come here, like Shakra swiftly summoned to a sacriﬁce. Behold. The army of the Bharatas

has been shattered. Why are those Indras among men running away? It is evident that the intelligent Savyasachi,
foremost among men, has shrouded the soldiers with his swift arrows. O Vishoka! Behold. The standards are being
routed in the battle, and so are the large numbers of elephants, horses and infantry. The chariots are being shattered, afﬂicted by arrows and javelins, and so are the rathas. O suta! Behold. The Kourava soldiers are being severely slaughtered and destroyed. Dhananjaya’s force is like that of the vajra, and his golden arrows, tufted with
the feathers of peacocks and hawks, are devouring them. The chariots, horses and elephants are being driven away.
Large numbers of foot soldiers are being crushed. All the Kouravas are confounded. The terriﬁed elephants are
running away, as if from a conﬂagration. O Vishoka! Sounds of lamentation are arising in the battle. Kings among
elephants are emitting loud shrieks.’ Vishoka replied, ‘O Pandava! All your desires have come true. In the midst of
the elephant arrays, the standard with the ape can be seen. Behold. Like lightning ﬂashing amidst blue clouds, the
bow is being extended there. Astride the top of Dhananjaya’s standard, the ape can be seen from every direction.
The celestial gem on the diadem is as radiant as the rays of the sun.669 Alongside, behold the terrible and extremely loud blare of Devadatta, pale in complexion.670 Janardana has the reins in his hand. He is driving through the
army of the enemy. Behold. Next to Janardana is his chakra, increasing Keshava’s fame. It is sharp at the edges
and is like the sun in complexion. Its handle is like the vajra. It is always worshipped by the Yadus. O brave one!
Behold.’ Bhima said, ‘O charioteer! Because you have pleased me greatly and given me good news, I will give
you fourteen supreme villages, one hundred maidservants and twenty chariots. O Vishoka! You have given me
news about Arjuna.’” ’

Chapter 1205(55)
‘S anjaya said, “In the battle, hearing the clatter of chariots and roars of lions, Arjuna asked Govinda to drive the
horses quickly. On hearing Arjuna’s words, Govinda told Arjuna, ‘I am proceeding extremely swiftly to the spot
where Bhima is stationed.’ The horses that were as white as snow, or conch shells, advanced. The harnesses were
decorated with golds, pearls and jewels. It was as if the lord of the gods was advancing in great anger, grasping the
vajra, desiring victory and wishing to kill Jambha.671 There was a large number of chariots, horses, elephants and
foot soldiers, accompanied by the whizzing sound of arrows and the clatter of hooves. The earth and the directions
echoed with the sound. Angrily, they advanced against Jaya, lion among men. There was a great clash between
them and Partha. That great encounter brought destruction to bodies and lives. It was like that between the asuras
and the god Vishnu, supreme among victorious ones, ﬁghting over the lordship of the three worlds. The diademed
and garlanded one was alone. But he severed all their superior and inferior weapons. With sharp arrows that were
like the razor and in the shape of a half-moon, he severed many of their heads and arms and also their umbrellas,
whisks, fans and standards. Large numbers of horses, rathas, foot soldiers and elephants shrieked and fell down in
diverse ways, assuming mutilated forms. They were like a forest shattered by a storm. There were giant elephants
decorated with golden nets. They had been prepared for war, with standards signifying victory. They were mangled
by gold-tufted arrows and looked like blazing mountains. With supreme arrows that were like Vasava’s vajra, he
shattered elephants, chariots and horses. He then advanced swiftly, wishing to kill Karna, just as in ancient times,
the lord of the Maruts had advanced to shatter Bala.672 O scorcher of enemies! That mighty-armed tiger among
men penetrated the army of the son of a suta, like a makara entering the ocean. O king! On seeing this, those on
your side attacked Pandava, with chariots and foot soldiers and a large number of elephant riders and horse riders.
As they advanced against Partha, they created an extremely loud noise, like the sound made by the waters of a turbulent ocean. In the battle, those maharathas were like tigers. Ready to give up their lives and abandoning fear,
they attacked that tiger among men. They descended there, showering down arrows. However, Arjuna scattered
those soldiers, like clouds dispelled by a strong storm. Those large numbers of rathas were great archers and strikers. They advanced against Arjuna and pierced him with sharp arrows. However, using his arrows, Arjuna dispatched thousands of rathas, elephants and horses towards Yama’s abode. In that battle, they were slaughtered by
arrows released from Partha’s bow. As fear was generated in the maharathas, they started to melt away. Using his
sharp arrows, Arjuna conveyed four hundred brave maharathas, who were endeavouring, to Yama’s abode. In the
battle, they were slain by arrows of many different forms. In their fear, they abandoned Arjuna and ﬂed in different
directions. As they ﬂed, a great uproar arose in the vanguard of the army. O fortunate one! It was like that made by
the giant ocean when it dashes against a mountain. That army was severely routed and driven away by Arjuna’s
arrows. O venerable one! Partha then advanced in the direction of the army of the son of a suta. There was a great
noise when he advanced against the enemy. It was like that made in ancient times, when Garuda descended in
search of serpents.
‘ “On hearing that sound, the immensely strong Bhimasena was extremely delighted, because he desired to catch
sight of Partha. O great king! On hearing that Partha was advancing, the powerful Bhimasena became ready to
give up his life and crushed your soldiers. He was like the force of the wind. He was like the force of the wind in
speed. Bhima, the powerful son of the wind god, roamed around like the wind. O Indra among kings! O lord of the
earth! Your soldiers were afﬂicted. O great king! They were whirled around, like a shattered boat on the ocean.
Bhima showed those soldiers the dexterity of his hands. He released sharp arrows and conveyed them to Yama’s
eternal abode. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the battle there, the warriors witnessed Bhima’s superhuman strength. He was like the Destroyer at the time of the destruction of a yuga. O descendant of the Bharata lin-

eage! They were afﬂicted by Bhimasena’s terrible strength. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On seeing this,
King Duryodhana spoke these words, addressing the soldiers, the great archers and the warriors. ‘All of you unite
in this battle and kill Bhima. Once he has been slain, I think that all the remaining soldiers will have been killed.’
Accepting the instructions of your son, the kings enveloped Bhima with a shower of arrows from every direction.
O king! There were many elephants and men, desiring victory. O Indra among kings! There were also chariots and
horses that surrounded Vrikodara. O king! O foremost among Bharatas! Having been thus surrounded by valiant
ones from every direction, the brave one was as beautiful as the moon surrounded by stars. O great king! That
supreme of men looked radiant and handsome in the battle, in particular, as beautiful as Vijaya was. All those
kings released showers of arrows at him. They were cruel and their eyes were red in anger. They wished to kill
Vrikodara. In that battle, Bhima drove away that large army with straight-tufted arrows and emerged, like a ﬁsh in
the water coming out of a net. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He killed ten thousand elephants that refused
to retreat, two hundred thousand and two hundred men, ﬁve thousand horses and one hundred rathas. Having killed
them, Bhima created a river made out of blood and mire. Blood constituted the water and chariots were the eddies.
It was full of crocodiles in the form of elephants. The men were the ﬁsh and horses were the sharks. Hair constituted the moss and the weeds. The trunks of the best of elephants were severed and many jewels were borne along.
Thighs were alligators. The fat was the mud. It was full of many heads that were the rocks. The bows and arrows
were like rafts. Clubs and maces were the ﬂags. In the battle, a current of warriors were borne along to Yama’s
abode. In an instant, the tiger among men created a river that ﬂowed downwards.673 It was like the ﬁerce
Vaitarani, difﬁcult for those who have not perfected their souls to cross. Wherever the spot where Pandaveya,
supreme among rathas, advanced, in that spot he brought down hundreds and thousands of warriors.
‘ “O great king! Having seen the deeds performed by Bhimasena in the battle, Duryodhana spoke these words to
Shakuni. ‘O maternal uncle! Defeat the immensely strong Bhimasena in the encounter. If the immensely strong
Pandaveya is vanquished, I think that our victory is ensured.’ O great king! At this, the powerful Soubala advanced, surrounded by his brothers, to engage in that great battle. In the battle, he rushed against Bhimasena,
whose valour was terrible. He countered the brave one, like the shoreline against the abode of makaras. Though he
was restrained by sharp arrows, Bhima did not retreat. O Indra among kings! Shakuni struck him on the left ﬂank
and between the breasts with iron arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone. O great king!
Those golden arrows, tufted with the feathers of herons and peacocks, penetrated the great-souled one’s armour
and sank in. In the battle, Bhima was severely pierced by those gold-decorated arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He violently shot an arrow towards Soubala. O king! As the terrible arrow arrived, the immensely
strong Shakuni, the scorcher of enemies, displayed the dexterity of his hands and shattered it into one hundred
fragments. O lord of the earth! When it fell down on the ground, Bhima was enraged. He laughed and severed
Soubala’s bow with a broad-headed arrow. The powerful Soubala cast aside that severed bow and picked up another bow and sixteen broad-headed arrows. O great king! With four of those broad-headed and straight-tufted arrows,
he struck Bhima’s horses and his charioteer with a ﬁfth. O lord of the earth! He severed his standard with one and
his umbrella with two. With four more, Subala’s son struck his four horses.674 O great king! At this, the powerful
Bhimasena became wrathful. In that battle, he hurled a javelin that was completely made out of iron, but had a
golden handle. Released from Bhima’s arm, it was like the ﬂickering tongue of a serpent. It swiftly descended on
the great-souled Soubala’s chariot. O lord of the earth! The javelin had been hurled by the enraged Bhimasena and
was decorated with gold. But he675 seized it and hurled it back and it penetrated the great-souled Pandava’s left
arm. It then fell down on the ground, like lightning descending from the sky. O great king! In every direction, the
sons of Dhritarashtra let out a loud cry. However, Bhima was not prepared to tolerate those spirited roars, like
those of lions. In haste, the maharatha grasped a bow and strung it. O Indra among kings! In a short while, in that
battle, the immensely strong one enveloped Soubala’s soldiers, who were prepared to give up their lives, with arrows. O lord of the earth! He killed his676 four horses and his charioteer. The valiant one swiftly severed his standard with a broad-headed arrow. With the horses slain, the supreme among men abandoned his chariot. His eyes
were red with rage and he stretched his bow, sighing deeply. O king! He covered Bhima from every direction with
many arrows. However, the powerful Bhimasena countered him with force. He angrily severed his bow and

pierced him with sharp arrows. O lord of men! Powerfully and extremely severely pierced by the enemy, the afﬂicter of enemies fell down on the ground, with only a little bit of life left in him. O lord of the earth! On discerning that he had lost his senses, your son bore him away on his own chariot, while Bhimasena looked on. On seeing
that the tiger among men was taken away on the chariot, the sons of Dhritarashtra retreated. They suffered from
great fear on account of Bhima and, terriﬁed, ﬂed in different directions. O king! When the archer Bhimasena had
defeated Soubala, your son, Duryodhana, was shattered by great fear. Thinking about his maternal uncle, he ﬂed on
swift horses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the king had retreated, the troops withdrew,
abandoning the duels that were going on in different directions. On seeing this, all the atirathas among the sons of
Dhritarashtra also retreated. Bhima quickly rushed at them, showering down many hundreds of arrows. Slaughtered by Bhima, the sons of Dhritarashtra withdrew.
‘ “O king! From every direction, they sought refuge with Karna, who was stationed in the battle. That greatly
valiant and immensely strong one became like an island to them. O king! O tiger among men! It was as if mariners
who suffered from a calamity and had a shattered boat found comfort on reaching an island. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! In that way, those on your side sought refuge with Karna. O king! Having stationed themselves
there, they cheered each other. They advanced to ﬁght again, preferring to die rather than retreat.” ’

Chapter 1206(56)
‘D hritarashtra asked, “O Sanjaya! When the soldiers were shattered by Bhimasena in the battle, what did Duryodhana and Soubala say? What about Karna, foremost among victorious warriors, Kripa, Kritavarma, Drona’s son,
Duhshasana and other warriors on my side? I think that Pandaveya’s valour was extremely wonderful. Did Radheya Karna, the destroyer of enemies, act towards all the Kuru warriors in accordance with his vow? O Sanjaya!
On seeing that the army had been routed by the inﬁnitely energetic Kounteya, Radheya, Adhiratha’s son, remained
the prosperity, the armour, the base and the hope of remaining alive. What did the warrior Karna do? What about
my sons and the invincible maharatha kings? O Sanjaya! You are skilled in narrating. Tell me everything about all
this.”
‘Sanjaya replied, “O great king! In the afternoon, while Bhimasena looked on, the powerful son of a suta began
to strike all the Somakas. The extremely strong Bhima also began to uproot all the soldiers of the sons of Dhritarashtra. On seeing that the intelligent Bhimasena was driving away the army, Karna asked his charioteer to drive
him towards the Panchalas. The immensely strong king of Madra, Shalya, drove the white horses, which were extremely swift, towards the Chedis, the Panchalas and the Karushas. Shalya, the destroyer of enemy troops, penetrated those soldiers. He cheerfully drove the horses to the spot where that foremost one677 wanted him to go. The
chariot was like a cloud and was covered in tiger skins. O lord of the earth! On seeing it, the Pandus and the Panchalas were terriﬁed. The loud roar of the chariot could be heard in the great battle. Its roar was like that of a
cloud, or of a mountain being shattered.
‘ “Karna drew his bow all the way back to his ear and slew hundreds and thousands of Pandava soldiers with
hundreds of sharp arrows. While he was performing that superhuman deed in the encounter, the great archers, the
Pandava maharathas, surrounded him. Shikhandi, Bhima, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Nakula, Sahadeva, Droupadi’s sons and Satyaki surrounded him and showered down arrows, wishing to kill Radheya. In the battle, the brave
Satyaki, supreme among men, pierced Karna with twenty sharp arrows in his shoulder joints. Shikhandi pierced
Karna with twenty-ﬁve arrows, Dhrishtadyumna with ﬁve, Droupadi’s sons with sixty-four, Sahadeva with seven
and Nakula with one hundred. In that encounter, the immensely strong and angry Bhimasena pierced him in the
shoulder joints with ninety arrows with drooping tufts. Adhiratha’s immensely strong son laughed. He drew back
his supreme bow and released sharp arrows, afﬂicting them. Radheya pierced each of them back with ﬁve arrows
each. The bull among men severed Satyaki’s bow and standard and struck him between the breasts with nine arrows. The scorcher of enemies wrathfully pierced Bhimasena with thirty arrows and struck his charioteer with
three arrows. In the twinkling of an eye, the bull among men deprived Droupadi’s sons of their chariots and it was
extraordinary. With straight-tufted arrows, he made all of them retreat. He killed the brave maharathas from Panchala and Chedi. O lord of the earth! In that battle, the Chedis and the Matysas were slaughtered. They rushed
against Karna, who was single-handed, and struck him with torrents of arrows. The maharatha son of a suta struck
those down with his sharp arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I witnessed this extraordinary deed performed by Karna. In the battle, the brave and powerful son of a suta was single-handed. O great king! However,
despite those enemy warriors striving to their utmost in the encounter, he restrained the Pandaveyas with his arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the gods, siddhas and supreme rishis were satisﬁed at the dexterity
shown by the great-souled Karna. The great archers, the sons of Dhritarashtra, applauded that best of men. Karna
was best among supreme rathas. He was foremost among all archers. O great king! Karna consumed the army of
the enemy, just as a large and ﬂaming ﬁre burns down dead wood during the summer. Thus slaughtered by Karna
and witnessing Karna’s great strength, the Pandaveyas were terriﬁed in the battle and ﬂed here and there. In the
great encounter, loud lamentations arose among the Panchalas, since they were slaughtered by the sharp arrows

that were released from Karna’s bow. The large army of the Pandavas was frightened at the sound. In the battle
there, the enemies thought that Karna was the only warrior. Thus Radheya, the afﬂicter of enemies, accomplished
that supremely wonderful deed. He single-handedly countered all the Pandavas and no one was capable of glancing towards him. They were like a large mass of water that dashes against a supreme mountain and is driven back.
In that way, the Pandava soldiers clashed against Karna and were shattered. O king! In the battle, Karna blazed like
a ﬁre without smoke. The mighty-armed one burnt down the large army of the Pandavas. O great king! With great
agility and his light arrows, the brave Karna severed the heads, with earrings, and the arms of the valiant ones.
There were swords with handles of ivory. There were standards, javelins, horses and elephants. There were the
parts of chariots and many kinds of ﬂags and whisks. There were axles, yokes, harnesses and many kinds of
wheels. Karna observed his vow of a warrior and shattered these into hundreds of fragments. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Elephants and horses were slain by Karna. Because of the ﬂesh, blood and mire, the earth assumed an impassable form. With destroyed horses, foot soldiers, chariots and elephants, one could no longer distinguish uneven terrain from plain ground. Nor could the warriors distinguish those on their own side from that of
the enemy. The arrows generated from Karna’s weapon created a terrible darkness. The arrows released from Radheya’s bow were decorated in gold. O great king! In the battle, the Pandaveya maharathas repeatedly endeavoured,
but were shrouded by Karna. O great king! The maharathas endeavoured and were submerged. They were like a
herd of deer, driven away by an angry lion in the forest. The warriors who fought against Karna in the battle were
greatly illustrious. But those soldiers were slaughtered, like a large number of smaller animals by a wolf.
‘ “Seeing that the Pandava soldiers were retreating, the great archers, the sons of Dhritarashtra, pursued them,
emitting ﬁerce roars. O Indra among kings! Duryodhana was ﬁlled with great delight. He joyfully instructed that
many musical instruments should be sounded in every direction. The great archers among the Panchalas, supreme
among men, were shattered. But though shattered, those brave ones returned, preferring death over retreat. O great
king! The brave Radheya, scorcher of enemies and bull among men, countered and repelled them in many different
kinds of ways. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Twenty rathas among the Panchalas were slain there by Karna
and so were one hundred angry enemy riders from among the Chedis. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He
emptied the seats of chariots and the backs of horses. He brought down men from the necks of elephants. He drove
away the infantry. The scorcher of enemies was like the sun at midday and was impossible to look at. The son of a
suta assumed as cruel a form as Yama and roamed around. O great king! In this fashion, the great archer Karna, the
destroyer of large numbers of the enemy, killed men, horses, rathas and elephants and was stationed there. The immensely strong one was stationed there like the Destroyer after slaying large numbers of beings. The single-handed
maharatha was stationed there, after having slain the Somakas. However, we beheld the wonderful valour of the
Panchalas. Though they were slaughtered by Karna, they did not forsake the ﬁeld of battle. The king,678
Duhshasana, Sharadvata Kripa, Ashvatthama, Kritavarma and Shakuni Soubala slew the Pandava soldiers in hundreds and thousands. O Indra among kings! The brothers who were Karna’s sons were also true in their valour.
Those powerful ones easily fought with the Panchalas, here and there. They created a cruel and great destruction
among the horses there. Despite this, the brave Pandavas, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi and Droupadi’s sons were
enraged and attacked those on your side. In this fashion, there was destruction among the Pandavas there and also
amongst those on your side, when they clashed against the immensely strong Bhima in the battle.” ’

Chapter 1207(57)
‘S anjaya said, “O great king! Meanwhile, in that great battle, Arjuna divided up the enemy and glanced at the enraged son of a suta. He generated a large river of blood that bore along ﬂesh, marrow and bones. The bull among
men spoke these words to Vasudeva. ‘O Krishna! The standard of the son of a suta can be seen there. Bhimasena
and the other maharathas are ﬁghting there. O Janardana! Terriﬁed of Karna, the Panchalas are being driven away.
The radiant and white umbrella of King Duryodhana is there. Karna looks extremely beautiful as he is routing the
Panchalas. Kripa, Kritavarma and Drona’s immensely strong son are protecting the king and are protected by the
son of a suta. Those on our side are unable to kill them, but they are slaying the Somakas. Shalya is stationed on
his chariot, skilled in handling the reins. O Krishna! He looks extremely beautiful as he guides the horses of the
chariot of the son of a suta. My wish is that you should drive my chariot to that maharatha. Without killing Karna
in the battle, I will not retreat. O Janardana! Otherwise, while we look on in this battle, Radheya will exterminate
the maharatha Parthas and Srinjayas.’ Having been thus instructed, Keshava quickly drove the chariot towards
your army, so that there might be a duel between Karna, the great archer, and Savyasachi. On Pandava’s instructions, the mighty-armed Hari departed, thus providing assurance to the Pandava soldiers in every direction. O venerable one! There was the loud clatter of Pandaveya’s chariot in the battle. It was like the sound of Vasava’s vajra
or a giant ﬂood. There was a great roar from the chariot of Pandava, who was unwavering in his valour. Vijaya, immeasurable in his soul, advanced against your army.
‘ “On seeing the white horses advance, with Krishna as the charioteer, the king of Madra spoke to Karna. ‘Behold the standard of the great-souled one. The chariot is coming here, with white horses and with Krishna as the
charioteer. O Karna! He is slaying the enemies in the battle. He is the one about whom you had enquired.
Kounteya is stationed there, touching Gandiva bow. If you can kill him today, that will be greatly beneﬁcial for us.
The army of the sons of Dhritarashtra is being routed in every direction. It is terriﬁed of Arjuna, who is swiftly
slaying large numbers of the enemy. Abandoning all the soldiers, Dhananjaya is hastening here. His body swelling
with anger, I think he is coming for your sake. I do not think Partha is interested in ﬁghting with anyone else other
than you. He is blazing with anger because you have worsted Vrikodara. He has seen that you deprived Dharmaraja of his chariot and severely wounded him. Shikhandi, Satyaki, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Droupadi’s sons, Yudhamanyu, Uttamouja and the two brothers, Nakula and Sahadeva, are looking on. O scorcher of enemies! Partha is
advancing violently, alone on a chariot. His eyes are red with anger. In his rage, he wishes to kill all the archers.
There is no doubt that he has abandoned all the other soldiers and is spiritedly advancing towards us. O Karna!
Advance and repulse him. There is no other archer who can. I do not see any other archer in this world who is like
you and can counter the angry Arjuna in a battle, like a shoreline. I do not see anyone protecting him, at the rear, or
along the ﬂanks. Behold. He is advancing alone towards you, with thoughts of success in his mind. In the battle,
you are the only one who can withstand the two Krishnas in an encounter. O Radheya! It is your burden that you
must ﬁght against Dhananjaya. You are as accomplished as Bhishma, Drona, Drona’s son and Kripa. Drive your
chariot against Savyasachi and counter Pandava. He is like a snake with a ﬂickering tongue. He is roaring like a
bull. O Karna! He is bent on destruction, like a tiger. Slay Dhananjaya. The maharatha sons of Dhritarashtra have
been driven away in the battle. In their fear of Arjuna, the kings are quickly glancing at him. There is no man other
than you who can dispel the fear of the warriors who are running away in terror. O descendant of the suta lineage!
There is no one other than you. In this battle, you are an island of refuge to all the Kurus. O tiger among men!
They are stationed here, desiring assurance from you. You have advanced against and defeated in battle those who
are invincible, those from Videha, Ambashtha, Kamboja, Nagnajit and Gandhara. O Radheya! Exert yourself now
and counter Pandava and Varshneya Vasudeva, loved by Kiriti.’

‘ “Karna replied, ‘O Shalya! You seem to be in your natural state now and amicable towards me. O mightyarmed one! It is evident that you are frightened of Dhananjaya. Behold the strength of my arms today. Behold my
learning. I will single-handedly slay the large army of the Pandavas and the two Krishnas, tigers among men. I tell
you this truthfully. Without killing those two brave warriors, I will not retreat. Or I will be slain by them and will
lie down. Victory in a battle is uncertain. But I will be successful in my objective, whether I kill them, or whether I
am killed. It is said that no one like him has been born in this world. He is supreme among rathas. That is what we
have heard. I will ﬁght against the Partha who is like that. Behold my manliness in the great battle. The foremost
among rathas is advancing on his chariot. The Kourava prince is borne on swift horses. Perhaps he will convey me
towards a calamity today and perhaps with Karna’s death, all of this will end. This prince’s hands do not sweat.
They are thick and large and marks have been created on them.679 He is ﬁrm and accomplished in the use of
weapons. He is light in the use of his hands. There is no warrior who is Pandaveya’s equal. He grasps many arrows
tufted with the feathers of herons. He shoots them as if they were but one. They descend at the distance of one
krosha and do not deviate from their aim. Where is the warrior on earth who is his equal? With Krishna as his second, the spirited atiratha Pandaveya satisﬁed the ﬁre.680 The great-souled Krishna obtained the chakra there and
Pandava Savyasachi the bow Gandiva. The mighty-armed one, whose spirit does not wane, also obtained the chariot, with a ﬁerce and loud roar. It is yoked to white horses. He obtained giant quivers that are divine in form and are
inexhaustible. The bearer of oblations681 also gave him celestial weapons. He slew the daityas in Indra’s world
and destroyed all the kalakeyas in a battle.682 He obtained the conch shell Devadatta there. Who possesses greater
fame than him on earth? He faced the immensely generous Mahadeva himself in a battle and satisﬁed him.683 He
thus obtained the extremely terrible pashupata, the great weapon that can destroy the three worlds. The various
guardians of the world assembled and gave him weapons that have no measure. The lion among men swiftly slew
in battle the assembled kalakhanja asuras. In Virata’s city, alone on a chariot, he defeated all of us who were assembled there. He retrieved the wealth of cattle from us and robbed the maharathas of their garments. He possesses
these qualities of a valiant one and the revered Krishna is his second in the battle. Keshava is inﬁnite in his valour.
He is Narayana himself in disguise and protects him. Even if all the worlds assembled together and tried for ten
thousand years, they would be incapable of describing his684 qualities. The great-souled one possesses a conch
shell, a chakra and a sword in his hands. He is Vishnu and Jishnu and the son of Vasudeva.685 On seeing the two
Krishnas together on a single chariot, both fear and valour are generated in my heart. Both of them are brave and
accomplished, ﬁrm in the use of weapons. They are maharathas who can withstand anything. Phalguna and Vasudeva are like this. O Shalya! Which other person is capable of advancing against them? I will bring them down
in the battle, or the two Krishnas will kill me today.’”
‘Sanjaya said, “Having spoken these words to Shalya, Karna, the slayer of enemies, roared like a cloud in that
battle. He approached your son and honoured him. He then spoke these words to the foremost among the Kurus
who had assembled—the mighty-armed Kripa and the lord from Bhoja,686 the king of Gandhara and his son, the
son of the preceptor,687 his younger brothers, the foot soldiers and the other horse riders and elephant riders.
‘Swiftly advance against Achyuta and Arjuna from every direction and restrain them, so that they are exhausted. O
kings! Then those two lords will be severely wounded and I will be able to kill them cheerfully today.’ Those spirited ones agreed. Wishing to kill Arjuna, the best of the brave ones attacked, like rivers and streams full of water
dashing towards the great ocean. Arjuna received them there in the battle. The enemies could not discern when he
afﬁxed supreme arrows and released them. They were oppressed by Dhananjaya’s arrows. Men, horses and elephants were slain and fell down. He was as radiant as the energetic sun that arises at the end of a yuga. Gandiva
was like a circular disc and the arrows were like rays. The Kouravas were incapable of glancing towards Jaya. He
was like a sun that hurts the eyes of people. Kripa, Bhoja and your son himself attacked him and shot arrows. They
wished to kill him and were skilled. They shot supreme arrows in that great battle, making the best of efforts. Pandava swiftly severed those arrows and pierced each of his foes in the chest with three arrows each. Arjuna drew
Gandiva back to a full circle and scorched them like the radiant sun. The arrows were like ﬁerce rays and he was
like the solar disc when it is midway between Shuchi and Shukra.688

‘ “Drona’s son pierced Dhananjaya with ten supreme arrows and then struck Achyuta with three. He struck the
four horses with four and released many supreme arrows at the ape.689 While he was extending his bow to its
complete extent, Dhananjaya used three arrows to sever it and sliced down his charioteer’s head with a kshurapra
arrow. Dhananjaya struck the four horses of Drona’s son with four arrows, his standard with three and brought him
down from his chariot. He690 became angry and picked up another bow that was ornamented with diamonds and
other precious stones. It had excellent joints and was as radiant as the great and supreme serpent Takshaka, resting
on a mountain. The great personage placed his other weapons on the ground and strung the bow himself. Drona’s
son then afﬂicted those unvanquished and supreme men691 with supreme arrows and pierced them from a close
distance. Kripa, Bhoja and your son showered down torrents of arrows on the one who was like a sun.692 Partha
used his arrows to sever Kripa’s bow, with an arrow ﬁxed to it, and struck his horses, standard and charioteer with
arrows. He enveloped your son with arrows and severing his bow and standard, roared. The powerful one slew
Kritavarma’s horses and severed his sparkling standard. He also slaughtered horses and charioteers, and destroyed
supreme elephants, horses, chariots and their standards. Your large army was shattered, like an embankment devastated by water. Dhananjaya then swiftly advanced, like Shatakratu for Vritra’s death. He was followed by other
chariots that raised their standards again, prepared well and ready to ﬁght with the enemy. Maharathas Shikhandi,
Shini’s descendant and the twins followed Dhananjaya’s chariot, countering the enemy with sharp arrows, shattering them and roaring ﬁercely. The brave Kurus and Srinjayas killed each other in great rage, shooting extremely
energetic arrows. They were like supreme gods and asuras693 in ancient times. They desired victory or heaven. O
scorcher of enemies! Elephants, horses and chariots fell down. They roared loudly and struck each other separately
with arrows that were released well. In the great battle, the supreme warriors fought with each other. The greatsouled ones created darkness because of the arrows. O king! The ten directions and the sky could not be discerned.
The sun’s radiance was covered in darkness.” ’

Chapter 1208(58)
‘S anjaya said, “Dhananjaya saw that the foremost among the Kurus had attacked Bhimasena with great force and
that he was submerged. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Wishing to save him, he struck the soldiers of the
son of a suta with arrows. Dhananjaya conveyed brave ones amongst the enemy to the world of the dead. Some of
his nets of arrows covered the sky. Others were invisible, but killed your soldiers. He ﬁlled the sky with arrows
and they seemed to be like a ﬂock of birds. O great king! Dhananjaya was like a destroyer of the Kurus. Partha
used broad-headed arrows, kshurapras and sparkling iron arrows to mangle the bodies and sever the heads. Severed bodies, dislodged armour and heads were strewn around everywhere. Foot soldiers fell down and warriors
were spread around. O king! Destroyed by Dhananjaya’s arrows, chariots, horses, men and elephants were on the
ﬁeld of battle and made it look like a giant Vaitarani river. As they fought, wheels of chariots were shattered,
sometimes without horses and sometimes yoked to horses. With charioteers slain, or with charioteers, chariots
were scattered around on the ground. The warriors wore golden armour and golden ornaments. They were on
well-trained elephants that were also armoured. The wrathful drivers angered them by urging them on towards
Arjuna. Kiriti slew and brought down four hundred of these through his showers of arrows. They were like the
summits of large mountains, with living beings still atop them. Struck by Dhananjaya’s arrows, the elephants
were strewn around on the ground. Arjuna’s chariot passed through them, like the sun penetrating a mass of
clouds. Elephants, men and horses were slain and many chariots were fragmented. With their armour dislodged
by arrows, warriors who were ﬁerce in battle lost their lives. Phalguna crossed over that path of battle, which was
strewn around in this fashion. He stretched Gandiva and it let out a great and terrible twang. The sound was as
awful as that of thunder, resounding amidst dark clouds. Struck by Dhananjaya’s arrows, the army was routed. It
was as if a large boat was tossed around on the ocean by a great tempest. Arrows and weapons of many forms issued out of Gandiva. They ﬂamed like meteors and lightning and scorched your soldiers. It was like a grove of
bamboos burning on a giant mountain in the night. That was how your large army seemed to blaze, oppressed by
the arrows. Yours soldiers were crushed, burnt and destroyed by Kiriti. They were killed and wounded by the arrows and ﬂed in all the directions. It was as if a herd of deer was being devoured by a conﬂagration in a large forest. When they were consumed by Savyasachi, such was the state of the Kurus.
‘ “In the battle, they abandoned the mighty-armed Bhimasena. The army of the Kurus was anxious and all of
them desired to retreat. Thus, the Kurus were defeated by Bibhatsu and routed. Having clashed against Bhimasena, they were made to withdraw in a short while. Phalguna approached Bhima and consulted with him. He told
him that Yudhishthira’s wounds had been attended to. Having obtained Bhimsena’s permission, Dhananjaya departed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The earth and the sky resounded with the clatter of his chariot. Ten
of your terrible sons, bulls among the enemy, and all born after Duhshasana, surrounded Dhananjaya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those cruel ones seemed to dance around and attacked him with their arrows, like an
elephant with ﬂaming torches.694 Madhusudana guided the chariot so that they were on the right side. On seeing
that Arjuna was advancing towards them, those brave ones retreated. Partha swiftly used iron arrows and arrows
in the shape of a half-moon to destroy their standards, chariots and bows and bring them down. He then used ten
other broad-headed arrows to sever their heads.695 The eyes were red with rage. The teeth bit the lips. Fallen
down on the ground, those faces looked like stars that had been dislodged from the ﬁrmament. Ten immensely
forceful, gold-tufted and broad-headed arrows brought down ten Kouravas who possessed golden clubs. When
they had been pierced, the slayer of enemies departed.” ’

Chapter 1209(59)
‘S anjaya said, “The one with the supreme ape on his standard advanced at great speed. Ninety brave Kuru rathas
wished to ﬁght with him and attacked him. In the battle, those tigers among men surrounded Arjuna, tiger among
men. However, the white horses were extremely swift and were decorated in gold. They were decorated with nets
of pearls and Krishna drove it towards Karna’s chariot. As Dhananjaya, the slayer of enemies, advanced towards
Karna’s chariot, the chariots of the samshaptakas696 also followed him, showering down arrows with a desire to
kill. The brave Arjuna used his sharp arrows to swiftly kill all ninety of them, with their charioteers, bows and
standards. Slain by Kiriti’s many different kinds of arrows, they fell down, like siddhas and their celestial vehicles
from heaven, when their stores of meritorious deeds have been exhausted. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! O
foremost among Bharatas! At this, the fearless Kurus attacked Phalguna, with their chariots, elephants and horses.
They released weapons. Supreme and mighty elephants that belonged to your son’s large army obstructed Dhananjaya in the battle. The great archers, the Kurus, used lances, swords, spears, javelins, clubs, scimitars and arrows to
envelop the descendant of the Kuru lineage.697 The Kurus showered down weapons. However, Pandava used arrows that were like the rays of the sun to strike them down. At this, on the instructions of your son, mlecchas who
were astride thirteen hundred crazy elephants struck Partha from the side. They used barbed arrows, hollow arrows, iron arrows, spears, javelins, spikes, kampanas and catapults to afﬂict Partha’s chariot. Having been struck
by the shower of weapons released by the yavanas698 on elephants, Phalguna smiled and severed those with his
sharp broad-headed arrows and arrows in the form of a half-moon. All those elephants were struck by large arrows
of many different forms. With their ﬂags and riders, they were brought down, like mountains shattered by thunder.
Those gold-tufted arrows afﬂicted and killed the giant elephants that had golden harnesses. They fell down, like
mountains that were on ﬁre. O lord of the earth! In that great roar, Gandiva’s twang could be heard. Men, elephants
and horses shrieked and lamented. O king! The elephants were killed and ﬂed in different directions. With their
riders slain, the horses ran away in the ten directions. O great king! Chariots were without their rathas and so were
the steeds. Thousands of them were seen, like the cities of the gandharvas. O great king! Horse riders ran hither
and thither. They were seen there, brought down by Partha’s arrows. At that time, Pandava showed the strength of
his arms. Single-handedly, he defeated the riders, the elephants and the chariots in the battle.
‘ “O bull among the Bharata lineage! O king! Bhimasena saw that Kiriti was surrounded by a large army consisting of three kinds of forces.699 O king! He abandonded the few remaining rathas who were left on your side
and swiftly advanced towards Dhananjaya’s chariot. On seeing that Bhima was advancing towards his brother Arjuna, the soldiers who had not been killed were distressed and ﬂed. There were some extremely fast horses that had
not been killed by Arjuna. In the great battle, with the club in his hand, Bhima slaughtered them. It700 was as
ﬁerce as the night of destruction and fed on men, elephants and horses. It was extremely terrible and could shatter
walls, mansions and the gates of cities. Bhima used that club against the men, elephants and horses who were
around. O venerable one! He slew many horses and horse riders. Pandava crushed men and horses plated in bronze
armour and terriﬁed them. He uprooted them with the club. Slain, they fell down with a great noise. He then ascended his chariot again and followed Arjuna from the rear. The army of the enemy was slain or devoid of spirit
and retreated. Those soldiers were immobile and distracted. On seeing this, Arjuna shrouded them with arrows that
robbed lives. As they clung to each other, there were severe woes of lamentation. At that time, your soldiers
whirled around like a circle of ﬁre. With the armour shattered by arrows, the soldiers blazed. Overﬂowing with
blood, they looked like a ﬂowering grove of ashoka trees. On seeing Savyasachi’s valour there, all the Kurus there
lost all hope of Karna remaining alive. In the battle, they could not withstand the downpour of Partha’s arrows.

Having been defeated by the wielder of Gandiva, the Kurus retreated. Slaughtered by Partha’s arrows, they abandoned the battle. They were terriﬁed and ﬂed in different directions, calling out to the son of a suta. Partha followed them, showering down many hundreds of arrows. The Pandava warriors, with Bhimasena at the forefront,
were delighted.
‘ “O great king! Your sons advanced towards Karna’s chariot. They were submerged in fathomless waters and
Karna was like an island to them. O great king! The Kurus were like defanged serpents. Because of their fear of
the wielder of Gandiva, they sought shelter with Karna. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It was just as all beings, fearing death and because of their deeds, seek shelter with dharma. O lord of men! Karna, the great archer,
was like that to your sons. Terriﬁed of the great-souled Pandava, they sought refuge with him. They were overﬂowing with blood and severely distressed on account of the arrows, and Karna told them, ‘Do not be frightened.
Come to me.’ He saw that your army had been destroyed because of Partha’s strength. Wishing to kill the enemy,
Karna stretched his bow and while Savyasachi looked on, attacked the Panchalas again. The lords of the earth possessed eyes that were as red as wounds. In a short while, Karna showered down torrents of arrows on them, like
clouds pouring down on a large mountain. O venerable one! Thousands of arrows were shot by Karna. The
supreme among all living beings robbed many Panchalas of their lives. O lord of the earth! In that battle, great
sounds of lamentation arose among the Panchalas. To ensure the welfare of his friend,701 the son of a suta, the
slayer of enemies, slaughtered them.” ’

Chapter 1210(60)
‘S anjaya said, “O king! The Kurus702 were driven away by Karna, whose chariot possessed white horses. Using
great arrows, the son of a suta slew the sons of the Panchalas, like a storm dispelling large masses of clouds. With
an anjalika arrow, he brought down Janamejaya’s charioteer from his chariot and killed his horses. He enveloped
Shatanika and Sutasoma with broad-headed arrows and severed their bows. In the battle, he pierced Dhrishtadyumna with six arrows and slew the horses that were on his right ﬂank. The son of a suta next killed Satyaki’s horses
and also slew Vishoka, the son of Kekaya. When that prince was killed, Ugradhanva, the general of the Kekayas,
attacked him. He used many arrows that were ﬁerce and forceful and severely struck Karna’s son, Sushena.703
Karna laughed. Using three arrows that were in the shape of a half-moon, he severed his704 arms and head. Having lost his life, he fell down from his chariot, like a decaying shala tree that is struck down with an axe. The horses of the foremost among the Shinis705 had been slain. Sushena, the grandson of a suta, enveloped him with sharp
arrows and seemed to be dancing around. However, he was struck by the arrows of Shini’s descendant and fell
down. When his son was killed, Karna became senseless with rage and wished to kill Shini’s descendant, bull
among men. He said, ‘O descendant of Shini’s lineage! You have been killed.’ He released an arrow that was capable of killing all enemies. Shikhandi severed it with three arrows and struck Karna with three more. Using large
arrows, he706 severed Shikhandi’s bow and standard and then pierced Shikhandi with six ﬁerce arrows. He next
severed the head of Dhrishtadyumna’s son. Adhiratha’s great-souled son then mangled Sutasoma with an extremely sharp arrow.
‘ “O lion among men! While that tumultuous battle was going on and Dhrishtadyumna’s son had been killed,
Krishna said, ‘O Partha! He is eliminating the Panchalas. Go and kill Karna.’ Thus addressed, that foremost of
men laughed and advanced swiftly on his chariot towards the chariot of Adhiratha’s son. The one with excellent
arms wished to save those who were frightened and were being killed707 by that leader of rathas. He stretched
Gandiva with a twang that was loud and terrible. He rubbed the bowstring ﬁercely. He suddenly created darkness
with his arrows and destroyed elephants, horses, chariots and men. Bhimasena, the brave one among the Pandavas,
followed him on his chariot and protected his rear. Those two princes quickly advanced on their chariots towards
Karna, releasing arrows at the enemy.
‘ “During that time, the son of a suta fought mightily, crushing the Somakas in the battle. He destroyed large
numbers of chariots, horses and elephants and enveloped the directions with his arrows. Uttamouja, Janamejaya,
the enraged Yudhamanyu and Shikhandi united with Parshata.708 They roared loudly and mangled Karna with
many arrows. Those ﬁve Panchala rathas attacked Vaikartana Karna extremely well, but were incapable of dislodging him from his chariot, just as the senses cannot overpower a patient and self-controlled person. Karna severed
their bows, standards, horses, charioteers, quivers and ﬂags with his arrows and struck each of the ﬁve with arrows.
He then roared like a lion. As he struck them and there were the sounds of his bowstring, arrows, palms and the
bow, all beings were distressed. They thought that the earth, with its mountains and trees, was being shattered. His
bow was like Shakra’s bow. Using that, Adhiratha’s son shot ﬁerce arrows. He was resplendent in the battle, like
the blazing solar disc, surrounded by a garland of rays. He pierced Shikhandi with twelve sharp arrows and the
ratha Uttamouja with six. He pierced Yudhamanyu with three sharp arrows and the sons of Somaka and Prishata
each with three arrows.709 O venerable one! In the great battle, those ﬁve maharathas were defeated by the son of
a suta. They were rendered immobile by that scorcher of enemies, just as the senses are vanquished by one with a

controlled soul. They were submerged in the ocean that was Karna, like distressed merchants on an ocean. Droupadi’s son rescued their maternal uncles710 with well-prepared chariots, like providing boats on an ocean.
‘ “The bull among the Shini lineage used his sharp arrows to slice down the many arrows that Karna shot. He
struck Karna with sharp and iron arrows and pierced his eldest son711 with eight arrows. Kripa, Bhoja,712 your
sons and Karna struck him back with sharp arrows. However, the supreme one amongst the Yadu lineage fought
with them, like the guardians of the directions ﬁghting with the lords of the daityas. His bow roared continuously
and he showered down extremely ﬁerce arrows. Satyaki became invincible, like the midday sun in the autumn sky.
Those rathas713 armoured themselves well and again attacked, desiring to protect the foremost one from the Shini
lineage. The rathas from Panchala united in that great battle, like large numbers of Marut surrounding Shakra,
when he was afﬂicting the enemy. An extremely terrible encounter commenced between them and those on your
side who were engaged in your welfare. It was like an ancient one between gods and asuras and destroyed chariots,
horses and elephants. Afﬂicted by many types of weapons, chariots, elephants, horses and foot soldiers wandered
around. They struck each other and wavered. They uttered loud wails of lamentation and fell down, deprived of
their lives.
‘ “At that time, without any fear, your son, the younger brother of the king,714 showered arrows and advanced
against Bhima. Vrikodara spiritedly encountered him, like a lion leaping on a large ruru deer. The battle between
them was superhuman and was like a gambling match, with lives as stakes. They attacked each other ﬁercely and
angrily, like Shakra and Shambara in earlier times. They severely struck each other with extremely energetic arrows that were capable of ending lives. They mangled each other, like two mighty elephants that are overcome
with sexual desire and seek to indulge in intercourse.715 With two kshurapra arrows, Vrikodara severed the bow
and the standard of your son. He struck him in the forehead with an arrow and severed his charioteer’s head from
his body. The prince picked up another bow and struck Vrikodara with twelve arrows. He controlled the reins of
the horses himself and again rained down arrows on Bhima.” ’

Chapter 1211(61)
‘S anjaya said, “Prince Duhshasana accomplished an extremely difﬁcult task in that tumultuous battle.
He severed Bhima’s bow with a razor-sharp arrow and pierced his charioteer with six arrows. In an instant, the great-souled one then struck Bhimasena with many excellent arrows. Bhimasena hurled a
ﬁerce club towards him. It struck Duhshasana and ﬂung him a distance of ten bow-lengths away, rendering him like a wounded elephant with shattered temples. He was struck and fell down, trembling. O
Indra among kings! It716 slew his horses and charioteer and having crushed the horses and the chariot,
fell down. His armour, ornaments and garments were destroyed and, completely immobile, he shrieked
in pain. The spirited Bhimasena remembered all the acts of enmity that had been performed by your
sons. He jumped down from the chariot onto the ground and eagerly looked at him. He grasped an extremely sharp sword and placed it against the throat of the trembling one. He tore apart the breast of the
one who had fallen down on the ground and drank the warm blood. He repeatedly savoured the taste.
Then, excessively angry, he glanced at him and spoke these words. ‘This is superior to mother’s milk,
honey, clariﬁed butter, well-prepared liquor, celestial water and skimmed and churned milk. It is my
view today, that the blood of my enemies is tastier than all of these.’ He again repeated these cheerful
and eloquent words. Whoever saw Bhimasena in that state then, fell down in distress and in fear. When
the men fell down there, the weapons also fell down from their hands. Others were terriﬁed and
glanced at him with half-open eyes, uttering loud lamentations of woe. All those who saw Bhima drink
Duhshasana’s blood were terriﬁed and miserable and ran away in different directions. They said, ‘This
one is not human.’ In the hearing of the brave ones in the world, he717 spoke these words. ‘O worst of
men! I am drinking the blood from your throat. In great rage, you repeatedly called us cattle.718 When
I was asleep in Pramanakoti, you fed me poison and made me suffer the hardship of being bitten by
serpents.719 You burnt us down in the house of lac. You robbed our kingdom through a gambling
match and made us dwell in the woods. We were robbed of the happiness in our homes and suffered
from weapons in battle. There were many other hardships and we have never known any joy. Dhritarashtra and his son have always acted maliciously towards us.’ O king! O great king! Having spoken
these words, Vrikodara, who had obtained victory, again spoke these words to Keshava and Arjuna. ‘O
brave ones! I had taken a vow about Duhshasana in the battle.720 I have accomplished that today. I
will accomplish the second vow now too, that of killing Duryodhana like a sacriﬁcial animal. In the
presence of the Kouravas, I will press down the evil-souled one’s head with my foot and obtain peace.’
Having spoken these words, he cheerfully roared, blood streaming from his body. The extremely powerful and great-souled one danced, like the one with one thousand eyes721 after Vritra’s death.” ’

Chapter 1212(62)
‘S anjaya said, “O king! Ten of your sons were brave and maharathas. They did not run away from the ﬁeld of battle. When Duhshasana was slain, those immensely valiant ones were overcome with great rage and showered Bhima with arrows. Kavachi, Nishangi, Pashi, Dandadhara, Dhanurdhara, Alolupa, Shala, Sangha, Vatavega and Suvarchasa united and attacked together, overcome with grief on account of their brother. They enveloped the
mighty-armed Bhimasena with arrows. He was restrained in every direction by the arrows of those maharathas.
Bhima’s eyes became red with rage and he looked like the wrathful Destroyer himself. Using ten immensely forceful broad-headed and sharp arrows that were gold-tufted and decorated with gold, Partha conveyed those ten to
Yama’s eternal abode. When those brave ones were killed, your soldiers ran away, afﬂicted by fear of the Pandavas, while the son of a suta looked on.
‘ “O great king! On witnessing Bhima’s valour, like Yama amongst beings, Karna entered the great battle. O destroyer of enemies! On discerning what was going on in his mind, Shalya, the ornament of an assembly, realized
that the time was right and spoke these words to Karna. ‘O Radheya! Do not be distressed. This is not deserving of
you. These kings are being driven away, afﬂicted by their fear of Bhimasena. Overcome with misery and grief on
account of his brother, Duryodhana is numb. The great-souled one has drunk Duhshasana’s blood. His mind is full
of sorrow, and grief has robbed him of his senses. O Karna! Kripa and the others and the remaining brothers are
tending to Duryodhana and have surrounded him from all directions. The brave Pandavas are unwavering in their
aim. With Dhananjaya at the forefront, they are advancing towards you, stationing themselves in the battle. O tiger
among men! Base yourself on your great manliness. Devoting yourself to the dharma of kshatriyas, ﬁght against
Dhananjaya. Dhritarashtra’s son has placed the entire burden on you. O mighty-armed one! Shoulder it, to the best
of your capacity and the best of your strength. If you are victorious, you will obtain great fame. If you are defeated,
heaven is certain. O Radheya! The wrathful Vrishasena is your son. Since you are confused, he is advancing towards the Pandavas.’ Hearing the words of the inﬁnitely energetic Shalya, he came to the human conclusion that
there was nothing to do but to base oneself well in the battle.
‘ “The angry Vrishasena was stationed on his chariot and wishing to slay the enemy, advanced against Vrikodara, who was like Yama with a staff in his hand, and with a club in his hand, was uprooting those on your side.
Nakula, foremost among brave ones, was full of anger and attacked this enemy with arrows. He cheerfully attacked Karna’s son in the battle, like Jishnu and Maghavan wishing to kill Jambha.722 Using a razor-sharp arrow,
the brave Nakula severed his standard, which had the complexion of a conch shell and sparkled like crystal. Karna’s son possessed a colourful bow that was adorned with golden cloth. He severed this with a broad-headed arrow. Extremely quickly, Karna’s son picked up another bow and pierced Pandava. Wishing to show his respect to
Duhshasana, who had lost his life, the one who knew about great weapons, then struck Nakula with divine and
great weapons. The great-souled Nakula was enraged and pierced him back with arrows that were like giant meteors. Karna’s son was skilled in the use of weapons and pierced Nakula back with celestial weapons. O king! Karna’s son slew all of Nakula’s horses with supreme weapons. They were swift, delicate and pure, ornamented with
gold, and were of the vanayu breed. When the horses were slain, he descended from his chariot and picked up a
beautiful shield that was marked with the signs of eight moons. He also picked up a sword that sparkled like the
sky. With these, he leapt up and roamed around, like a bird. He executed many wonderful motions in the air and
sliced down the best of men, horses and elephants. They were struck by that sword and fell down on the ground,
like animals at an ashvamedha sacriﬁce, struck by the executioner. There were two thousand warriors who found
delight in battle. They were well trained and came from many different countries. They never missed their objective. The upper parts of their bodies were smeared with sandalwood paste. Quickly and single-handedly, Nakula

brought them down. While they were falling down, he723 attacked Nakula and pierced him from every direction
with arrows. Nakula was thus struck by those arrows and angrily pierced the brave one back in turn. Single-handedly, Karna’s son struck men, horses, elephants and chariots. He pierced the brave one who seemed to be
sporting724 with eighteen arrows and was angrily pierced back in return. Wishing to kill him, Pandu’s son, foremost among men, attacked Karna’s son in that battle. In the great battle, Karna’s son sliced down the shield, which
was decorated with one thousand stars, with his arrows. The sword was extremely sharp, keen at the edges. It had
been unsheathed and was capable of bearing a great load. It was extremely terrible and was being whirled around,
used to sever the bodies of the enemy. It was as ﬁerce in form as a serpent. With six sharp and extremely pointed
arrows, he725 shattered his enemy’s sword. He then struck him again between the breasts with sharp and yellow
arrows and pierced him grievously. Madri’s son was tormented by Karna’s son. His horses were slain. He jumped
onto Bhimasena’s chariot, like a lion leaping onto the summit of a mountain, while Dhananjaya looked on.
‘ “Nakula’s bow and arrows had been severed. He was without a chariot and afﬂicted by arrows. He had been
mangled by the weapons of Karna’s son. On discerning this, the ﬁve foremost sons of Drupada, Shini’s descendant
as the sixth, and the ﬁve sons of Drupada’s daughter, all destroyers of enemies, swiftly advanced against those on
your side and devastated the elephants, chariots, men and horses. Those supreme men were cheerful and were on
swift chariots drawn by speedy steeds. Their ﬂags ﬂuttered in the wind. They used hundreds of arrows and other
weapons that resembled the lords of serpents. The foremost of rathas on your side, Hridika’s son,726 Kripa,
Drona’s son, Duryodhana, Shakuni, Shuka, Vrika, Kratha and Devavridha speedily countered them. They wielded
bows and were on chariots that roared like elephants and clouds. Those best of men countered the eleven brave
ones727 and used supreme and ﬁerce arrows to strike and repel them.
‘ “Those on your side were in turn countered by Kunindas who were on elephants that were ﬁerce in force and
were like the summits of mountains, with complexions like that of newly formed clouds. They728 had been prepared well, were crazy and were from the Himalaya regions. Accomplished riders who desired to ﬁght were astride
them. The elephants were beautifully covered with nets of gold and looked like clouds tinged with lightning. Using
ten arrows that were completely made out of iron, the son of Kuninda729 severely struck Kripa and his charioteer.
However, slain by the arrows of Sharadvata’s son, he fell down on the ground, together with his elephant. The
younger brother of the son of Kuninda then struck, using javelins that were completely made out of iron and were
as radiant as the sun’s rays. He hurled these at his730 chariot and roared loudly. But the lord of Gandhara731 severed his head, while he was still roaring. When the Kunindas were slain, the maharathas on your side were delighted. They loudly blew on conch shells obtained from the ocean and with bows and arrows in their hands, attacked
the enemy. An extremely terrible battle commenced again between the Kurus and the Pandus and Srinjayas. Arrows, swords, javelins, scimitars, clubs and battleaxes were ﬁercely used and men, horses and elephants destroyed.
As they attacked and wounded each other, chariots, horses, elephants and foot soldiers fell down here and there. It
was as if clouds tinged with lightining were stationed in the sky and were dispelled with ﬁerce winds. Bhoja struck
Shatanika, the mighty elephants, the chariots and the infantry on their side. Using his weapons, Kritavarma
brought down the horses and the elephants. At that time, three elephants belonging to the enemy were struck by the
arrows of Drona’s son. All of them were ridden by warriors and sported ﬂags. They lost their lives, shrieked and
fell down, like large mountains shattered by the thunder. The third son of the king of Kuninda struck your son732
between the breasts with excellent arrows. Your son pierced his body and that of his elephant with sharp arrows.
With the son of the king, that king of elephants fell down, with copious quantities of blood issuing forth. It was as
if, at the onset of the moon, water mixed with red chalk was exuding from a mountain, when it had been struck by
the vajra of Shachi’s consort.733 However, though struck, the son of Kuninda ascended another elephant and
brought down Shuka, with his charioteer, horses and chariot. The lord Kratha734 was afﬂicted by the arrows and
fell down, like a mountain shattered by thunder. Seated astride an elephant, the invincible ratha from the mountainous regions735 slew and brought down the lord of Kratha with arrows. He was brought down with his horses,
charioteer and bow, like a giant tree struck by a mighty storm. Vrika used twelve arrows to severely strike the one
who resided in the mountainous regions and was astride his elephant. However, using great speed in the battle, he

brought down Vrika, with his four horses and chariot. But that king of elephants was severely struck and brought
down by Babhru’s son, together with its driver. Devavridha’s son was also struck, slain and brought down by Sahadeva’s son. The elephant of the son of Kuninda was capable of slaying the enemy with its tusks and body. It impetuously rushed towards Shakuni, wishing to kill him. The lord of Gandhara severed its head. Mighty elephants,
horses, rathas and large numbers of infantry on your side were slain by Shatanika. They fell down on the ground,
crushed and immobile, like trees devastated through a storm raised by Suparna.736 The son of Kuninda smiled and
shot many sharp arrows at Nakula’s son.737 At this, Nakula’s son used a razor-sharp arrow to sever his head,
which was like a lotus, from his body.
‘ “Karna’s son pierced Shatanika with three swift arrows and Arjuna with three more. He pierced Bhima with
three arrows, Nakula with seven and Janardana with twelve. On witnessing that superhuman deed, all the Kurus
were delighted and applauded him. But they also knew about Dhananjaya’s valour and thought that he738 was like
an oblation that had been poured into the ﬁre. Kiriti, the slayer of enemy heroes, saw that the best of men739 was
without his horses, which had been slain. In the battle, he attacked Vrishasena, who was stationed in front of the
son of a suta. In that great battle, he descended, with thousands of arrows. On seeing him advance, Karna’s maharatha son, ﬁerce and foremost among men, also attacked, like Namuchi against Indra in ancient times.740 The
son of the son of a suta then pierced Partha with many wonderful arrows. The illustrious one roared loudly, like
Namuchi in ancient times, after having pierced Shakra. Vrishasena used ﬁerce arrows to again pierce Partha in his
armpits. He struck Krishna with nine arrows and again struck Partha with ten sharp and ﬁerce arrows. Kiriti became enraged in that ﬁeld of battle and his forehead furrowed into three lines. The great-souled one shot arrows in
the battle, designed to kill the son of a suta in the battle.741 Kiriti pierced him violently in the inner organs with
ten arrows. With four razor-sharp arrows, he severed his bow, his arms and his head. He was struck by Partha’s arrows and fell down from the chariot onto the ground, deprived of his arms and head. He was like an extremely
large and ﬂowering shala tree, with a lot of leaves, which had been struck by a storm and brought down from the
summit of a mountain. The son of a suta saw that his son had been struck by arrows and had fallen down from his
chariot. He was tormented because his son had been slain. Powerfully and violently, he advanced on his chariot towards the ratha Kiriti.” ’

Chapter 1213(63)
‘S anjaya said, “On seeing that Vrishasena had been killed, Karna was overcome by anger and rage. Sudden tears
of sorrow ﬂowed down from Vrisha’s eyes. On his chariot, he spiritedly advanced towards the enemy. His eyes
were coppery red with rage and he challenged Dhananjaya to a ﬁght. Those two chariots were as radiant as the sun
and were covered with tiger skins. When they encountered each other, it was as if two suns had clashed against
each other. Those two men, scorchers of enemies, were like suns and were borne by white horses. Those two greatsouled ones were as radiant as the sun and the moon in the sky. O venerable one! On seeing them, all the beings
were astounded. They looked like Indra and Virochana’s son,742 embarking on a conquest of the three worlds.
There was the clatter of chariots, the twang of bowstrings, the slapping of palms, the whizzing of arrows and the
blare of conch shells. As they advanced on their chariots, all the lords of the earth looked on. As they clashed
against each other, the standards generated great wonder. Karna’s had the housing of an elephant and Kiriti’s the
ape. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As the two chariots clashed against each other, the kings looked on.
They emitted roars like lions and voiced loud words of applause. On hearing about the duel between them, the
warriors gathered around there. They slapped their arms powerfully and forcefully waved their garments around.
The Kurus assembled there. Wishing to cheer Karna, they blew loudly on their conch shells and instructed that musical instruments should be played. All the Pandavas also cheered Dhananjaya. They caused trumpets and conch
shells to be sounded in all the directions. The roars generated a tumultuous sound everywhere. As Karna and Arjuna clashed, the brave ones slapped their arms. They saw that those two tigers among men, supreme among rathas,
were stationed on their chariots. They grasped their giant bows, arrows, javelins, clubs and other weapons. They
were armoured and had girded their swords. They were borne on white horses that were as beautiful as conch
shells. Both of them possessed the best of quivers and were handsome. They were smeared with red sandalwood
paste on their limbs and were as crazy as bulls. They were like venomous serpents and like Yama, the Destroyer, in
their rage. They were as wrathful as Indra and Vritra and as resplendent as the sun and the moon. They were as
cruel as mighty planets that clash at the end of a yuga. They were born from gods. They were the equals of the
gods. They were like the gods in their beauty. Those two tigers among men, Karna and Dhananjaya, clashed and it
was a sight worth seeing. Both of them possessed the best of weapons and both of them were exhausted from ﬁghting. Both of them made the sky resound with the slapping of their arms. Both of them were famous for their deeds,
their manliness and their strength. In a battle, both of them were the equals of Shambara and the king of the immortals. In an encounter, both of them were the equals of Kartavirya743 and Dasharatha’s son. Both of them possessed valour that was like Vishnu’s bravery and both were Bhava’s744 equal in a ﬁght. O king! Both were borne
on white horses and on supreme chariots. The charioteers of those immensely strong ones were the best. O great
king! On seeing those two blazing maharathas, there was great amazement among the large numbers of siddhas
and charanas. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The sons of Dhritarashtra quickly surrounded Karna, the ornament of a battle, with their army. In similar fashion, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, the Pandavas joyfully
surrounded the great-souled Partha, who was unmatched in a battle. O lord of the earth! For those on your side,
Karna became the stake in the battle. In that way, for the Pandaveyas, Partha became the stake in the battle. The
troops on both sides, and those who had assembled, were eager to witness the encounter. The stakes were determined and it was certain that there would be victory, or there would be defeat. Stationed on the ﬁeld of battle, the
gambling match between us and the Pandavas commenced, with the objective of victory, or its reverse. O great
king! Those two, who were skilled in ﬁghting, were stationed in the encounter. They were extremely angry to-

wards each other and wished to defeat each other. Like Indra and Vritra, they wished to kill each other. They assumed fearful forms, like planets trailing a lot of smoke.
‘ “O bull among the Bharata lineage! As they took sides between Karna and Arjuna, there were differences, debates, dissension and arguments among those in the sky and among all beings. O venerable one! The directions
and all the worlds also adopted different sides. When Karna and Arjuna clashed, the gods, the danavas, the gandharvas, the pishachas, the serpents and the rakshasas adopted different sides. O lord of the earth! The sky and the
nakshatras became anxious on Karna’s account.745 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The extensive earth was
anxious on Partha’s account, like a mother for her son.746 O supreme among men! The rivers, the oceans, the
mountains, the trees and the herbs took Kiriti’s side. O scorcher of enemies! The asuras, the yatudhanas, the
guhyakas, crows and others who travelled through the sky were on Karna’s side. The stores of all gems, the Vedas
and accounts as the ﬁfth,747 the minor Vedas, the Upanishads, with collections of their commentaries, Vasuki,
Chitrasena, Takshaka, Upatakshaka, all the mountains, Kadru’s offspring and immensely wrathful and virulent serpents were on Arjuna’s side.748 Airavata’s offspring, the offspring of Surabhi and Vaishali and the serpents were
on Arjuna’s side.749 The smaller snakes were on Karna’s side. O king! The wolves, jackals and all the auspicious
animals and birds were on Partha’s side, wishing for his victory. The Vasus, the Maruts, the Sadhyas, the Rudras,
the Vishvas,750 the Ashvins, Agni, Indra, the moon god, the wind god and the ten directions were on Dhananjaya’s side, while the Adityas were on Karna’s side.751 The gods, together with the large number of ancestors,
were on Arjuna’s side. Yama, Vaishravana752 and Varuna were also with Arjuna. The gods, the brahmanas, the
kings and the large number of rishis were with Pandava. O king! The gandharvas, with Tumburu at the head, were
with Arjuna. The descendants of Prava and Muni, the large numbers of gandharvas and apsaras,753 wolves, predatory beasts, animals, birds, large numbers of chariots, different forms of clouds and winds, and sages assembled
there to witness the clash between Karna and Arjuna. O great king! The gods, the danavas, the gandharvas, the nagas, the yakshas, birds, maharshis learned in the Vedas, the ancestors who thrive on svadha oblations,754 austerities, learning and the herbs, in many different forms and attires, took up their places in the ﬁrmament and this created a great noise. Brahma, with the brahmarshis and the Prajapatis755 and Bhava,756 on his celestial chariot, also
arrived at the spot.
‘ “On seeing that Prajapati,757 the self-creating one, had arrived, the gods spoke to him. ‘O god! Let this struggle for victory between these two lions among men be paciﬁed.’ Hearing this, Maghavan758 prostrated himself
before the grandfather and said, ‘Let the entire universe not be destroyed because of Karna and Arjuna. O self-creating one! You had earlier said that Vijaya and the other one759 are identical. O illustrious one! I am bowing down
before you. Be paciﬁed and let that be true.’ Brahma and Ishana760 spoke these words to the lord of the thirty
gods. ‘The victory of the great-souled Vijaya is certain. He is spirited, powerful and brave. He is skilled in the use
of weapons and is rich in austerities. Great energy is manifested in him, especially in dhanurveda. Through his
greatness, he is capable of overcoming destiny. He is capable of controlling and overcoming the worlds. When the
two Krishnas are angered, no one is capable of standing before them. Those two bulls among men are truly the creators of the universe. They are the ancient and supreme rishis Nara and Narayana.761 Those two scorchers of enemies control everything and cannot be controlled by anyone. Karna, foremost in the worlds, is a bull among men.
Vaikartana is brave and valiant. But let the two Krishnas be victorious. With Drona and Bhishma, let him762 obtain the great world of heaven and the worlds of the Vasus and the Maruts.’ Having heard the words spoken by
those two gods of the gods and abiding by the instructions of Brahma and Ishana, the one with the one thousand
eyes spoke these words to all the beings. ‘You have heard what the two illustrious ones have said for the welfare of
the universe. It must happen that way and cannot be countered. Therefore, do not be anxious.’ O venerable one! O
king! Having heard Indra’s words, all the beings were astounded and honoured him. The gods showered down
many kinds of fragrant ﬂowers from the sky and sounded divine trumpets. To witness the unmatched duel between
those two lions among men, all the gods, danavas and gandharvas waited.

‘ “The two chariots were yoked to white horses. They possessed standards and made a loud noise. The brave
ones from the world assembled and separately blew on their conch shells. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! So
did the brave Vasudeva and Arjuna and Karna and Shalya. The battle that generated terror among cowards commenced. They rivalled each other in their valour, like Shakra and Shambara. The two clear and radiant standards
were ﬁxed to the chariots. As they angrily prepared to ﬁght each other, they763 were thick. Karna’s resplendent
one was marked with an elephant’s housing. It was bejewelled and ﬁrm, like Purandara’s bow, and like a venomous serpent. The best of apes opened its terrible and gaping mouth on Partha’s. It was extremely ﬁerce and difﬁcult to look at, like the sun. Stationed on the standard of the wielder of Gandiva, it desired a ﬁght. It roared loudly
and ﬂung itself on Karna’s standard. Having descended with great force, the ape used its nails and its teeth to destroy the elephant’s housing, like Garuda against serpents. The elephant’s housing was well decorated with bells. It
was like Yama’s noose and was hard as iron. It angrily attacked the giant ape. As those two excellent ones challenged each other to a duel, the standards began to ﬁght each other, wishing to destroy each other.
‘ “Pundarikaksha pierced Shalya with the arrows of his sight and he also glanced back at Pundarikaksha in a
similar way. Using the arrows of his sight, Vasudeva defeated Shalya. Kunti’s son, Dhananjaya, also glanced at
Karna with his sight and vanquished him. At this, the son of a suta smiled and told Shalya, ‘O friend! If through
some means, Partha slays me in the battle today, what will you do after that? Tell me truthfully.’ Shalya replied, ‘O
Karna! If the one with the white horses kills you in the battle today, I will slay both Madhava and Pandava.’ In that
way, Arjuna also asked Govinda. However, Krishna laughed and spoke these supreme words to Partha. ‘The sun
may fall down from its place. The earth may shatter into many fragments. The ﬁre may become cold. But Karna
will not be able to kill Dhananjaya. However, if this does happen, the world will be destroyed. Using my arms in
the battle, I will kill Karna and Shalya.’ Having heard Krishna’s words, the one with the ape on his banner
laughed. Arjuna told Krishna, the performer of undecaying deeds, ‘O Janardana! Karna and Shalya together are not
sufﬁcient for me. In the battle today, you will see Karna severed into many fragments with my arrows, with Karna’s ﬂags and standard, with Shalya, the chariot and the horses, with his umbrella and armour, and with his
javelins, arrows and bow. In earlier times, he laughed at Krishna.764 Today, you will see Karna uprooted by me,
like a ﬂowering tree brought down by a maddened elephant. O Madhusudana! After that, you will hear pleasant
words today. Today, you will be able to comfort Abhimanyu’s mother and repay her debt. O Janardana! Kunti,
your father’s sister, will be delighted. O Madhava! The tears on Krishna’s765 face will be comforted today. You
will be able to speak immortal words to Dharmaraja Yudhishthira.’” ’

Chapter 1214(64)
‘S anjaya said, “With nagas, asuras, large numbers of siddhas, gandharvas, yakshas, large numbers of apsaras,
brahmarshis, rajarshis and groups of birds, the sky was beautiful in form. There were pleasant sounds of musical
instruments. There were sounds of praise. There was singing and dancing. All those in the sky, and men, were
spectators. The sky assumed a beautiful form. Cheerfully, the warriors on the Kuru and Pandava sides made the
earth and the directions resound with their musical instruments, the sounds of arrows and weapons and leonine
roars. With that sound, they began to slaughter their enemies. The ﬁeld of battle had many horses, elephants and
chariots and it was extremely difﬁcult to withstand, because of the descent of supreme swords, javelins and scimitars. As they attacked, bodies were slain and it was red and beautiful because of the blood. As the battle commenced, Dhananjaya and Adhiratha’s son, supreme among wielders of weapons, used their sharp and swift arrows
against the soldiers in all directions. They were armoured and showered these towards each other.766 Because of
the darkness that was created by the arrows, those on one’s own side could not be distinguished from that of the
enemy. Since they767 were terriﬁed, they sought refuge with those two rathas, who were like the extending rays of
the sun at the end of darkness. Those two countered each other’s weapons with their own, like the east wind clashing against the west wind. They were as radiant as two suns, dispelling the thick darkness after the sun has arisen.
Each encouraged those on his side to take a stand against the enemy. The two maharathas were surrounded in
every direction, like the gods and the asuras around Vasava and Shambara. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Drums, smaller drums and battle drums were sounded. There was the blare of conch shells. This mingled with
roars like lions. Those two supreme among men were dazzling, like the sun and the moon amidst a thick mass of
clouds. Both of them possessed large bows drawn into circles, like radiant solar discs, with thousands of arrows as
the rays. They were extremely unassailable in battle and were like two suns that had arisen at the end of a yuga to
destroy all mobile and immobile objects in the universe. They were both invincible and capable of destroying illwishers. They were accomplished and wished to kill each other. In the great battle, Karna and Pandava, supreme
among brave ones, clashed, like Indra and Jambha. Those two great archers released great weapons and terrible
arrows. As they sought to kill each other with supreme arrows, they slaughtered large numbers of men, horses and
elephants. Terriﬁed and afﬂicted again by those arrows, the Kurus and Pandavas sought refuge with those two
supreme among men. Elephants, foot soldiers, horses and chariots ﬂed in various directions, like residents of a forest out of fear for a lion.
‘ “Duryodhana, Bhoja, Soubala, Kripa and Sharadvata’s son— these ﬁve maharathas attacked Dhananjaya and
Achyuta with arrows that could destroy the body. Dhananjaya used his arrows to destroy their bows, arrows, horses, standards, chariots and charioteers. Having countered and defeated them, he struck the son of a suta with
twelve supreme arrows. At this, one hundred chariots, one hundred elephants, riders from Shakas, Tukharas and
Yavanas and the best of Kambojas attacked Arjuna, desiring to kill him. However, Dhananjaya used razor-sharp
arrows to swiftly sever the supreme weapons in their hands, heads, horses, elephants and chariots of the large numbers of the enemy who were ﬁghting against him. The assembled gods in the sky were delighted and applauded by
sounding their trumpets. Showers of beautiful and fragrant ﬂowers were rained down. Auspicious winds began to
blow. O king! Gods, men and beings who witnessed that wonderful sight were amazed. However, your son and the
son of a suta certainly felt neither pain, nor wonder. Drona’s son grasped your son’s hand in his own hand and
comforted him. He said, ‘O Duryodhana! Be paciﬁed. Make peace with the Pandavas. There is no need for dissension. Shame on war. Your preceptor768 was Brahma’s equal and knew about great weapons. He has been killed
and so have bulls among men, with Bhishma as the foremost. I cannot be killed and neither can my maternal

uncle.769 Together with the Pandavas, enjoy the kingdom for a long time. Restrained by me, Dhananjaya will
withdraw. Janardana does not desire a conﬂict either. Yudhishthira is always engaged in the welfare of beings.
Vrikodara is obedient to him and so are the twins. If there is peace between you and Partha,770 all the subjects will
be fortunate and that seems to be your desire too. Let the remaining kings return to their own cities. Let the soldiers refrain from hostilities. O lord of men! If you do not listen to my words, you are certain to be slain by the enemies in the battle and will repent. This universe, and you, has seen what the one with the diadem and the
garland771 has single-handedly accomplished. This has not been accomplished by the destroyer of Bala,772
Yama, the illustrious Prachetas773 and the king of the yakshas.774 There are many other qualities that Dhananjaya
possesses. He will not transgress my words. He will act so as to follow you. O king! For the beneﬁt of the world,
be paciﬁed. You have always shown me great honour and I have reciprocated. I am your great well-wisher and that
is the reason I am speaking these words. If you are inclined towards affection, I will restrain Karna too. Those who
are learned say that there are four kinds of friends—those who are natural friends, those who are made such
through conciliation, those who are earned through riches and those who are subjugated through power. Towards
you, the Pandavas are all four. O brave one! They are naturally your relatives. Make them that through conciliation. O Indra among kings! If they are paciﬁed and become friends towards you, it is certain that you should also
act in that way.’ Having heard the beneﬁcial words spoken by his well-wisher, he775 thought for some time. He
sighed and, distressed in his mind, replied, ‘O friend! It is as you have said. However, listen to the words that I will
tell you. Vrikodara is evil-minded. He slew Duhshasana like a tiger, and laughing, spoke many words. Those are
still lodged in my heart. They were uttered in your presence. How can there be peace? O son of my preceptor! O
unblemished one! You should not speak to Karna and try to restrain him. Phalguna is overcome by great exhaustion. Karna will kill him in a short while.’ Humbly and respectfully, your son repeatedly spoke these words and instructed his soldiers, ‘Attack and kill those who seek to injure us. Why is the sound of arrows not heard and why is
everything quiet?’” ’

Chapter 1215(65)
‘S anjaya said, “The blare of conch shells and the beating of drums became loud. Those two best among men,
Vaikartana, the son of a suta, and Arjuna, borne on white horses, clashed against each other. O king! This was because of the evil counsels of your son. They were like two elephants with shattered temples from the Himalayas,
attacking each other with their tusks in a desire for intercourse.776 The brave Dhananjaya and Adhiratha’s son
rushed against each other with ﬁerce force, as they willed. It was like a cloud dashing against another cloud, or a
mountain against another mountain. The twang of bowstrings and the sound of palms could be heard. The wheels
of the chariots rattled. They clashed and showered down arrows. They were like large mountain tops, covered with
trees and herbs and populated by many kinds of dwellers of mountains, dashing against each other. As they struck
each other with great weapons, those two immensely strong ones were like mountains that had been dislodged. The
clash between those two great ones was like that between the lord of the gods and Virochana’s son777 in ancient
times. Arrows mangled their bodies and those of their charioteers and horses. This was impossible for others to
withstand. Blood began to ﬂow like water. It was as if there were two large ponds ﬁlled with lotuses, lilies, ﬁsh and
turtles and resounding with the calls of a large number of birds. It was as if they were being gently stirred by the
wind. Those two chariots, with standards, were like that and they approached each other. Each of them possessed a
valour that was like that of the great Indra. Those two maharathas were as resplendent as the great Indra. Their arrows were like the vajra of the great Indra. They attacked each other, like the great Indra and Vritra. Both armies
possessed elephants, foot soldiers, horses and chariots. There were diverse colourful ornaments and garments.
Everyone, including those in the sky, trembled and was astounded at the clash between Karna and Arjuna. The
spectators raised their arms, with diamonds on their ﬁngers. They were delighted and roared like lions. Adhiratha’s
son attacked Arjuna, wishing to kill him, like a crazy elephant against another elephant. The Somakas roared and
urged Partha on. ‘O Arjuna! Speed up. Pierce Karna. Sever his sparkling head without any delay. This is because
of the greed that Dhritarashtra’s son has for the kingdom.’ In similar fashion, many warriors from our side exclaimed, ‘O Karna! Proceed. Advance. O Karna! Slay Arjuna without any delay. Let the Parthas again be banished
to the forest for a long time.’
‘ “With ten great arrows, Karna struck Partha ﬁrst. Extremely angry, Arjuna pierced him back in the ﬂanks with
ten sharp and ﬁerce arrows. The son of a suta and Arjuna struck and wounded each other with extremely sharp arrows. So as to crush each other, they sought for a weakness in the adversary. Cheerfully, but ﬁercely, they attacked
each other in the great conﬂict. In the great conﬂict, the great-souled Bhimasena became wrathful and intolerant.
He squeezed his hands and bit his lips with his teeth. Dancing around like a musician, he asked, ‘O Kiriti! How
was it that the son of a suta was able to pierce you ﬁrst with ten great arrows? Do you remember the fortitude with
which you defeated all beings and satisﬁed Agni in Khandava? Use that fortitude and kill the son of a suta. Otherwise, let me bring him down with a club.’ On seeing that Partha’s arrows were being repulsed, Vasudeva spoke to
him. ‘O Kiriti! How is it that in every way, your weapons today are being countered by Karna’s weapons? O brave
one! Why do you look like someone who is confused? The Kurus are cheerfully roaring. All of them are honouring
Karna, knowing that all your weapons have been destroyed by his. In yuga after yuga, you have used fortitude to
destroy the weapons of darkness and terrible rakshasas. You slew Dambhodbhava and other asuras in
encounters.778 Use that fortitude and slay the son of a suta. Or use this sudarshana chakra now and slice off his
head. It is sharp at the edges and even the immortals cannot withstand it. It has been used by me earlier, like
Shakra using the vajra to strike Namuchi. The illustrious one, in the form of a hunter, was pleased by your greatness and fortitude.779 Resort to that fortitude again and slay the son of a suta, together with his relatives. Give this

earth, right up to the frontiers of the ocean, prosperous with its towns and villages, to the king.780 O Partha! Having slain large numbers of the enemy, obtain unlimited fame.’ Having been thus urged by both Bhima and Janardana, he glanced towards his own self and remembered his spirit.
‘ “The great-souled one knew the reason for his birth and spoke to Keshava. ‘I will release a great and ﬁerce
weapon for the welfare of the worlds and for the death of the son of a suta. Let me have your permission, that of
the gods, Brahma, Bhava and all the ones who are knowledgeable about the brahman.’ Having said this, he invoked the invincible brahmastra in his mind, in accordance with the prescribed rites. All the directions and subdirections were covered by extremely energetic arrows. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Many hundreds of swift
arrows were released from it. In the midst of this, Vaikartana also created many thousands of arrows. These descended on Pandava with a large roar, like showers of rain released from a cloud. He performed a superhuman
deed and pierced Bhimasena, Janardana and Kiriti with three arrows each. Terrible in his strength, he then emitted
a loud and ﬁerce roar. Kiriti saw that Bhima and Janardana had also been struck by Karna’s arrows. He became intolerant and shot eighteen arrows again. He pierced Sushena with one arrow, Shalya with four and Karna with
three. He then shot ten excellent arrows and killed Sabhapati,781 who was clad in golden armour. The head and
the arms of that prince were severed. He was without his charioteer, bow and standard. He was mangled and fell
down from the chariot, like a shala tree sliced down with an axe. He again pierced Karna with three, eight, two and
fourteen arrows. He slew four hundred elephants, stocked with weapons, eight hundred rathas, one thousand horses
and riders and eight thousand valiant foot soldiers. Karna and Partha fought on. They were the best of the brave
and the slayers of enemies. The spectators, who were assembled in the sky and on earth, controlled their mounts
and watched what was going on in the battle.
‘ “Pandava’s bowstring was being drawn with great force and snapped, with a loud noise. At that moment, the
son of a suta struck Partha with one hundred kshudraka arrows. He pierced Vasudeva with sixty sharp iron arrows
that were washed in oil and were tufted with the feathers of birds. They were like snakes that had cast off their
skins. At this, the Somakas ran away. Partha became extremely angry. His body was mangled by Karna’s arrows.
He stretched his bowstring and swiftly countered the arrows of Adhiratha’s son. He made the Somakas return. The
sky was darkened because of this release of weapons and birds were unable to ﬂy. Partha pierced Shalya’s body
armour with ten arrows and laughed. He pierced Karna with twelve well-aimed arrows and pierced him again with
another seven. He was ﬁrmly struck by Partha’s forceful arrows. Those arrows were ﬁerce in their power. His body
was mangled and his limbs were wounded. Karna looked as beautiful as Rudra at the time of destruction. Dhananjaya was the equal of the lord of the gods. However, Adhiratha’s son struck him with three arrows. Wishing to slay
Achyuta, he next shot ﬁve arrows that were like ﬂaming serpents. They were decorated with gold and were aimed
well. They pierced Purushottama’s armour with great force and passing through, entered the earth. Having bathed
there, they returned to Karna. Quickly, with well-aimed and broad-headed arrows, Dhananjaya sliced each of them
into three fragments and they fell down on the ground. They were mighty serpents that were on the side of Takshaka’s son.782 The one with the diadem and the garland ﬂamed in rage, like a ﬁre that burns down dead wood. He
drew his bow all the way back to his ears and shot many ﬂaming arrows that were capable of bringing an end to
the body. They pierced him783 in the inner organs and made him waver. However, he was extremely patient and
used that fortitude to withstand the grief. O king! Dhananjaya angrily covered Karna’s chariot, all the directions
and the sub-directions with his torrents of arrows. These shrouded the radiance of the sun. The sky also seemed to
disappear, as if it was covered in snow. On the instructions of Duryodhana, there were those who were guarding
the chariot wheels, the feet, the front and the rear.784 These were excellent rathas and the best. In the battle,
Savyasachi slew all of them. He killed two thousand of the foremost Kurus, bulls among the Kuru lineage. O king!
In a short instant, the brave one single-handedly destroyed all of them, with their chariots, horses and charioteers.
They ﬂed, abandoning Karna. And so did your son and the Kurus who were left. They abandoned those who were
slain and wounded by the arrows, including lamenting sons and fathers. All the directions were emptied and devoid of Kurus, because they were afﬂicted by fear. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! However, on seeing this,
Karna wasn’t distressed. Cheerfully, he attacked Arjuna.” ’

Chapter 1216(66)
‘S anjaya said, “They ﬂed because of that descent of arrows. The soldiers of the Kurus were routed. However, they
waited at a distance and glanced back, gazing at Dhananjaya’s weapons, which were descending like lightning in
all directions. In that great battle, the angry Partha quickly unleashed a weapon to slay Karna. However, while Arjuna’s weapon was still travelling and roaring through the air, the brave one destroyed it with a great weapon that
he had obtained from Atharvan Rama785 and which was capable of destroying enemies. Having destroyed Arjuna’s weapon, he struck Partha with innumerable sharp arrows. O king! The clash between Arjuna and Adhiratha’s
son assumed a great and dreadful form. They struck each other with arrows, like two ﬁerce elephants goring each
other with their tusks. Karna afﬁxed an extremely sharp and ﬂaming arrow that was capable of slaying the enemy.
This had a serpent in its mouth.786 That terrible arrow had been carefully preserved and washed well, protected
well for Partha’s destruction. It had been worshipped and laid down on a bed of sandalwood paste. That immensely
virulent weapon was lying down in a golden quiver. It was generated from the lineage of Airavata787 and ﬂamed.
Wishing to kill Phalguna in the battle, he aimed at his head. On seeing that Vaikartana had afﬁxed that arrow, the
great-souled king of Madra said, ‘O Karna! This arrow will not be able to reach his neck. Fix and aim another arrow that can sever his head.’ With eyes that were red with rage, Karna afﬁxed that arrow and told Shalya, ‘O
Shalya! Karna will not afﬁx a second arrow. Someone like me does not engage in deceit.’ Having said this, he released that arrow, the serpent which he had worshipped for many years. He said, ‘O Phalguna! You have been
slain,’ and swiftly shot the arrow. On seeing that Karna had afﬁxed the serpent, Madhava, supreme among strong
ones, used his strength to press down on the chariot with his feet. The chariot sank down on the ground and the
horses sank down on their knees.
‘ “The arrow struck down the intelligent one’s diadem. The ornament that adorned Arjuna’s head was famous
throughout the earth, heaven and the waters. In his anger and through the strength of his weapon, the son of a suta
used the arrow to bring it down from his head. It possessed the ﬂaming radiance of the sun, the moon and the planets. It was decorated with nets of gold, pearls and gems. Using his austerities and efforts, this had been crafted for
Purandara by the earth’s son himself.788 It was extremely expensive in form and generated terror amongst the enemy. It was fragrant and brought happiness to the one who wore it. When he killed the enemies of the gods,789 the
lord of the gods was delighted and himself gave it to Kiriti. It could not be destroyed by Hara, the lord of the waters or the protector of riches,790 and by the pinaka, pasha or vajra791 and the best of arrows. The supreme gods
were incapable of withstanding it. However, using the serpent, Vrisha now destroyed it. The ﬂame of the poison
uprooted it from his head and brought the beloved crown, with ﬂaming rays, down on the ground. Partha’s
supreme diadem fell down, like the blazing sun setting over Mount Asta. The crown was decorated with many
gems. The serpent forcefully tore it down from Arjuna’s head. It was as if an excellent mountain top, with shoots
and blossoming trees, was struck down by the great Indra’s vajra. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The earth,
the sky, heaven and the waters seemed to be whirled around by a tempest. Such a noise arose on earth then.
Though they tried to control themselves, people were distressed and trembled. But Arjuna was not distressed. He
tied the hair on his head with a white garment. The serpent released from Karna’s arms was extremely radiant, like
the rays of the sun. That giant serpent was ﬁrm in its enmity of Arjuna. It struck the diadem and fell down. It told
him,792 ‘Know who I am. I am ﬁrm in my enmity of the two Krishnas, because they slew my mother.’793 In the
battle, Krishna then spoke to Partha. ‘The giant serpent is ﬁrm in its enmity. Slay it.’ Having been thus addressed
by Madhusudana, the wielder of Gandiva, ﬁerce in using the bow and arrow against enemies, asked, ‘Who is the
serpent who is advancing against me of his own accord, as if into Garuda’s gaping mouth?’ Krishna replied, ‘In

Khandava, you satisﬁed the blazing one794 with the bow in your hand. You killed his mother, taking her to be a
single snake. However, though her body was destroyed by the arrows, he was in the sky, covered by her.’ The serpent was falling down from the sky. Jishnu severed the serpent with six sharp arrows. Mangled in its body, it fell
down on the ground.
‘ “At the time, Karna, foremost among brave men, glanced sideways at Dhananjaya and pierced him with ten
arrows that had been sharpened on stone and were tufted with the feathers of peacocks. Arjuna drew his bow all
the way back up to his ears and struck him with twelve sharp arrows. Those iron arrows were like venomous serpents in their force. He drew his bow all the way back up to his ears and shot them. They were released well. They
shattered his supreme and colourful armour, as if they were robbing him of his life. Having drunk Karna’s blood,
they penetrated the ground, with the tufts smeared with blood. Vrisha became extremely angry at being struck by
the arrows, like a giant serpent that has been beaten with a staff. He swiftly shot supreme arrows that were like giant serpents with excellent poison. He struck Janardana with twelve arrows and Arjuna with ninety-nine. Karna
again pierced Pandava with terrible arrows and roared loudly. Pandava could not tolerate this joy. He was like Indra in his valour. He shot supreme arrows, like Indra energetically striking Bala. Arjuna shot ninety arrows at Karna and each of them was like Yama’s staff. Those arrows severely mangled his body, like a mountain shattered by
thunder. The crown on his head was decorated with gems and diamonds and he wore excellent earrings. These
were severed by Dhananjaya’s arrows and fell down. His radiant and excellent armour was carefully crafted by the
best of craftsmen over a long period of time. It was extremely expensive. In an instant, Pandava shattered this into
many fragments with his arrows. Having deprived him of his armour with those excellent arrows, he then angrily
struck him with four arrows. Distressed and struck by his enemy, he was like a diseased person, suffering from
bile, phlegm, wind and wounds. Arjuna spiritedly shot sharp arrows from the great circle of his bow. He made
great efforts and struck with strength. Karna was struck by many supreme arrows and they penetrated his inner organs. Karna was struck by many of Partha’s sharp arrows. He was severely wounded by those arrows that were
ﬁerce and forceful. He looked as beautiful as a mountain with red chalk, from which, streams of red water were
ﬂowing down the slopes. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Kiriti struck Karna and his horses and his chariot
with vatsadanta arrows. Making every effort, he used gold-tufted arrows to envelope the directions. When he was
struck in his broad chest by those vatsadanta arrows, Adhiratha’s son looked resplendent. He looked like a blossoming ashoka, palasha or shalmali tree, or like a trembling mountain with many sandalwood trees. O lord of the
earth! With those many arrows stuck to his body, Karna looked beautiful in the battle. He looked like a valley in a
mountain, covered with many large trees, or like a giant mountain, with sparkling karnikara trees.
‘ “Karna also shot a large number of arrows from his bow. With those nets of arrows as rays, he looked dazzling.
He was like the sun advancing towards sunset, red and with a crimson solar disc. Those arrows were released from
the arms of Adhiratha’s son and blazed like giant serpents in the sky. In all the directions, they clashed with the
sharp and ﬁerce arrows released from Arjuna’s arms and destroyed them. At that time, the earth trembled and the
son of a suta became confused in the battle. Because of the brahmana’s curse, the chariot was whirled around in
the encounter.795 Because of Rama’s curse, the weapons no longer manifested themselves. Unable to tolerate this,
he whirled his garments and his arms around and lamented, ‘Those who know about dharma have always held that
that dharma protects those who place dharma at the forefront. But instead of protecting one who is devoted, it is
now bringing me down. I think that dharma does not always protect.’ While he was speaking in this way, his horses and chariot were dislodged and he began to waver because of the downpour of Arjuna’s weapons. He was struck
in his inner organs and was incapable of acting. He repeatedly censured dharma. In the battle, having been struck
by three ﬁerce arrows in the arm, Karna then pierced Partha with seven. Arjuna struck him back with seventeen
straight-ﬂying and energetic arrows. They were as terrible as Indra’s vajra and like ﬁre to the touch. They pierced
him with great force and then fell down on the surface of the earth.
‘ “Karna trembled. However, he exhibited great capacity. Using his strength, he invoked brahmastra. On seeing
this, Arjuna invoked mantras and released aindrastra. Dhananjaya also invoked mantras on the bowstring of Gandiva and the arrows. He released showers of arrows, like Purandara pouring down rain. Those energetic arrows issued from the immensely valorous Partha’s chariot and were about to destroy Karna’s chariot. However, when they
arrived in front of him, maharatha Karna repulsed all of them. When that weapon was destroyed, the brave one

from the Vrishni lineage said, ‘O Partha! Radheya is destroying your arrows. Release supreme weapons.’ Using
mantras, Arjuna released brahmastra. With those radiant arrows, Arjuna shrouded Karna. But Karna used extremely energetic arrows to angrily sever his bowstring. Fixing another bowstring, Pandava enveloped Karna with thousands of ﬁery arrows. In that battle, when Karna severed his bowstring, he ﬁxed another one so quickly that no one
could make this out. It was wonderful. Using his weapons, Radheya countered all of Savyasachi’s weapons. At that
time, his valour seemed to be greater than that of Partha. Krishna saw that Arjuna was afﬂicted because of Karna’s
weapons. He said, ‘O Partha! Go closer and strike him with the best weapons.’ Dhananjaya invoked an arrow with
divine mantras. It was like a ﬁre and the poison of a serpent. It was made completely out of iron. Kiriti united this
with roudrastra and wished to shoot it. But, in that great battle, the earth swallowed up one of the wheels of Radheya’s chariot.
‘ “Radheya wept in rage. He told Arjuna, ‘O Pandava! Wait for an instant. You can see that because of destiny,
my central wheel796 has got submerged. O Partha! Abandon the thought797 that only beﬁts a coward. O Arjuna!
One should not shoot a weapon at one with dishevelled hair, at one who doesn’t wish to ﬁght, at a brahmana, at
someone who has joined his hands in salutation, at one who has sought refuge, at one who has cast aside his
weapons, at someone who faces a calamity, at someone who doesn’t have arrows, at a person whose armour has
been destroyed, or at a person whose weapons have been shattered and broken. Brave ones do not strike at such
people, nor do kings and lords of the earth. O Kounteya! You are brave. Wait for a short while. O Dhananjaya! Let
me extricate the wheel from the ground. You are stationed on your chariot. You should not kill me when I am on
the ground. O Pandaveya! You and Vasudeva are not frightened of me. You are a kshatriya and you are the extender of a great lineage. O Pandava! Remember the instructions of dharma and wait for a short while.’” ’

Chapter 1217(67)
‘S anjaya said, “Vasudeva was stationed on his chariot. He said, ‘O Radheya! It is fortunate that you remember
dharma. Quite often, when they are immersed in hardships, inferior ones censure destiny, but not their evil deeds.
O Karna! When you, Suyodhana, Duhshasana and Shakuni Soubala brought Droupadi to the assembly hall in a
single garment, did dharma not show itself to you? When, in the assembly hall, Yudhishthira, who was not skilled
at dice, was defeated by Shakuni, who was skilled at dice, where did dharma go then? O Karna! During her season,
Krishna798 was under Duhshasana’s subjugation in the assembly hall and you laughed at her. Where did dharma
go then? O Karna! Resorting to the king of Gandhara and coveting the kingdom, you challenged the Pandavas.799
Where did dharma go then?’ When Vasudeva addressed Radheya in this way, Pandava Dhananjaya remembered all
this and was overcome by great rage. Energetic ﬂames of anger seemed to issue out from all the pores on his body
and it was extraordinary.
‘ “On seeing this, Karna again invoked brahmastra against Dhananjaya. He showered down arrows and tried to
extricate his chariot. Pandava countered those weapons with his own weapons. Kounteya then released another
weapon, beloved of the ﬁre god, towards Karna. It blazed ﬁercely. Karna paciﬁed the ﬁre through a varuna
weapon. He covered all the directions with clouds and it was as dark as a rainy day. Pandaveya was not frightened.
While Radheya looked on, the valiant one used the vayavya weapon and dispelled all the clouds. The supreme
one’s standard had the marks of an elephant’s housing. It was decorated with gold, pearls, jewels and diamonds. It
had been crafted by excellent artisans over a long period of time. It was expensive and beautiful in form. It always
inspired your soldiers and terriﬁed and frightened the enemy. It was renowned in the world and blazed like the sun
and the moon. Kiriti used a razor-sharp arrow that was gold-tufted and pointed. With that, he brought down the
handsome and blazing standard of the great-souled maharatha, Adhiratha’s son. O venerable one! When that standard was uprooted, fame, dharma, victory and everything that was dear to the hearts of the Kurus also fell down.
Great sounds of lamentation arose.
‘ “To ensure Karna’s death, Pandava took out an anjalika arrow. It was like the great Indra’s vajra, or like a rod
that was made out of ﬁre. It blazed in its rays, like the one with one thousand rays.800 It was capable of penetrating the inner organs and smearing itself with blood and ﬂesh. It was extremely expensive and was like the ﬁre and
the sun. It could destroy men, horses and elephants and was three cubits long, with six tufts.801 It travelled straight
and possessed a great force. In its energy, it was like the vajra of the one with one thousand eyes. It was as difﬁcult
to withstand as predatory beasts. It was like the pinaka and Narayana’s chakra. It was fearful and destructive of living beings. He invoked mantras and afﬁxed that supreme and great weapon to Gandiva. He loudly said, ‘I am
grasping this great weapon, which is in the form of an arrow. It is extremely difﬁcult to withstand and is capable of
destroying the body. If I have tormented myself through austerities and have satisﬁed my seniors, if I have listened
to what my well-wishers have told me, through that truth, let this arrow slay my armoured enemy, Karna, and bring
me victory.’ Having said this, for the sake of Karna’s death, Dhananjaya released that terrible arrow. It was as
ﬁerce as rites performed by Atharvan and Angiras. It blazed and was impossible to be endured in a battle, even by
Death itself. Kiriti cheerfully said, ‘Let this arrow bring me victory.’ Wishing to slay Karna, bring about his end
and convey him to Yama, he released the arrow, which was as radiant as the sun and the moon. Cheerfully, so that
he could be conveyed towards victory, the one with the diadem and the garland shot the arrow. It was as radiant as
the sun and the moon. He harboured feelings of enmity and wished to slay his enemy. That weapon, blazing like
the sun, was shot. Like the sun, it lit up the earth with its radiance. The head of the commander of the army was
severed. Like the sun, with a red disc, it seemed to set. The body of the one who performed generous deeds was

always reared in happiness. Like a person who is reluctant to leave a house ﬁlled with great riches, the head parted
from the body with great difﬁculty. Without the armour, the body was mangled by arrows and lost its life. Karna’s
body was severed and fell down. Blood oozed from the wounds, like red chalk ﬂowing from the slopes of a mountain, when the summit has been struck by thunder. When Karna’s body fell down, a ﬂaming mass of energy arose
and rose up into the sky. O king! When Karna was slain, all the men and warriors witnessed this great wonder.
‘ “On seeing that he had been slain and was lying down, with their soldiers, the Somakas roared in delight. They
joyfully blew on their trumpets and waved their garments and hands around. Other troops danced around. They
embraced each other, roaring in delight. They saw that Karna had been destroyed and was lying down on the
ground. The ratha had been slain and mangled by the arrows. It was as if the untainted and extinguished ﬁre was
lying down in the expansive sky, after the end of a sacriﬁce. All his limbs were mangled by arrows and torrents of
blood ﬂowed from them. Karna’s body was beautiful, like the rays of the sun in the ﬁrmament. He had tormented
the soldiers of the enemy with ﬂaming arrows that were like the sun’s rays. The powerful Karna was like the setting sun, conveyed to death by Arjuna. When the sun sets, all its radiance also departs. Like that, the arrow took
away Karna’s life. O venerable one! It was the late part of the afternoon then. Severed by the anjalika in the battle,
the head and the body of the son of a suta fell down. While the soldiers of the enemy looked on, it swiftly severed
Karna’s head and body.
‘ “The brave Karna fell down on the ground. Mangled by arrows, blood ﬂowed out from his body. On seeing
that he was lying down on the ground and seeing that the standard had been severed, the king of Madra withdrew
on the chariot. When Karna was slain, the Kurus ﬂed. They were severely struck in the battle and were afﬂicted
with fear. They repeatedly glanced at Arjuna’s great standard, blazing in form. He802 had performed deeds like
those of the one with one thousand eyes. His face was as beautiful as one with one thousand petals.803 He was like
the one with one thousand rays, at the end of the day. Thus did his head fall down on the ground.” ’

Chapter 1218(68)
‘S anjaya said, “In the course of the encounter between Karna and Arjuna, the soldiers had been mangled with arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing this, Shalya went to Duryodhana, who was glancing at the
ﬁeld of battle. Duryodhana saw that his army, with its chariots, horses and elephants, had been destroyed and the
son of a suta had been killed. His eyes ﬁlled with tears and in great distress, he sighed repeatedly. The brave Karna
had fallen down on the ground. His body had been mangled by arrows and blood ﬂowed from it. It was as if the
sun had fallen down from the sky. To see this, everyone came there and surrounded the body. There were those
who belonged to your side and others who belonged to the enemy. Some were cheerful. Others were frightened.
Some were distressed. Others were amazed. There were others who were completely overcome by grief. According to their natural traits, they looked towards each other. Karna had possessed armour, ornaments, garments and
weapons. On seeing that he had been brought down by Dhananjaya and deprived of his energy, the Kurus ﬂed.
They were like a distressed herd of cattle, when the bull has been killed. By slaying Karna, like an elephant by a
lion, Arjuna had struck them severely.
‘ “On seeing that he was lying down on the ground, the king of Madra was terriﬁed. He swiftly withdrew on his
chariot. The lord of Madra was stupeﬁed. He quickly departed on the chariot that was without a standard. He swiftly went to Duryodhana’s side and spoke these sorrowful words. ‘The elephants, horses and best of rathas in your
army have been destroyed. It looks like Yama’s kingdom. The large armies with men, horses and elephants that are
like mountain tops have clashed against each other and have been killed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
There has never been a battle like that fought between Karna and Arjuna today. Karna clashed against the two Krishnas and others who are your enemies and has been devoured. Destiny ﬂows according to its own rules. That is
the reason it is protecting the Pandavas and weakening us. All the brave ones sought to accomplish your objectives. They have been slain by the enemy. Those brave ones were the equals of Kubera, Vaivasvata and the lord of
the waters in power. They possessed valour, bravery and strength. They possessed large stores of qualities. Those
lords of men were unslayable. They sought to accomplish your objectives, fought against the Pandaveyas and have
been slain. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Do not grieve. This is destiny. There is no substitute for success.
However, success cannot always be obtained.’ Hearing the words of the lord of Madra, Duryodhana was miserable
in his mind. He thought of his own evil deeds and looked within his heart. He was bereft of his senses. In great
grief, he repeatedly sighed.
‘ “He reﬂected and was silent. He was extremely distressed. Artayani804 spoke these words to him. ‘O brave
one! Behold this ﬁerce ﬁeld of battle. It is strewn around with slain men, horses and elephants. Giant elephants
have fallen down, like giant mountains. They have been sliced down. Their inner organs have been pierced with
arrows. They are unconscious and anxious. Some have lost their lives. The warriors have dislodged their body armour and their weapons. They are like fragmented mountains, with rocks, animals, trees and herbs, which have
been shattered by Indra’s vajra. The bells, goads, javelins and standards have been destroyed. They possessed
golden harnesses, which are streaming with copious quantities of blood. Mangled by arrows, horses have fallen
down. Some of them are ﬁnding it difﬁcult to breathe and are vomiting blood. Some are shrieking loudly, with dilated eyes. Some are biting the ground with their teeth and neighing in distress. Warriors on horses and elephants
have been struck. Some have a little bit of life left and others have lost their lives. Men, horses, elephants and chariots have been crushed. Like the great Vaitarani, the earth is difﬁcult to behold. Elephants have had their trunks
severed by the enemy. They are shrieking, trembling and falling down on the ground. There were illustrious elephants, chariots, horses, warriors and foot soldiers. Advancing against the enemy, they have been slain. Armour,
ornaments, garments and weapons are strewn around. It is as if the earth is covered with many ﬁres that have been

extinguished. One can see that the mighty armies have been struck by the force of the arrows and soldiers have
fallen down in thousands. They have lost their senses and are trying to regain their breath again. The earth is beautiful, as if with ﬁres that have been extinguished. Flaming and sparkling planets seem to have fallen down from the
sky. The arrows, released from the arms of Karna and Arjuna, have shattered the bodies of elephants, horses and
men. The weapons have quickly deprived them of their lives and have entered the ground, like giant serpents looking for an abode. In the battle, men, horses and elephants have been killed. Chariots have been shattered by the arrows. The earth has become impassable because of the bodies of elephants that have been killed by the arrows of
Dhananjaya and Adhiratha’s son. The best of rathas and warriors have been uprooted by the arrows. Chariots,
horses, the best of weapons and standards are strewn around. It is impassable because of shattered and destroyed
weapons. Wheels, axles, yokes and trivenus have been shattered. The chariots are without charioteers, who have
been killed. It is impassable because some are without yokes, while others have had their yokes broken. The seats
were decorated with gold and jewels and have been shattered. They are strewn around on the ground, like clouds in
the autumn sky. The swift and ornamented horses were yoked to excellent chariots and with riders slain, are dragging them around. Large numbers of men, elephants, chariots and horses are seen to speedily run away. They have
been routed in many ways. Clubs tied in golden cloth, battleaxes, swords,805 bludgeons, spears, sparkling and unsheathed scimitars, and maces tied up in golden pieces of cloth have fallen down. There are bows, golden armlets,
ornaments, arrows with colourful tufts made out of gold, yellow and spotless swords that have been unsheathed,
javelins and scimitars with golden complexions. There are umbrellas, fans, whisks, conch shells and garlands of
ﬂowers, embellished with gold. There are housings, ﬂags and garments. There are radiant crowns, garlands and diadems. The housings are scattered and strewn around. There are necklaces decorated with pearls from the waters.
There are guards, armlets and excellent bracelets. There are golden collars and golden threads for the necks. There
are the best of gems, diamonds, gold, pearls and other jewels. There are auspicious signs, good and not that good,
on the bodies, which have been reared in great happiness. The faces on the heads are like the full moon. The bodies have given up pleasure and garments, objects desired by the heart and happiness. They have resorted to their
own dharma and obtained great merits. They have ascended to the worlds that bring fame.’ Shalya spoke these
words to Duryodhana and stopped.
‘ “His806 mind was overcome with great grief. Bereft of his senses, he lamented, ‘Alas! Karna! Alas! Karna!’
His eyes overﬂowed with tears. All the kings, with Drona’s son at the forefront, comforted him and departed.807
They repeatedly glanced at Arjuna’s great standard, which seemed to be blazing because of his glory. The bodies
of men, horses and elephants were covered with blood. The earth was covered with blood. It looked like a woman
attired in crimson and golden garments and garlands, who would go to everyone.808 O king! Their terrible forms
were covered with blood and could not be recognized. The Kurus were unable to look at all those who had departed for the world of the gods and could not stand there. Because Karna had been slain, they were extremely miserable. They lamented, ‘Alas! Karna! Alas! Karna!’ On seeing that the sun had assumed a reddish tinge, they rapidly
left for their camps.
‘ “Gold-tufted and sharp arrows were released from Gandiva. Their tufts were smeared with blood. With those
arrows on his limbs, Karna looked beautiful on the ground. Though slain, he looked like the sun, with its rays. Karna’s body was covered with blood. It was as if the illustrious sun was showing compassion towards its devotee809
and having touched the crimson form with its red hand, was proceeding beyond the ocean to have a bath. That is
what the large numbers of gods and rishis thought. They returned to their respective abodes. The other beings also
thought in the same way and left as they wished, to heaven or on earth. The foremost of brave ones among the Kurus had witnessed the terrible encounter between Dhananjaya and Adhiratha’s son, destructive of lives. They were
amazed. Now that it was over, they praised it and departed. The brave one’s armour had been shattered by arrows.
He had been slain in the battle. Radheya had lost his life. But his beauty810 did not desert him. O king! He was
adorned in many ornaments and his armlets were made out of gold. Vaikartana had been slain and was lying down,
like a tree with branches and sprouts. He had the complexion of pure gold and blazed like a ﬁre. With his son, the
tiger among men was paciﬁed by Partha’s energy. O king! With his weapons and energy, he scorched the Pandavas
and the Panchalas. Whenever he was asked to give, he always did and never said that he had nothing to give. The

virtuous always regarded him as righteous. This Vrisha was killed in the duel. The great-souled one gave everything that he possessed to brahmanas. There was nothing, not even his own life, which he would not give away to
brahmanas. He was always loved by men. He was generous. He loved giving. He went to heaven. He took away
with him the hopes your sons cherished for victory and their comfort and armour. When Karna was killed, the
rivers stopped ﬂowing. The sun was tainted and set. The blazing planets coursed in a diagonal direction. O king!
Yama’s son arose.811 The sky seemed to divide into two parts. The earth seemed to shriek. Extremely harsh and
forceful winds began to blow. The directions seemed to blaze ﬁercely, with a lot of smoke. The giant oceans were
agitated and roared loudly. O venerable one! The groves, mountains and large numbers of beings were distressed
and trembled. Brihaspati afﬂicted Rohini812 and assumed the complexion of the moon and the sun. When Karna
was killed, the directions were covered in darkness and could not be distinguished. The ﬁrmament and the earth
seemed to move. Flaming meteors showered down. Those who travel during the night813 were seen to be delighted. Karna’s head was as beautiful as the full moon and Arjuna brought it down with a razor-sharp arrow. Loud
sounds of lamentation were heard among beings in heaven, in the sky and on the ground. In the battle, Arjuna
killed his enemy, Karna, who was revered by the gods, the gandharvas and men.
‘ “Partha was resplendent in his supreme energy, like the one with the one thousand eyes, after Vritra had been
killed. That chariot roared like a large mass of clouds. Its radiance was like the midday sun in the autumn sky.
With its standard and ﬂags, it clattered loudly. It was as radiant as snow, the moon, a conch shell or a crystal. It was
ornamented with gold, pearls, jewels, diamonds and coral. It possessed the speed of thought. Those two supreme
among men, Pandava and the slayer of Keshi814 were as resplendent as the ﬁre and the sun in that ﬁeld of battle.
They roamed around, without any fear. Astride the same chariot, they were like Vishnu and Vasava. The one with
the ape on his banner created a tumult with the twang of his bowstring, the slapping of his palms and the clatter of
his wheels. He destroyed and killed the enemy with his power. With the one with a bird on his banner815 with
him, he showered torrents of arrows on the Kurus. They held their conch shells, as white as snow, in their hands.
These emitted a loud roar and were decorated with golden nets. Their minds ﬁlled with delight, they blew loudly
on these conch shells. Placing those best of conch shells against their lips, those best of men, simultaneously blew
on them with the best of mouths. Panchajanya and Devadatta816 roared. That sound ﬁlled up the earth, the sky and
heaven. At the sound of those conch shells, the forest, the mountains, the rivers and the directions were terriﬁed, as
were the soldiers of your son. However, those two brave ones delighted Yudhishthira. As soon as they heard the
loud blare of those conch shells, the Kurus speedily departed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They abandoned the lord of Madra and Duryodhana, the lord of the Bharatas. In the great battle, a large number of beings assembled around the radiant Dhananjaya. They joyfully congratulated him and Janardana, each dazzling like a sun.
In the battle, having been struck by Karna’s arrows, those two scorchers of enemies, Achyuta and Arjuna, looked
beautiful. They were like the sparkling moon and sun, garlanded with rays, arising after darkness has been destroyed. Taking out those large numbers of arrows, those valiant lords entered their own camps, surrounded by
well-wishers. They were like Vasava and Achyuta,817 invoked by ofﬁciating priests. When Karna was slain in that
supreme battle, the gods, the gandharvas, men, charanas, maharshis, yakshas and giant serpents honoured them
greatly and hoped that their victories might continue.” ’

Chapter 1219(69)
‘S anjaya said, “When Karna was brought down, your soldiers ﬂed. Dasharha joyfully embraced Partha and said,
‘O Dhananjaya! Through your strength, Karna, who was like Vritra, has been killed. Men will talk about the deaths
of Karna and Vritra. The inﬁnitely energetic one818 used the vajra to slay Vritra in a battle. You have slain Karna
with your bow’s sharp arrows. Your fame will be renowned in this world and will bring you glory. O Kounteya!
Go and tell this to the intelligent Dharmaraja. For a long time, this death of Karna in the battle has been desired.
You should go and tell this to Dharmaraja and free yourself of the debt.’ Having been thus addressed by Keshava,
bull among the Yadu lineage, Partha agreed. The foremost chariot of the foremost among rathas was turned back.
Govinda spoke these words to Dhrishtadyumna, Yudhamanyu, Madri’s sons, Vrikodara and Yuyudhana, ‘Remain
here and carefully confront the enemy, until we have returned, after informing the king that Karna has been killed
by Arjuna.’ Having taken their leave of those brave ones, they departed for the king’s abode.
‘ “With Partha, Govinda saw Yudhishthira. The tiger among kings was lying down on an excellent golden bed.
Joyfully, they touched the king’s feet. On discerning their joy and the superhuman marks of wounds, Yudhishthira
deduced that Radheya must have been killed and arose. Vasudeva, the descendant of the Yadu lineage, pleasant in
speech, told him everything about Karna’s death. Joining his hands in salutation, Achyuta Krishna smiled a little
and told Yudhishthira that his enemy had been killed. ‘O king! It is through good fortune that the wielder of Gandiva, Pandava Vrikodara, you and the Pandavas who are the sons of Madri are safe. You have been freed from the
battle that led to a destruction of heroes and made the body hair stand up. O king! Quickly undertake whatever
tasks must be done next. The cruel and immensely strong Vaikartana, son of a suta, has been slain. O Indra among
kings! It is through good fortune that you have obtained victory. O Pandava! You are prospering through good fortune. The worst among men laughed at Krishna819 when she had been won in the gambling match. The earth is
now drinking the blood of that son of a suta. O bull among the Kuru lineage! With arrows mangling his limbs, that
enemy of yours is now lying down. O tiger among men! Look at him. He has been shattered by many arrows.’ Delighted, Yudhishthira honoured Dasharha back in return. O Indra among kings! He joyfully said, ‘This is good fortune. It is fortunate. O mighty-armed one! O Devaki’s son! This is all because of you. With you as a charioteer,
Partha was able to exhibit this manliness today.’ The best of the Kuru lineage grasped his820 right hand, adorned
with a bracelet, and addressed both Partha Arjuna, the upholder of dharma, and Keshava. ‘Narada had said that
you were the gods Nara and Narayana. You are the ancient and supreme men, united in establishing dharma. The
revered and intelligent Krishna Dvaipayana also told me this. O mighty-armed ones! The lord told me about that
divine account. O Krishna! It is because of your powers that Dhananjaya confronted his enemies with Gandiva and
defeated them, not retreating before any of them. Our victory is certain and their defeat is certain. After all, when
Partha ﬁghts in the battle, you have agreed to be his charioteer.’ O great king! Having spoken these words, the maharatha ascended his gold-decorated chariot, which was yoked to horses with the complexion of ivory and with
black tails. The tiger among men was surrounded by his own soldiers. The brave Krishna and Arjuna cheerfully
followed him. Surrounded by many and conversing pleasantly with the brave and resplendent Madhava and Phalguna, he went to see the ﬁeld of battle.
‘ “He saw Karna, bull among men, lying down in the battle. Arrows released from Gandiva had splintered all
over his body. King Yudhishthira saw that Karna had been slain, together with his son. He praised those two tigers
among men, Madhava and Pandava, and said, ‘O Govinda! Today, with my brothers, I have become the king of the
earth. This is because you are our protector and we are sheltered by your bravery and your learning. On seeing that
the proud Radheya, tiger among men, has been slain, Dhritarashtra’s evil-souled son will lose all hope today, both

about remaining alive and about the kingdom. Maharatha Karna has been killed. O bull among men! It is because
of your favours that we are successful. O descendant of the Yadu lineage! You have ensured that the wielder of
Gandiva is victorious. O Govinda! It is through good fortune that you have been victorious. It is through good fortune that Karna has been brought down.’ O Indra among kings! Delighted, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira praised Janardana, and also Arjuna, in many ways. The joy of the kings and the maharathas also increased. O great king! When
the descendant of the suta lineage was killed, Nakula, Sahadeva, Pandava Vrikodara, Satyaki, the foremost rathas
among the Vrishnis, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, the Pandus, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas honoured
Kounteya.821 They increased the desire of King Yudhishthira, Pandu’s son, for victory. Those strikers delighted in
ﬁghting and wished to accomplish their objective. With eloquent words, they praised and honoured the two Krishnas, the scorchers of enemies. Then, ﬁlled with great delight, the maharathas left for their respective camps. In this
way, there was a great destruction and it made the body hair stand up. O king! All of this was the consequence of
your evil counsel. Why are you grieving?” ’
Vaishampayana said, ‘O king! On hearing the unpleasant news, Dhritarashtra, the lord of the earth, fell down unconscious on the ground. Kouravya was overcome by supreme distress. Queen Gandhari, who was devoted to the
truth and knew about dharma, also fell down. Vidura and Sanjaya raised the king and comforted the monarch. The
women of the king’s household raised Gandhari. Comforted by them, the king regained his senses, but was silent.’
This ends Karna Parva.

